THE CODE OF THE CITY OF MOUNTAIN PARK, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted: April 21, 2003  Effective: April 21, 2003 
____________ 
Published in 2002 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MOUNTAIN PARK, GEORGIA 
(2015) 
____________ 
Jim Still 
Mayor 
____________ 
Don Carlson  Gladney Cooper  Scott Mills  Ocoee Penick  Scott Read 
City Council 
____________ 
Brandon Bowen 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Karen Segars 
Clerk/Administrator 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MOUNTAIN PARK, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Joyce H. Ayers 
Mayor 
____________ 
Donald L. Bowen 
James L. Close 
Ben T. Counter 
Gwyndolyn C. Ketcham 
Thomas J. Smith 
Jimmy O. Still, Jr. 
James S. Wright 
City Council 
____________ 
Caryl Sumner Black 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Barbara St. Peter 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Mountain Park, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Ron K. McLaughlin, Code Attorney, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Honorable Joyce H. Ayers, Mayor; Barbara St. Peter, City Clerk; Caryl Sumner Black, City Attorney; and Susanne Fischer, Paralegal, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
ORDINANCE NO. 257-03 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MOUNTAIN PARK, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Mountain Park, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 to 117, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 17, 2002, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or a term of imprisonment not to exceed 180 days or both a fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 17, 2002, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
Passed and Adopted on the 21st day of April, 2003. 
By: 

 \Mayor 
ATTEST: 

 \City Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1982 Georgia Laws, page 3648, substantially as adopted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments to this Act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Mountain Park in the Counties of Fulton and Cherokee, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the "City of Mountain Park," hereinafter referred to at times as the "city," and by that name, shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued, and plead and be impleaded in all courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold, or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell or dispose of the same; may have and use a common seal and change it at pleasure. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Mountain Park shall embrace the following tracts or parcels of land in Fulton and Cherokee counties: 
(1)  Fulton County: Land Lot 1153 of the Second District, Second Section of formerly Milton, now Fulton County and Land Lots 1222, 1223, 1224, 1225, 1226 and 1227 of the Second District, Second Section of originally Cherokee, then Milton and now Fulton County; and 
(2)  Cherokee County: That tract of land lying and being in Land Lots 1117 and 1188 of the Fifteenth District, Second Section of Cherokee County, to wit: 
Beginning at the northeast corner of Land Lot 1188 of the 15th District and Second Section of Cherokee County, Georgia (the said beginning point being on the county line which runs in a northerly and southerly direction between Cherokee and Fulton Counties), and proceeding thence westwardly along the north line of said Land Lot 1188 a distance of 533 feet to a stake located on the westerly side of a creek known as Mountain Park, Cane or Rocky Creek; thence north 31 degrees 31 minutes west in a straight line a distance of 196 feet to a one-half (½) inch iron pin; thence north 74 degrees 22 minutes east in a straight line a distance of 642 feet to an iron pin located on the county line between Cherokee County and Fulton County; thence south 2 degrees 56 minutes east in a straight line a distance of 340 feet to the northeast corner of Land Lot 1188 of the 15th District and Second Section of Cherokee County and the point of beginning; the same being approximately 3.4 acres of unimproved property as shown on survey of Lat Ridgeway, dated November 24, 1949; together with all that tract of land in said Land Lot 1188 of the 15th District and Second Section of Cherokee County described as follows: Beginning at the southeast corner of Land Lot 1117 of the 15th District and Second Section of Cherokee County, Georgia, and proceeding thence westwardly along the south side of said Land Lot 1117 in a straight line a distance of 751 feet to a point marked by a pine tree and an iron pin; thence south 12 degrees 51 minutes west in a straight line a distance of 650 feet to a stake; thence south 68 degrees 27 minutes east in a straight line a distance of 289 feet to a point marked by a white oak and an iron pin; thence north 54 degrees 38 minutes east to the water line of a lake; thence in a southerly and easterly direction along the water line of said lake a distance of approximately 600 to 700 feet to the county line which runs in a northerly and southerly direction between Cherokee and Fulton Counties; thence in a northerly direction along the west side of Fulton County to the southeast corner of Land Lot 1117 of the 15th District and Second Section of Cherokee County and the point of beginning, consisting of approximately 14.4 acres. 
(3)  All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 1188, of the 18th District, 2nd Section, Cherokee County, Georgia, being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection where the Southerly Right of Way of Mountain Park Road, formerly Pine Street, (Having a forty foot Right of Way) intersects the line dividing Cherokee County and Fulton County, Georgia; said iron pin being known as the point of beginning; thence leaving said Right of Way and proceeding along said boundary line between Cherokee County and Fulton County, South 02°59'43" West a distance of 219.14 feet to an iron pin found; thence South 07°20'16" East a distance of 21.98 feet to an iron pin found; said iron pin also being the point of intersection of the boundary line between Cherokee County and Fulton County and the Land Lot Line dividing Land Lot 1188 and 1189; thence leaving said boundary line between Cherokee County and Fulton County and proceeding along the Land Lot Line dividing Land Lots 1188 and 1189 South 84°52'59" West a distance of 220.09 feet to an iron pin found; thence South 66°11'34" West a distance of 48.31 feet to an iron pin found; thence leaving said Land Lot Line dividing Land Lots 1188 and 1189 and proceeding North 18°13'24" East a distance of 232.85 feet to an iron pin found; said iron pin also being located along the Southerly Right of Way of Mountain Park Road, formerly Pine Street; thence North 85°15'17" East along the Southerly Right of Way of Mountain Park Road and following the curvatures there of a chord distance of 99.56 feet to an iron pin; thence continuing along the Southerly Right of Way of Mountain Park Road North 74°47'50" East a distance of 119.84 feet to a point being the true point of beginning, as per Plat of Survey prepared by Rodney H. Reese, RLS #2072, for Brumbelow-Reese & Assoc., Inc., prepared for Jeffrey Johnson and Nannette Johnson, dated January 15, 1987 and Revised dated August 11, 1987, Cherokee County Records. 
(Ord. No. 256-02, § 1, 1-27-2003) 
Sec. 1.12. - Specific powers. 
Consistent with the provisions of the general laws of this state, the government of the City of Mountain Park shall have power: 
(1)  to levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, reevaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(2)  to levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and occupation taxes on privileges, persons, firms, corporations, businesses, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate such privileges, persons, firms, corporations, businesses, occupations, trades, and professions; and to provide for the manner of payment of such licenses and taxes; 
(3)  to make appropriations for the support of the government of the city to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  to appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(5)  to acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; 
(6)  to accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(7)  to condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the mayor and council, under O.C.G.A. title 22; 
(8)  to acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties applicable thereto; to withdraw service for refusal or failure to pay such taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, and assessments; and to fix the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; 
(9)  to grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services; to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, standards, and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(10)  to lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light streets, roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; 
(11)  to grant franchises and rights of way through the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities; 
(12)  to provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals, and charitable, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof; 
(13)  to regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, and electrical codes and to regulate all housing, building, and building trades, to license all building trades, and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures; 
(14)  to provide for the prevention and punishment of vice, obscenity, immorality, vagrancy, drunkenness, riots, disturbances, lewd exhibitions, disorderly conduct, and breaches of the peace; 
(15)  to regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the use and sale of firearms; and the use and sale of fireworks; and to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials; the use of lighting and heating equipment; and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; 
(16)  to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; 
(17)  to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling or palmistry; 
(18)  to prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads within the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(19)  to prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(20)  to regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of lakes and natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(21)  to fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations relating to fire prevention, detection, and fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(22)  to provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(23)  to provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; 
(24)  to levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charges for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city, from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such service charges; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(25)  to levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewage system; and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewage system a sewer service charge fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge and for enforcing payment of same; 
(26)  to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees, and to change the same from time to time, such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; 
(27)  to define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(28)  to define a nuisance and provide for its abatement; 
(29)  to provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(30)  to establish minimum standards for and regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing, and housing for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards and regulations; 
(31)  to provide that persons given jail sentences by the mayor's court shall work out such sentence in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city, or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(32)  to adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of idleness, loitering, vagrancy, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, and disturbing the peace in the corporate limits of the city and to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein; and to prohibit or regulate such other conduct and activities within said city which are detrimental to the peace and good order of the city and to the welfare and morals of the citizens thereof; 
(33)  to regulate and license or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl; and to provide for the impoundment of same when in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(34)  to regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(35)  to regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in amounts prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; 
(36)  to provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city; 
(37)  to levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(38)  to enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefor; 
(39)  to create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(40)  to make, ordain, and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules, and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, morals, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(41)  to provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; and 
(42)  to exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, morals, and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.13. - General powers. 
In addition to all other powers herein granted, the City of Mountain Park shall be vested with any and all powers which municipal corporations are or may hereafter be authorized or required to exercise under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein, and any and all powers which the City of Mountain Park was heretofore authorized to exercise upon the effective date of this Charter. 
Sec. 1.14. - Construction. 
The powers of the City of Mountain Park shall be construed liberally and in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the city as stated in this Charter. It is the intention hereof to grant to the city full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the City of Mountain Park within its corporate limits and the authority to conduct all its affairs. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2.10. - Creation and composition; number. 
The corporate powers and the municipal government of the City of Mountain Park shall be vested in a mayor and city council. There shall be five members of the city council known as councilmen. The mayor and councilmen shall be elected for the terms of office, at the times, and in the manner provided by general law for the election of municipal officers. 
(2010 Ga. Laws, Act No. 479, § 1) 
Sec. 2.11. - Qualifications of office. 
No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilman unless such person shall have attained the age of 21 at the beginning of the term of office and unless such person shall have been a resident of the city for a period of one (1) year immediately prior to the date of such person's election and shall continue to reside therein during the term of office and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Mountain Park. Neither the mayor nor any councilman shall hold any other elective or appointive office in the city. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancies. 
(a)  The office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, or removal from office as provided by chapter 2 of article VI of this Charter. The office of mayor or councilman shall also be deemed vacant if the regular election called to fill such office fails to fill such seat; such seat shall be deemed vacant at the beginning of the term for which the regular election was called. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled by the council appointing one of its number to fill such vacancy as follows: 
(1)  if the vacancy occurs during the first two years of a term of office, the appointment shall be until a successor is elected for the unexpired term at the next regular municipal election; or 
(2)  if the vacancy occurs during the last two years of a term of office, the appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  A vacancy in the office of councilman, including a vacancy created by the appointment of a councilman as mayor under subsection (b) of this section, shall be filled by the remaining councilmen as follows: 
(1)  if the vacancy occurs during the first two years of a term of office, the appointment shall be until a successor is elected for the unexpired term at the next regular municipal election; or 
(2)  if the vacancy occurs during the last two years of a term of office, the appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(2010 Ga. Laws, Act No. 479, § 2) 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
(a)  For service in public office, the mayor shall be paid a salary of $200.00 per month for regular or special session of council attended by said mayor, at which a quorum of members of council are present. 
(b)  For service in public office, the mayor pro tempore shall be paid a salary of $100.00 per month for regular or special session of council attended by said mayor pro tempore, at which a quorum of members of council are present. 
(c)  For service in public office, each member of council shall be paid a salary of $75.00 per month for regular or special session of council attended by said member, at which a quorum of members of council are present. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4414) 
Sec. 2.14. - General powers of the mayor and council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, all the powers of the City of Mountain Park shall be vested in the city council. 
(b)  In the exercise of its powers, the city council shall adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia, as may be necessary or expedient for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, moral prosperity, and well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Mountain Park and may enforce such ordinances, by imposing penalties for violations thereof. 
(c)  The city council may by ordinance create, change, alter, abolish, and consolidate departments and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies, departments, boards, or commissions created by or pursuant to this Charter. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the City of Mountain Park and into the conduct of any department, office, or agency or any officer or employee thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses or documents, records or other evidence, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any subpoena shall be issued by the clerk of the city council upon its application. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or by confinement for not more than five (5) days in jail or both in the discretion of the city council. 
Sec. 2.16. - Financial management. 
The mayor and city council shall budget, provide for audits, and otherwise conduct the financial management of the City of Mountain Park in accordance with the provisions of articles IV and V of this Charter and the "Local Government Financial Management Standards Act," approved April 8, 1980, and subsequently amended (O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.). 
CHAPTER 2. - MAYOR 

Sec. 2.20. - Powers and duties; generally. 
The mayor shall be the official spokesman for the city and the chief advocate of policy. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the city council and may vote on a question before the council only to break a tie. The mayor shall sign ordinances and resolutions on their final passage; shall sign deeds, bonds, contracts, and other instruments and documents authorized and executed on behalf of the city. The mayor shall have the power to declare emergencies in the event of civil or other disorder which might prove detrimental to the welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Mountain Park. The mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the city by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process and by the public for all ceremonial purposes. The mayor shall have power to administer oaths and perform such other duties imposed by this Charter or by ordinance not inconsistent therewith. 
Sec. 2.21. - Mayor pro tempore. 
During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore or, in the absence or disability of the mayor pro tempore, any member of the city council chosen from its membership shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. 
CHAPTER 3. - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2.30. - Organization meeting. 
The city council shall meet for organization immediately upon taking office on the day provided for taking office as set forth in state law (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-541.1 as amended.). The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will well and truly perform the duties of mayor (or councilman as the case may be) of the City of Mountain Park and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America. So help me God." 
Following the induction of members, the city council by majority vote of all the members thereof shall elect one of its number to be mayor pro tempore, who shall serve for a term of two (2) years and until a successor is elected and qualified. 
Sec. 2.31. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The city council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meeting on any weekday or hour the council may fix. The council may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or shall be held when requested in writing by a majority of the members of the city council and, except in case of emergency, upon no less than 24 hours' notice to each member. Notice of any special meeting may be waived in writing and attendance at the meeting shall be a waiver of notice of any special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be held and conducted in conformity with the requirements of the Act providing for open meetings of public agencies, approved March 28, 1972 and subsequently amended (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). 
Sec. 2.32. - Rules of procedure. 
The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings and minutes of its meetings which shall be public records. 
Sec. 2.33. - Quorum; voting. 
The mayor, or the mayor pro tempore during the absence or disability of the mayor, and three other councilmen shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the yeas and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. The affirmative vote of three councilmen shall be required for the adoption of an ordinance, resolution, or motion except when the mayor votes to break a tie, and in that event the affirmative vote of the mayor and two councilmen shall be sufficient for the adoption of an ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(2010 Ga. Laws, Act No. 479, § 3) 
CHAPTER 4. - ORDINANCE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2.40. - Action requiring an ordinance or resolution. 
(a)  Except as herein provided, every official action of the city council shall be exercised only by affirmative vote of the mayor and city council as further described in section 2.33 of this Charter or adoption of ordinances and resolutions. 
(b)  Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one (1) subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The council of the City of Mountain Park hereby ordains …." 
(c)  An ordinance or resolution may be introduced by any member of the city council and read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances and resolutions shall be considered, adopted, or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Resolutions may be adopted at the regular or special meeting of the city council at which they are introduced. Ordinances shall not be finally adopted until the next regular meeting of the city council following the meeting of their initial introduction, except for emergency ordinances. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilman and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(Ord. No. 251-02, § 1, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 278-05, § 1, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 2.41. - Emergency ordinances. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew, or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided by law. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 60 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this repeal shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(2010 Ga. Laws, Act No. 479, § 4) 
Sec. 2.42. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  the requirements of subsection (c) of section 2.40 for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of the code of technical regulations as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations as well as the adopting ordinance shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.43. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 2.43. - Signing, authenticating, and recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  Every ordinance and resolution shall be signed by the mayor after adoption. The clerk shall authenticate the ordinance or resolution by signing same and shall record in full in a properly indexed book kept for this purpose all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances and resolutions of the city having the force and effect of law. Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION AND PERSONNEL 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative departments: creation. 
The government of the City of Mountain Park shall continue as presently organized, unless and until otherwise provided by ordinance. The council by ordinance may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as the council deems necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The council may prescribe the functions and duties of existing or of any departments, offices, and agencies hereafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the function or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city. 
Sec. 3.11. - Administrative duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall be executive head of the city government and responsible for the efficient and orderly administration of the city's affairs. As the chief executive of the city government, the mayor shall: 
(1)  see that all laws of this state, provisions of this Charter, rules, regulations, ordinances, and franchises of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  with advice and consent of city council, appoint, suspend, or remove all officers, department heads, and employees in the administrative service of the city; 
(3)  supervise the administration of the affairs of the city; 
(4)  recommend to the city council such measures connected with the affairs of the city, the protection and improvement of its government and finances, and promotion of the welfare of its citizens as the mayor shall deem desirable; 
(5)  call special meetings of the city council as provided for in section 2.31 of this Charter; 
(6)  examine and inspect all books, records, and official papers of any department or agency of the city as the mayor deems necessary; 
(7)  require any officer, department, or agency of the city to submit written reports and information in connection with the business and affairs thereof as the mayor deems necessary; 
(8)  conduct inquiries and investigations into the conduct of the affairs of any department or agency which the mayor deems necessary; and 
(9)  perform such other, executive and administrative responsibilities as may be required by law, this Charter, or by ordinance of the city council. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The council may appoint a city attorney who shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the council and shall receive such compensation as it shall determine. The city attorney shall advise the mayor and council and other officials of the city with respect to its affairs; draw all legal documents relating to the affairs of the city; draw proposed ordinances when requested by the mayor and council; inspect and pass on all agreements, contracts, franchises, and other instruments with which the city may be concerned; attend all meetings of the city council; and perform such other duties as may be required of the city attorney by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The council shall appoint a city clerk. The city clerk shall be responsible for keeping and preserving the city seal and all records of the city council. The clerk shall attend meetings of the city council and keep a journal of its proceedings at such meetings. The clerk shall maintain and keep in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 3.14. - Personnel policies. 
The council may adopt such personnel policies for the adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the City of Mountain Park as the council deems appropriate. 
Sec. 3.15. - Personal financial interest. 
Any city officer or employee who has a financial interest, direct or indirect, or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the city or in the sale of any land, material, supplies, or services to the city or to a contractor supplying the city shall make known that interest and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating as a city officer or employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such contract. Any city officer or employee who willfully conceals such financial interest or willfully violates the requirements of this section shall upon conviction be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be subject to removal from office or from the position of employment. Violation of this section with knowledge expressed or implied of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the city shall render the contract or sale voidable by the council. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL AND FISCAL 
CHAPTER 1. - TAXATION 

Sec. 4.10. - Property taxes. 
All property subject to taxation for state or county purposes shall be subject to an ad valorem property tax levied by the City of Mountain Park. The assessment of property for ad valorem taxes and the collection of such taxes shall be as provided by the applicable provisions of the "Georgia Public Revenue Code" (O.C.G.A. title 48). 
Sec. 4.11. - Tax levy. 
The city council shall be authorized to levy an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city for ordinary current expenses and for any other purpose now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and such tax levy shall be in addition to any levy made by the city council for the payment of principal and interest on bonded indebtedness. 
Sec. 4.12. - Tax due dates and tax bills. 
The city council shall provide by ordinance when the taxes shall fall due and in what length of time said taxes must be paid. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the payment of taxes due to the city in installments, or in one lump sum, and when and how and upon what terms such taxes shall be due and payable, as well as to authorize the payment of taxes prior to the time when due. The terms and methods of payment of city taxes shall be in such manner as the city council may determine by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The city council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi. fa. issued by the city clerk under the same procedure provided by the laws governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. Any such fi. fa. may be executed by an officer or employee of the city designated for such purpose by the city council. A lien shall exist against all property upon which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment date of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those of the federal, state, or county taxes. 
Sec. 4.14. - Transfer of executions. 
The city clerk shall be authorized to transfer and assign any fi. fa. or execution issued for street, sewer, or any other assessment in the same manner, upon the same terms, and to the same effect, and thereby vest the purchaser or transferee with the same rights as in cases of sales or transfers of tax fi. fas. as now provided by law; and all sales of property hereafter made under execution in behalf of the city for the collection of street, sewer, and other assessments, the owner or owners, as the case may be, are authorized to redeem same within the same time and on compliance with the same terms and payment of the same premium, interest, and costs, as in cases of redemption of property where sold under tax fi. fa., as the same now exists, or as may from time to time be provided by law. 
Sec. 4.15. - Special assessments. 
The city council may assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances, against the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. A lien shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens, except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes, and said lien shall be enforceable by the same procedures and under the same remedies as provided in this article for city property taxes. 
CHAPTER 2. - BORROWING 

Sec. 4.20. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issues by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 4.21. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as now or hereafter provided by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
CHAPTER 3. - ACCOUNTING AND BUDGETING 

Sec. 4.30. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city government shall be established by ordinance of the city council. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, or institution, agency, and activity of the government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 4.31. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide by ordinance the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating and a capital improvements budget including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets. 
Sec. 4.32. - Submission of budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the mayor may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 4.33. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor; except, that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by law or by other provisions of this chapter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues available for such fund. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year within 60 days after the proposed budget is submitted to the council by the mayor. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriation ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purposes, or activity as set out in the budget document. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit, purpose of [sic] activity shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriation, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 4.34. - Property tax levies. 
As the next order of business following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance an annual tax on all real and personal property within the City of Mountain Park. The tax rate set by such ordinance shall be such that a reasonable estimate of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the City of Mountain Park. 
Sec. 4.35. - Additional appropriations. 
The city council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose, but any such additional appropriation may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies. 
Sec. 4.36. - Lapse of appropriations. 
All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse into the unappropriated surplus or reserves of the fund or funds from which such appropriations were made. 
Sec. 4.37. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with the mayor's recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept with or without amendments or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening the lives, health, or property of the inhabitants of the city. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year within 60 days after the proposed budget is submitted to the council by the mayor. No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned, but the mayor may submit amendments, accompanied by the mayor's recommendations thereon, to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon the affirmative vote of the city council. 
(2010 Ga. Laws, Act No. 479, § 5) 
ARTICLE V. - PROCUREMENT AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 5.10. - Contracting procedures. 
All contracts shall be made or authorized by the city council, and no contract shall bind the city unless reduced to writing and approved by the city council. 
Sec. 5.11. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the City of Mountain Park. 
Sec. 5.12. - Sale and disposition of city property. 
(a)  The city council. may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the City of Mountain Park for governmental or other purposes at a public or private sale in such manner and pursuant to such requirements as the council shall provide by ordinance. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon recommendation by the mayor and adoption by the council of a resolution finding that the property is not needed by the city for public or other purposes. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cutoff or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place or in settlement of any, alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered may convey all title and interest the city has in such property. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTION AND REMOVAL OF OFFICERS 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Georgia Laws 2010, Act No. 479, § 6, adopted May 27, 2010, amended Art. VI, Ch. 1, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 1, §§ 6.10—6.12, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from 1982 Georgia Laws, page 3648. 

Sec. 6.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Election Code, Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended. 
(2010 Ga. Laws, Act No. 479, § 6) 
Sec. 6.11. - Election of the city council and mayor. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election biennially in the odd years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  There shall be elected the mayor and two councilmen at one election and at alternating regular elections thereafter. The remaining city council seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created. Terms shall be for four years. 
(2010 Ga. Laws, Act No. 479, § 6) 
Sec. 6.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
(2010 Ga. Laws, Act No. 479, § 6) 
Sec. 6.13. - Election by plurality. 
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
(2010 Ga. Laws, Act No. 479, § 6) 
Sec. 6.14. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Election Code. 
(2010 Ga. Laws, Act No. 479, § 6) 
CHAPTER 2. - REMOVAL OF OFFICERS 

Sec. 6.20. - Grounds for removal. 
The mayor or any councilman shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  willful violation of any express prohibition of this Charter; 
(5)  abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by law. 
Sec. 6.21. - Procedure for removal. 
(a)  Removal of an elected officer from office may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By a vote of removal by four members of the city council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than 10 days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Fulton County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior courts from the probate courts; or 
(2)  By an information filed in the Superior Court of Fulton County as provided by law. 
(b)  For the purposes of paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this section, the city council is authorized to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and require the production of documents and evidence. 
( Ord. No. 313-12A, § I, 8-27-2012 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 7.10. - Creation; judge. 
(a)  There is established a court to be known as the "Municipal Court of the City of Mountain Park" which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of penalties provided for by section 7.12 of this Charter; to punish witnesses for nonattendance; and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court, to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the City of Mountain Park constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. 
(b)  The council shall provide by ordinance for the following: 
(1)  For the appointment by the council of a judge of the municipal court. In order to be appointed as judge, the person must be at least 21 years of age, a qualified attorney, and a resident of the same judicial circuit as that in which the court is located. 
(2)  For the term of office of the judge. 
(3)  For the compensation of the judge. 
(4)  For filling a vacancy which may occur in the office of judge. 
(5)  For appointment by the council of a person to serve as judge of the municipal court during the temporary absence or disqualification of the judge of said court. Any person so appointed must possess the same qualifications as required in paragraph (1) of this subsection. 
(6)  For the appointment by the council of a solicitor of the municipal court. The person appointed shall be at least 21 years of age and a qualified attorney and may be the City Attorney of the City of Mountain Park. 
(7)  For the appointment of one of more marshals for the municipal court and for the duties of such marshals. 
(8)  For the appointment of a clerk of the municipal court and for the duties of such clerk. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 3648, as amended by 1984 Ga. Laws, page 5126) 
Sec. 7.11. - Convening. 
Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance of the council or at such times as may be necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 3648, as amended by 1984 Ga. Laws, page 5126) 
Sec. 7.12. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Mountain Park by the violation of its ordinances. The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence, or so near thereto as to affect its operation, for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $100.00 or 20 days in jail. The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days or both and, as an alternative to fine or imprisonment, may sentence any offender upon conviction to labor in the city work gang or on the streets for a period not exceeding 180 days. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations of the laws or ordinances of the City of Mountain Park and may prescribe the conditions for forfeiture of the same. 
(c)  The municipal court shall have authority to administer oaths and perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of said court. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears that a state law has been violated. 
(e)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served or executed by the marshal of such court or by any other officer so authorized by this Charter or by state law. 
(f)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the City of Mountain Park granted by state laws generally to mayor's, recorder's, and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 3648, as amended by 1984 Ga. Laws, page 5126) 
Sec. 7.13. - Certiorari. 
Certiorari from the superior court to the municipal court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as prescribed for certiorari to the various justice courts of the state. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 3648, as amended by 1984 Ga. Laws, page 5126) 
Sec. 7.14. - Procedure. 
All reasonable rules and regulations relative to procedure and to the operation of the municipal court may be enacted by the city council, provided that such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the provisions set forth in this Charter and in conformance with the Constitutions of the United States and of Georgia and all laws of general application thereunder. The city council may adopt in whole or in part the rules and regulations relative to procedure and to the operation of the superior courts under the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 5126) 
ARTICLE VIII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8.10. - Restrictions on actions for damages against the city. 
No action shall be maintained against the city for damages unless a written statement by the claimant or by his agent, attorney, or representative, setting forth the basis for his claim, shall have been filed in compliance with the provisions for ante litem notice for municipalities set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-33-5 and subsequently amended. 
Sec. 8.11. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of the City of Mountain Park, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require. The premiums for such bonds as may be required by the city council shall be paid from the funds of the city. 
Sec. 8.12. - Existing ordinances and resolutions. 
Existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Mountain Park not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified, or amended by the city council. Existing rules and regulations of departments or agencies of the City of Mountain Park not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified, or amended. 
Sec. 8.13. - General laws may be used. 
The city council, in its discretion, may elect to use the provisions of any general laws of the state in addition to or instead of the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 8.14. - Section captions. 
The captions to the several sections of this Charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
Sec. 8.15. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provision of this Charter, for which penalty is not specifically provided for herein, is a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Sec. 8.16. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held toe invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part or parts held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 8.17. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Mountain Park approved July 13, 1927 (1927 Ga. Laws, page 1418), as amended by an Act approved August 24, 1931 (1931 Ga. Laws, page 909), an Act approved February 22, 1933 (1933 Ga. Laws, page 1034), an Act approved February 7, 1950 (1950 Ga. Laws, page 2046), an Act approved February 21, 1951 (1951 Ga. Laws, page 2893), an Act approved February 15, 1952 (1952 Ga. Laws, page 2800), and an Act approved March 23, 1977 (1977 Ga. Laws, page 3652), is repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 8.18. - Effective date. 
This Charter shall be effective on the first day of the month following the month during which it is approved by the Governor or during which it otherwise becomes law. 
Sec. 8.19. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3(a) 

SUBPART A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Mountain Park, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Mountain Park City Code." 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of council or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Advice and consent. The term "advice and consent" of the city council means an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire council. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The term "the city" shall mean the City of Mountain Park in the Counties of Fulton and Cherokee in the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City council, council, and mayor and council. The terms "city council" or "the council" or "mayor and council" shall mean the governing body of the City of Mountain Park, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean The Code of the City of Mountain Park, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The terms "county" and "the county" shall mean the Counties of Fulton and/or Cherokee, State of Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Mountain Park" were added to such name or title. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or adjacent open space, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office, which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the city council. 
Seal. The term "seal" shall mean the city seal. 
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" shall mean the sheriff of Fulton County and/or Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct or bridge and their approaches within the city. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-4) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained in the ordinance, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance that repealed another ordinance shall be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the council of the City of Mountain Park hereby ordains The Code of Mountain Park, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered, which section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-6; Charter, § 2.40(b)) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared when necessary. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be numbered so that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-7) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided; and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, and imprisonment in the city or county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-5) 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(3); any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(13); courts, ch. 22; taxation, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 62; administration of flood damage prevention, § 109-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-60-1 et seq., 36-80-2 et seq.; municipalities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-30 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; powers of municipalities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Voting machines authorized. 
The use in the city of vote recorders and tabulating machines for recording and computing the vote at elections held in the city and county is hereby authorized. 
(Res. No. 000-98) 
Sec. 2-2. - Contracting for elections. 
The City of Mountain Park may contract with any entity, governmental agency, authority or jurisdiction authorized by law to conduct elections within the City of Mountain Park. 
(Ord. No. 279-05, § 1, 3-21-2005; Ord. No. 313-12, § I, 6-26-2012 ) 
Sec. 2-3. - Training for the city clerk. 
The City of Mountain Park shall ensure that its city clerk receives training and certification from the State Elections Division of the Office of the Secretary of State for conducting elections. 
(Ord. No. 279-05, § 2, 3-21-2005) 
Secs. 2-4—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq.; requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Vacancy in council office. 
(a)  A vacancy shall exist if a city councilmember resigns, dies, moves his residence from the city or forfeits his office by being absent from five regular meetings of the mayor and city council within any consecutive 12-month period of time, with the exception of those unattended meetings for which the councilmember is excused by the granting of a leave of absence by a majority of the members of the city council and such leave of absence is entered on the minutes. A vacancy shall also exist if a councilmember is adjudged legally incompetent, or is convicted of malfeasance in office or of a felony. 
(b)  The city council may vote, grant a leave of absence to a councilmember for each meeting not attended by the member. Notwithstanding the vote, the city clerk will record the member absent and adjust salary payments accordingly. The council shall vote within a period of time not exceeding 60 days from the date of absence, at a regular or called meeting of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 237-00, § 2-1-1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 247-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 2-32. - Qualification fee. 
There shall be a qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election for the office of mayor or city council member in the amount of three percent of total gross income of the previous year, not to exceed $35.00. 
(Ord. No. 249-02, § 1(2-2-4), 5-20-2002; Ord. No. 277-05, § 1, 1-24-2005) 
Secs. 2-33—2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 314-12A, § I, adopted March 26, 2012, repealed §§ 2-51—2-55, which pertained to standing committees and derived from Ord. No. 234-00, §§ 2-1-2, 2-1-3, adopted May 15, 2000; Ord. No. 289-06, § VI, adopted April 17, 2006; Ord. No. 293-07, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 2007. 

Secs. 2-51—2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MEETINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 

Sec. 2-81. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the mayor and council are held at the city hall or at such other place as may be designated, on the fourth Monday of each month at 7:30 p.m. If the fourth Monday falls on a legal holiday, the council meeting shall be held on the fourth Wednesday of the month at 7:30 p.m. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-11; Ord. No. 298-09, § 1, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 319-14, § 1, 8-25-2014 ) 
Sec. 2-82. - Adjourned meetings. 
Regular meetings of the mayor and council are held at the city hall or at such other place as may be designated, on the fourth Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. If the fourth Monday falls on a legal holiday, the council meeting shall be held on the fourth Wednesday of the month at 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-12) 
Sec. 2-83. - Cancellation or rescheduling of meetings. 
(a)  The mayor or clerk shall notify all councilmembers 24 hours prior to the cancellation of any regular meeting or the rescheduling of any special meeting. 
(b)  The mayor or clerk shall notify all councilmembers 48 hours prior to rescheduling of any regular council meeting. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-13) 
Sec. 2-84. - Order of business. 
(a)  The order of business at all regular meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Approval of minutes of last meeting; 
(2)  Approving/disapproving absences from council meetings; 
(3)  Correction and approval of minutes of prior meetings; 
(4)  Financial report; 
(5)  Approval of agenda; 
(6)  Mayor's report; 
(7)  Unfinished business; 
(8)  New business. 
(b)  If the mayor and council directs any matter to be the special business of a future meeting, that matter shall have precedence over all other business at that future meeting. 
(c)  No proposition shall be entertained by the mayor and council until it has been seconded, and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor or any member, be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-14; Ord. No. 314-12A, § II, 3-26-2012 ) 
Sec. 2-85. - Rules of procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the procedures of the mayor and council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-15) 
Sec. 2-86. - Previous questions. 
The previous question may be called at any time by a majority of the members present. The ayes and nays may be called for by any member. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-16) 
Sec. 2-87. - Motions having precedence. 
(a)  When a question is under consideration no motion shall be received except as follows: 
(1)  To lay on the table; 
(2)  To postpone to a time certain; 
(3)  To postpone indefinitely; 
(4)  [Reserved]; 
(5)  To amend; 
(6)  To strike out or insert; or 
(7)  To divide. 
(b)  Motions for any of these purposes shall have precedence in the order named. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-17; Ord. No. 314-12A, § III, 3-26-2012 ) 
Sec. 2-88. - Motion to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-18) 
Secs. 2-89—2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-6(4); clerk of court, § 22-41 et seq.; judge, § 22-61 et seq.; court officer, § 22-121 et seq.; office of code compliance officer, § 101-1; code compliance officer, § 101-112; zoning enforcing officer, § 117-13. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq.; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers for official acts, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2). 

Sec. 2-121. - Code enforcement officer. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established the office of code enforcement officer who shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council and shall have the responsibility of assisting the police department and other city personnel and agencies in the enforcement of certain laws of the city as well as such other duties as the mayor and council shall from time to time prescribe by ordinance. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-4) 
Sec. 2-122. - Use of city-owned vehicles. 
(a)  No person, except employees, city officials and persons authorized by the mayor and council, shall operate any vehicle, owned, leased or possessed by the city. 
(b)  No person who is not an employee, city official or person authorized by the mayor or council shall occupy any vehicle owned, leased or possessed by the city or ride in or upon the same, except in the case of an emergency, in which case the driver of the vehicle shall be authorized to accept assistance from any person or persons as he deems necessary for such emergency. 
(c)  Any employee of the city who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to discharge from his employment by reason of such violation. 
(d)  Any employee of the city who permits any other person to violate the provisions of this section shall likewise be subject to discharge by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1982, § 4-4-1) 
Sec. 2-123. - City administrator. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established an office of city administrator who shall be appointed by the mayor and city council and who shall be responsible for administering and coordinating the daily operations of the city, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor. 
(b)  In the discretion of the mayor and council, the office of city administrator may be combined with, and performed by, the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 306-11A, § I, 3-28-2011) 
Secs. 2-124—2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-6(2); taxation, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance or budget resolution, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II; grants of state funds to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-151. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the city shall be July 1 through June 30. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-1; Ord. No. 311-11, § 1, 12-21-2011) 
Secs. 2-152—2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; local government finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-171. - Minor purchases. 
The mayor may authorize the expenditure of any sum not greater than $500.00 for municipal purposes when each of the following requirements or circumstances exist: 
(1)  The mayor (including the mayor pro tem when authorized by the mayor to act for and in his absence) has determined that the expenditure is required for the orderly and efficient conduct of the business of the city. 
(2)  The purpose and the sum of the proposed expenditure are within the scope of the authorized and approved city budget. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-2(a); Ord. No. 228-99, §§ 1-3, 11-22-1999; Ord. No. 238-00, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 314-12A, § IV, 3-26-2012 ) 
Sec. 2-172. - Competitive sealed bids for public works projects. 
(a)  Budgetary limitation. All purchases authorized by this division shall be for expenditures within the scope of the authorized and approved city budget. 
(b)  Terms. The terms used in this section are defined as follows: 
(1)  Bid bond means a bond with good and sufficient surety or sureties for the faithful acceptance of the contract payable to, in favor of, and for the protection of the city for which the contract is to be awarded. 
(2)  Change order means an alteration, addition, or deduction from the original scope of work as defined by the contract documents to address changes or unforeseen conditions necessary for project completion. 
(3)  Competitive sealed bidding means a method of soliciting public works construction contracts whereby the award is based upon the lowest responsive, responsible bid in conformance with the provisions of this section. 
(4)  Competitive sealed proposals means a method of soliciting public works contracts whereby the award is based upon criteria identified in a request for proposals in conformance with the provisions of this section. 
(5)  Payment bond means a bond with good and sufficient surety or sureties payable to the city for which the work is to be done and intended for the use and protection of all subcontractors and all persons supplying labor, materials, machinery, and equipment in the prosecution of the work provided for in the public works construction contract. 
(6)  Performance bond means a bond with good and sufficient surety or sureties for the faithful performance of the contract and to indemnify the city for any damages occasioned by a failure to perform the same within the prescribed time. Such bond shall be payable to, in favor of, and for the protection of the city for which the work is to be done. 
(7)  Public works construction means the building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing of any public structure or building or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property other than those projects defined in section 2-173 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(8)  Responsible bidder or responsible offeror means a person or entity that has the capability in all respects to perform fully and reliably the contract requirements. 
(9)  Responsive bidder or responsive offeror means a person or entity that has submitted a bid or proposal that conforms in all material respect to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids or request for proposals. 
(10)  Scope of project means the work required by the original contract documents and any subsequent change orders required or appropriate to accomplish the intent of the project as described in the bid documents. 
(11)  Scope of work means the work that is required by the contract documents. 
(c)  Conditions for use. All contracts for the city shall be awarded by competitive sealed bids except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(d)  Exceptions. When purchasing used equipment, the council may approve and authorize the negotiation of a purchase in the best interest of the city if a good faith search has determined that this is the best equipment available for the price at the time of the purchase. 
(e)  Invitation for bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. 
(f)  Public notice. A public notice for the invitation for bids shall be given. 
(1)  The notice shall be posted conspicuously in the city's office and shall be advertised in the legal organ of the city or by electronic means on an Internet website of the city or an internet website identified by the city. Contract opportunities shall be advertised a minimum of two times, with the first advertisement occurring at least four weeks prior to the opening of the sealed bids or proposals. The second advertisement shall follow no earlier than two weeks from the first advertisement. Plans and specifications shall be available on the first day of the advertisement and shall be open to inspection by the public. The advertisement shall include such details and specifications as will enable the public to know the extent and character of the work to be done. All required notices of advertisement shall also advise of any mandatory prequalification requirements or pre-bid conferences as well as any federal requirements. 
(2)  The city shall not issue or cause to be issued any addenda modifying plans and specifications within a period of 72 hours prior to the advertised time for the opening of bids or proposals, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. However, if the necessity arises to issue an addendum modifying plans and specifications within the 72-hour period prior to the advertised time for the opening of bids or proposals, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, then the opening of bids or proposals shall be extended at least 72 hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays from the date of the original bid or proposal opening without need to readvertise as required by this section. 
(3)  Bid and contract documents may contain provisions authorizing the issuance of change orders, without the necessity of additional requests for bids or proposals, within the scope of the project when appropriate or necessary in the performance of the contract. Change orders may not be used to evade the purposes of this section. 
(4)  The city may, in its discretion, adopt a process for mandatory prequalification of prospective bidders or offerors; provided, however, that: 
a.  Criteria for prequalification must be reasonable related to the project or the quality of work; 
b.  Criteria for prequalification must be available to any prospective bidder or offeror requesting such information; 
c.  Any prequalification process must include a method of notifying prospective bidders or offerors of the criteria for prequalification; and 
d.  Any prequalification process must include a procedure for a disqualified bidder to respond to his or her disqualification to a representative of the city; provided, however, that such procedure shall not be construed to require the city to provide a formal appeals procedure. 
(g)  Bid bonds. Bid bonds shall be required for all public works construction contracts when bids are estimated to be over $20,000.00. If a bid bond is required for a public works contract and not submitted, the bid shall not be valid for any purpose unless the bond of good and sufficient surety is presented and approved by the city. The bid bond shall be in the amount of not less than five percent of the total amount payable by the terms of the contract. No bid or proposal shall be considered if a proper bid bond or other security authorized in this section has not been submitted. 
(h)  Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of two or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as the council deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded; the record of each bid shall be open to public inspection. All bids and bid documents shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk of the City of Mountain Park as required under the Public Records Act of the State of Georgia. 
(i)  Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in subsection (k) of this section. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids should set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. 
(j)  Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before and after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written or telegraphic notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for the bid opening. After bid opening, corrections in bid openings shall be permitted only to the extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After the bid opening, no changes in bid price or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the city or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid corrections, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if: 
(1)  The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or 
(2)  The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids or to cancel the awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the council. 
(k)  Award of contract. The city, by majority vote entered in its minutes, shall award the contract to the lowest reliable bidder, provided that the city shall have the right to reject any and all such bids whether such right is reserved in the public notice or not and, in such case, may readvertise, perform the work itself, or abandon the project. 
(l)  Award. The contract shall be awarded with responsible promptness by appropriate written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. If the low responsible and responsive bid for a construction project exceeds available funds as certified by the city council, and such bid does not exceed such funds by more than five percent, the council shall approve and authorize when time or economic considerations preclude re-solicitation of work of a reduced scope, negotiation of an adjustment of the bid price with the low responsible and responsive bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. 
(m)  Multistep sealed bidding. When it is considered impractical to prepare initially a purchase description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation. 
(n)  Performance bonds in the procurement of public works projects. When a public works project contract is awarded in excess of $20,000.00, the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the city and shall become binding on the parties upon execution of the contract: 
(1)  A performance bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract; and 
(2)  A payment bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety company registered to do business in the state or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, for the protection of all persons supplying labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the work provided for in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract. 
(3)  The above stated bonds shall not be modified or released without a vote of council approving such modification or release. 
(4)  A public works project contract subject to the above stated performance and payment bond requirements shall require the contractor as a condition of performance to keep in force during the term of the contract the insurance outlined below from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia. The insurance policy shall name the city as an additional insured. A certificate of insurance shall provide the city a 30-day written notice in the event of cancellation, non-renewal or adverse changes to the policy. A certificate of insurance documenting the below stated amounts of insurance shall be furnished to the city at the time of execution of the public works project contract. 
Liability insurance: 
a.  Worker's compensation. Issuance in such amounts as required by the applicable worker's compensation laws of the State of Georgia. 
b.  Comprehensive general liability. With a minimum limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence covering: 
1.  Premises-operations; 
2.  Broad form contractual; 
3.  Broad form property damage; 
4.  Personal injury. 
c.  Business automobile liability. With minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, covering bodily injury in connection with and property damage to the following: 
1.  Owned vehicles; 
2.  Hired vehicles; 
3.  Non-owned vehicles 
4.  Leased vehicles. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the requirements of such bonds on construction contracts under $20,000.00 when the council determines that the circumstances warrant. 
(6)  All bonds shall meet the requirements set forth in Chapter 91 or Title 36 of the Georgia Code. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-3; Ord. No. 228-99, § 5, 11-22-1999; Ord. No. 258-03, § 1, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 274-04, §§ 1, 2, 12-20-2004) 
Sec. 2-173. - Competitive sealed bids for public road construction. 
(a)  Budgetary limitation. All purchases authorized by this division shall be for expenditures within the scope of the authorized and approved city budget. 
(b)  Conditions for use. All contracts for the city shall be awarded by competitive sealed bids except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(c)  Invitation for bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. 
(d)  "Contract" defined. As used in this section, the term "contract" means a contract or subcontract entered into by a municipality with any person, the state or federal government or an agency of either, with another municipality or municipalities, with a county or counties, or with any combination of any of the foregoing entities, for the construction, reconstruction, or maintenance of all or part of a public road in said municipality, including but not limited to a contract or subcontract for the purchase of materials, for the hiring of labor, for professional services, or for other things or services incident to such work. 
(e)  Advertisement. The city shall advertise for competitive sealed bids for at least two weeks. The public advertisement shall be inserted once a week in such newspapers wherein the county sheriff's sales are advertised or in such newspapers or other publications, or both, as will ensure adequate publicity, the first insertion to be at least two weeks prior to the opening of the sealed bids, the second to follow one week after the publication of the first insertion. 
Such advertisement shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  A description sufficient to enable the public to know the approximate extent and character of the work to be done; 
(2)  The time allowed for performance; 
(3)  The terms and time of payment; 
(4)  Where and under what conditions and costs the detailed plans and specifications and proposal forms may be obtained; 
(5)  The amount of the proposal guaranty, if one is required; 
(6)  The time and place for submission and opening of bids; 
(7)  The right of the municipality to reject any one or all bids; and 
(8)  Such further notice as the municipality may deem advisable as in the public interest. 
(f)  Charge for proposals. The city may require each bidder to pay a reasonable sum sufficient to cover the cost to the municipality, where applicable, of the bid proposal form, the contract, and its specifications. 
(g)  Proposal guaranty. A municipality may require that each bid on a particular contract, as a prerequisite to the bid being considered, be accompanied by a proposal guaranty in the form of a certified check or other acceptable security payable to the city for an amount deemed by the municipality in the public interest necessary to ensure that the successful bidder will execute the contract on which he bid. 
Such proposal guaranty will be returned to a bidder upon receipt by the city of the bidder's written withdrawal of his bid if such receipt is before the time scheduled for the opening of bids. Upon the determination by the city of the lowest reliable bidder, the city will return proposal guaranties to all bidders except the proposal guaranty of the lowest reliable bidder. If no contract award is made within 30 days after the date set for the opening of bids, all bids shall be rejected and all proposal guaranties shall be returned unless the city and the successful bidder agree in writing to a longer period of time. 
(h)  Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of two or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as the council deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded; the record of each bid shall be open to public inspection. All bids and bid documents shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk of the City of Mountain Park as required under the Public Records Act of the State of Georgia. 
(i)  Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in subsection (k) of this section. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids should set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. 
(j)  Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before and after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written or telegraphic notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for the bid opening. After bid opening, corrections in bid openings shall be permitted only to the extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After the bid opening, no changes in bid price or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the city or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid corrections, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if: 
(1)  The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or 
(2)  The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids or to cancel the awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the council. 
(k)  Award of contract. The city, by majority vote entered in its minutes, shall award the contract to the lowest reliable bidder, provided that the city shall have the right to reject any and all such bids whether such right is reserved in the public notice or not and, in such case, may readvertise, perform the work itself, or abandon the project. 
(l)  Award. The contract shall be awarded with responsible promptness by appropriate written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. If the low responsible and responsive bid for a construction project exceeds available funds as certified by the city council, and such bid does not exceed such funds by more than five percent, the council shall approve and authorize when time or economic considerations preclude re-solicitation of work of a reduced scope, negotiation of an adjustment of the bid price with the low responsible and responsive bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. 
(m)  Multistep sealed bidding. When it is considered impractical to prepare initially a purchase description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation. 
(n)  Performance bonds in the procurement of road construction services. When a road construction contract is awarded in excess of $5,000.00, the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the city and shall become binding on the parties upon execution of the contract: 
(1)  A performance bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract; and 
(2)  A payment bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety company registered to do business in the state or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, for the protection of all persons supplying labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the work provided for in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract. 
(3)  The above stated bonds shall not be modified or released without a vote of council approving such modification or release. 
(4)  A road construction contract subject to the above stated performance and payment bond requirements shall require the contractor as a condition of performance to keep in force during the term of the contract the insurance outlined below from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia. The insurance policy shall name the city as an additional insured. A certificate of insurance shall provide the city a 30-day written notice in the event of cancellation, non-renewal or adverse changes to the policy. A certificate of insurance documenting the below stated amounts of insurance shall be furnished to the city at the time of execution of the road construction contract. 
Liability insurance. 
a.  Worker's compensation. Issuance in such amounts as required by the applicable worker's compensation laws of the State of Georgia. 
b.  Comprehensive general liability. With a minimum limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence covering: 
1.  Premises-operations; 
2.  Broad form contractual; 
3.  Broad form property damage; 
4.  Personal injury. 
c.  Business automobile liability. With minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, covering bodily injury in connection with and property damage to the following: 
1.  Owned vehicles; 
2.  Hired vehicles; 
3.  Non-owned vehicles; 
4.  Leased vehicles. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the requirements of such bonds on construction contracts under $5,000.00 when the council determines that the circumstances warrant. 
(6)  All bonds shall meet the requirements set forth in Chapter 91 or Title 36 of the Georgia Code. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-4(g); Ord. No. 228-99, § 6, 11-22-1999; Ord. No. 258-03, § 2, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 274-04, §§ 3, 4, 12-20-2004) 
Sec. 2-174. - Contracting for designated professional services. 
(a)  Authority. The council shall secure the services of lawyers, accountants, architects, engineers and land surveying services, as well as other such professionals as that term is defined by state law, in accordance with the selection procedures specified in this section. The expenditures for such services shall be within the scope of the authorized and approved city budget. 
(b)  Conditions for use. Except as approved under section 2-176 or section 2-178, the professional services designated in subsection (a) of this section shall be procured in accordance with this subsection. 
(c)  Statement of qualifications. Persons engaged in providing the designated types of professional services may submit statements of qualifications and expressions of interest in providing such professional services. The council may specify a uniform format for statements of qualifications. Persons may amend these statements at any time by filing a new statement. 
(d)  Public announcement and form of request for proposals. Adequate notice of the need for such services shall be given by the council through a request for proposals. The request for proposals shall describe the services required, list the types of information and data required of each offeror, and state information and the relative importance of particular qualifications. 
(e)  Discussion. The council through its designee may conduct discussions with any offeror who has submitted a proposal to determine such offeror's qualifications for further consideration. Discussions shall not disclose any information derived from proposals submitted by other offerors. 
(f)  Award. Award shall be made to the offeror determined in writing by the council to be best qualified based on pertinent evaluation factors and negotiation of compensation determined to be fair and reasonable. If compensation cannot be agreed upon with the best qualified offeror, then negotiations will be formally terminated with the selected offeror. If proposals were submitted by one or more offerors determined to be qualified, negotiation may be conducted with such other offerors in the order of their respective qualifications ranking, and the contract may be awarded to the offeror then ranked best qualified if the amount of compensation is determined to be fair and reasonable. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-5; Ord. No. 228-99, § 8, 11-22-1999) 
Sec. 2-175. - Small purchases. 
(a)  General. Any contract not exceeding $5,000.00 may be made in accordance with the small purchase procedures authorized in this section. All such expenditures shall be within the scope of the authorized and approved city budget. 
(b)  Small purchases over $1,000.00. Insofar as is practical for small purchases in excess of $1,000.00, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations. The award shall be made to the business submitting the lowest acceptable quotations. The name of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and the amount of each quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(c)  Small purchases under $1,000.00. The council shall adopt operational procedures for making small purchases of $1,000.00 or less. Such operational procedures shall provide for obtaining adequate and reasonable competition for the supply, service or construction purchased. Further, such operational procedures shall require the preparation and maintenance of written records adequate to document the competition obtained, properly account for the funds expended, and facilitate an audit of the small purchase made. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-6; Ord. No. 228-99, § 9, 11-22-1999) 
Sec. 2-176. - Sole source procurement and contract renewals. 
(a)  A contract may be awarded without competition when the council determines, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required supply, service or construction item. The council shall approve and authorize negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery and terms. A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public record and shall list each contractor's name, the amount and type of each contract, and the identification number of each contract file. The purpose and the sum of the proposed expenditures shall be within the scope of the authorized and approved city budget. 
(b)  An existing contract may be renewed, extended or renegotiated without undergoing the bid process required by this article when the council determines that the existing service provider has performed acceptably under the terms of the contract and it would be in the best interest of the city to continue to use the services of the existing service provider. Nothing in this section shall exempt a project from bidding requirements imposed by state or federal law. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-7; Ord. No. 228-99, § 10, 11-22-1999; Ord. No. 295-08, § I, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 2-177. - Brand name or equal substitution. 
(a)  Use. Brand name or equal specifications may be used when the council determines in writing that the purpose and the sum of the proposed expenditures shall be within the scope of the authorized and approved city budget, and that: 
(1)  No other design or performance specification or qualified products list is available; 
(2)  Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase description, not including a brand name specification; 
(3)  The nature of the product or the nature of the city's requirements makes use of brand name or equal specification suitable for the procurement; or 
(4)  Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the city's best interest. 
(b)  Competition. The council shall seek to identify sources from which the designated brand name item or items can be obtained and shall solicit such sources to achieve whatever degree of price competition is practicable. If only one source can supply the requirement, the procurement shall be made pursuant to section 2-176. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-8; Ord. No. 228-99, § 11, 11-22-1999) 
Sec. 2-178. - Emergency procurements. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions, the council may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of supplies, services or construction items when there exists a threat to public health, welfare or safety, provided that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. As soon as practical, a record of each emergency procurement shall be made and shall set forth the contractor's name, the amount and type of the contract, a listing of the items procured under the contract, and the identification number of the contract file. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-9) 
Sec. 2-179. - Cancellation of invitations for bid or request for proposals. 
An invitation for bids, request for proposals, or other solicitation may be cancelled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation when it is for good cause and in the best interest of the city. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. The notice shall identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation, where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any resolicitation or any further procurements of similar items. Reasons for rejection shall be provided upon request by unsuccessful bidders or offerors. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-10) 
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF ETHICS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 299-09, § 1, adopted August 17, 2009, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 2-201—2-219, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to code of ethics for city officials and derived from Ord. No. 268-03, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2003. 

Sec. 2-201. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who fail to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 299-09, § 1, 8-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-202. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. 
This article is intended to supplement, rather than conflict with provisions of state and federal law and the City's Charter. Whenever the provisions of this article place a greater ethical duty or burden upon a city official than required by law or Charter, then this article shall control. Should any portion of this article be found to conflict with the procedural requirements of any law or the Charter, then this article shall be construed in a manner that complies with the law or Charter provision. 
(Ord. No. 299-09, § 1, 8-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-203. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined, does not include city employees, but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the City Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed (a) $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or (b) ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; or 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 299-09, § 1, 8-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-204. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose in writing for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  Any official who has a substantial interest in an entity doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall fail to disclose and abstain from any other official action in regards to any person or entity from whom the official has solicited or accepted other employment performed, or for which compensation was received, during the official's term of office. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or solicits a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or other persons or entities with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure except as provided by law, Charter or ordinance. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Mountain Park nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a Municipal Court Judge of the City of Mountain Park on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Mountain Park. 
(q)  No city official shall disclose or publish information obtained as a result of the performance of his or her office and official duties which is protected by, or subject to a privilege recognized by, the Georgia Open Meetings Act or other law, including but not limited to matters discussed in closed session, except as required or provided by law, and, in the context of such privileged information, pursuant to the determination of the mayor and city council to waive that privilege. 
(r)  No city official shall fail to disclose any familial relationship between the official and any person under consideration for employment or appointment by the city. Nor shall such city official take any action upon the decision of whether or not to employ or appoint any person with whom the city official has a familial relationship. 
(Ord. No. 299-09, § 1, 8-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-205. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 299-09, § 1, 8-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-206. - Advisory opinions. 
The city attorney shall render a written advisory opinion based on a real or hypothetical set of circumstances when requested in writing by any elected official subject to the provisions of this Code, and it shall be a responsibility of the city attorney for the interpretation of this Code in rendering such opinions. Such advisory opinion shall be rendered pursuant only to a written request, fully setting forth the circumstances to be reviewed by the city attorney. Whenever a complaint is filed against a city official acting in reliance of an advisory opinion issued by the city attorney, the Municipal Court may rule upon the merits of the city attorney's interpretation of the code, but shall take the city official's justifiable reliance upon the advisory opinion into consideration in determining the culpability of the city official. 
(Ord. No. 299-09, § 1, 8-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-207. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All ethics complaints filed against city officials under this article shall be filed with the city clerk. Complaints shall be in writing and under oath, and shall state the name of the city official charged, the acts which are alleged to have been committed, the time and place those acts were alleged to have been committed, and the section of this article that is alleged to have been violated. Complaints under this article shall be filed no later than 365 days after the facts giving rise to the ethics violation occurred. 
To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(b)  The city clerk shall submit the original complaint to the Municipal Court and city solicitor, and shall provide a copy to the code enforcement officer or city police officer, who shall serve it personally upon the city official and certify to the Municipal Court the date that personal service is accomplished. 
(c)  The Municipal Court shall cause the matter to be considered and tried in a manner consistent with due process and the rules of procedure established for or by that court for citations for ordinance violations. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the complaint, the city solicitor shall review the ethics complaint to determine whether it is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the court. The solicitor may dismiss complaints that in his or her discretion do not merit prosecution; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the city solicitor shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. If the solicitor determines that the complaint does merit prosecution, then the solicitor shall present the case in the same manner as other ordinance violations. 
(e)  Upon the conviction of the violation of this ethics ordinance, the court shall impose a sentence consistent with the provisions of this article, and shall cause a copy of the court's order to be delivered to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 299-09, § 1, 8-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-208. - Right to appeal. 
Decisions of the Municipal Court may be appealed in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 299-09, § 1, 8-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-209. - Penalty. 
Any person found by the Municipal Court to have violated any provision of this article may be punished in the following manner: 
(1)  The Municipal Court may access a fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, community service or a combination of both; and 
(2)  The city council, by resolution, may enter a public reprimand or request the city official's resignation. 
(Ord. No. 299-09, § 1, 8-17-2009) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances and hazards, ch. 113; noise from domestic animals, § 113-45(3). 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, >Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Fulton County provisions adopted. 
The Fulton County animal control ordinance, as now or hereafter amended, is hereby adopted as a general ordinance of the city to the extent that the animal control ordinance is not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. A copy of the current Fulton County animal control ordinance and any additions, deletions or local amendments thereto shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and be available for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 6-2. - Enforcement of Fulton County animal control ordinance. 
The city code compliance officer as well as the county animal control officer and county board of health are hereby given the power to enforce the Fulton County animal control ordinance in the city. 
Sec. 6-3. - Summons. 
A city officer, at his direction, may elect not to impound a dog or other animal found in violation of any section of this chapter, but to issue or cause to be issued a summons directed to the owner or possessor of the dog to appear before the municipal court on a certain day to stand trial for the violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-27) 
Sec. 6-4. - Violations. 
(a)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500.00 and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Vicious animals. Any vicious animal or fowl, as defined in the Fulton County animal control ordinance referenced in section 6-1, shall be deemed to be a nuisance and may be abated as a nuisance upon the conviction thereafter of its owner of a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-28) 
Sec. 6-5. - Confinement of female dogs in heat required. 
It shall be the duty of any owner, custodian or harborer of any female dog in heat within the city, when she is left unattended, to securely confine such dog inside a building or other enclosure to prevent such dog from coming into contact with another dog except for planned breeding. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-26) 
Secs. 6-6—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL LICENSE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Required. 
It shall be the duty of each owner, custodian or harborer of any dog over four months of age kept, maintained or harbored within the city to obtain a county dog license for such dog. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-23(a)) 
Sec. 6-32. - Dogs brought into city. 
It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog over four months of age brought into the city to obtain a county dog license for such dog within 14 days from the date of entry. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-23(b)) 
Sec. 6-33. - Application; evidence of inoculation. 
Every person owning or keeping a dog in the city may be required, as determined by city council, to apply to the city clerk for a license for each dog so owned or kept. At the time of such application, such person shall present to the clerk evidence showing that the dog has been inoculated against rabies within one year. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-23(c); Ord. No. 270-03, § 1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 6-34. - Issuance. 
After payment of a fee as set out in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk, the clerk shall issue to the applicant a license and a tag which shall be fastened to the collar of the dog so licensed. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-23(c)) 
Sec. 6-35. - Expiration. 
A license issued under this division shall expire 12 months from its date of issuance. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-23(c)) 
Secs. 6-36—6-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSEHOLD PETS.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 265-03, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 2003, repealed §§ 6-61—6-66, which pertained to special kennel permit. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 

Sec. 6-61. - Number of household pets limited in residential districts. 
(a)  For purposes of this division "household pet" is defined as any animal owned or kept for pleasure rather than sale, which is an animal of a species customarily bred and raised to live in the habitat of humans and is dependent upon them for food and shelter; except that livestock and wild animals shall not be deemed pets. 
(b)  No person who is a resident of a district zoned solely for residential uses, according to the official zoning map of the city, as it now exists or as is subsequently amended, shall own, board, or be the custodian of more than four household pets; and no household, regardless of the number of persons residing in same, shall own, board, or be the custodian of more than four household pets. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, an animal under the age of 14 weeks shall not be considered a household pet, provided that the animal is the offspring of a parent household pet belonging to and residing in the household with that owner or custodian. 
(Ord. No. 265-03 § 2, 11-17-2003) 
Secs. 6-67—6-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL GUARD/SECURITY DOGS 

Sec. 6-101. - Warning signs. 
It shall be the duty of all persons who keep, use or maintain any guard/security dog to have signs conspicuously posted on the premises where the guard/security dog is located to warn of the presence of the dog. This warning shall consist of a warning sign placed at each entrance and exit to the premises and in a position to be legible from the sidewalk or ground level adjacent to the sign at eye level. If the premises is not enclosed by a wall or fence, a sign shall be placed at every entrance and exit to each structure on the premises in which a guard/security dog is located. Each sign shall measure at least ten inches by 14 inches and shall contain block lettering stating "Warning, Guard Dog on Duty." In addition, for dogs rented or leased, the sign shall set forth the name, address and phone number of the responsible person or persons to be notified during any hour of the day or night. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-25(a)) 
Sec. 6-102. - Rabies vaccination. 
It shall be the duty of any person who keeps, uses, or maintains a guard/security dog to ensure the dog is vaccinated against rabies and licensed as required by the Fulton County animal control ordinance adopted in section 6-1. The dog also must have the current vaccination tag affixed to a collar worn by the dog at all times as required by such ordinance. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-25(b)) 
Sec. 6-103. - Notification. 
It shall be the duty of any person that sells, leases, and/or rents any guard/security dog to be used within the city to notify the Fulton County Animal Control S.P.C.A. of the location and number of guard/security dogs in use, kept, or maintained at a particular location. The animal control office shall maintain a record of the location, number of guard/security dogs, and current rabies vaccination and licensure of all guard/security dogs utilized within the city. The person that sells, leases, and/or rents a guard/security dog to be used in the city shall furnish the following information to the Fulton County Animal Control Office: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the location where a guard dog is located. 
(2)  Name, breed, sex, and current license tag information of each guard dog at any location in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-25(c)) 
Sec. 6-104. - Transporting. 
It shall be unlawful to transport any guard/security dog in an open bed truck, and the vehicle transporting guard dogs shall be identified as to the business owner. It shall be unlawful to transport any guard dog in the city except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Each dog shall be placed in separate holding bins. 
(2)  Each holding bin shall be enclosed and measure 48 inches long by 18 inches wide by 30 inches high. 
(3)  Each holding bin shall be adequately ventilated. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-25(d)) 
Sec. 6-105. - Confinement in building or secure enclosure. 
(a)  No guard/security dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its own enclosure. 
(b)  A guard/security dog shall be confined by the owner/custodian/harborer within a building or secure enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape of its own volition. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-25(e), (f)) 
ARTICLE IV. - WILDLIFE SANCTUARY 

Sec. 6-131. - Purpose. 
This section is adopted for the purpose of declaring and designating the City of Mountain Park as a wildlife sanctuary in an effort to protect wild animals and birds within the city in order to promote the aesthetic and environmental amenities of the city for the edification, education and well-being of the citizens and residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 259-03 § 1, 10-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-132. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this section, words and terms are defined as follows: 
(1)  Wildlife shall mean and include birds, warm-blooded animals and reptiles, which are not domesticated and which are not vermin as defined herein. "Wildlife" shall not include formerly domesticated animals which are feral, and any warm-blooded animals or reptiles which are determined to be a nuisance under applicable city ordinances. 
(2)  Vermin shall mean rats, mice, dangerous or rabid animals, and poisonous snakes which are inherently dangerous to human health or life. 
(3)  Sanctuary shall mean a place set apart for the protection and propagation of wildlife. 
(4)  City shall mean the City of Mountain Park. 
(5)  Weapon shall mean: 
a.  Firearms of all sizes, makes and types; 
b.  Guns or devices which discharge projectiles by spring under tension, by compressed air or gas, or by any other means, including but not limited to BB guns, air guns, and pellet guns; 
c.  Bows and arrows; 
d.  Spears; 
e.  Slingshots; 
f.  Any other missile or projectile thrown or launched with intent to harm or injure or kill wildlife; 
g.  Any vehicle used with intent to harm or injure or kill wildlife; and 
h.  A stick, club, took, or other device used with intent to harm or injure or kill wildlife. 
(6)  Trap shall include any device or man-made creation by which wildlife can be trapped or ensnared. 
(Ord. No. 259-03 § 1, 10-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-133. - Wildlife sanctuary. 
The city within its corporate limits is herewith declared to be and is designated as a wildlife sanctuary, and the appropriate officials are directed to place signs at all entrances to the city stating that the city is a wildlife sanctuary. 
(Ord. No. 259-03 § 1, 10-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-134. - Protection of wildlife. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to: 
(1)  Intentionally harm or injure or kill any wildlife; 
(2)  Intentionally use any weapon to harm or injure or kill any wildlife; 
(3)  Place or set any traps designed to entrap or ensnare any wildlife; 
(4)  Intentionally disturb or destroy the nesting or breeding place of any wildlife; 
(5)  Knowingly permit dogs and cats to harm or injure or kill any wildlife, or to disturb or destroy the nesting or breeding place of any wildlife; and/or 
(6)  Take the eggs or young of any wildlife. 
(Ord. No. 259-03 § 1, 10-20-2003) 
Chapter 14 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Communications, ch. 18; taxation, ch. 54; occupational license taxes, § 54-101 et seq.; utilities, ch. 62; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference— Limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; evidence of state license as prerequisite to local business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; exemption from taxation of agricultural products and livestock raised in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Handbills. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills or other advertising matter on any place where he has not secured the permission of the owner or manager of the property to do so. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause any commercial handbill to be placed within or upon, or under the windshield wiper of any private automobile parked upon any of the public streets or in any public parking area. This shall not preclude the delivery of any handbill to an owner, occupant or person present and in charge of a vehicle willing to accept and receive the handbill. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills or other advertising matter upon any permanent or temporary structure or building, pole or tree located on any street, park or public way without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 7-3-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Special daily business license. 
In lieu of obtaining a business license or paying an occupational tax as provided in this Code, a person not maintaining a fixed place of business in the city may obtain from the administrator a special daily business license which shall expire at 12:00 midnight of the day for which it is issued. A new license shall be obtained for each day on which any type of business is to be conducted. Any person desiring to engage in a business licensed under this section shall obtain a license prior to engaging in business on the day for which the license is issued and pay all license fees and occupation or business taxes as set out in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 221-99, § 7-3-2, 6-21-1999) 
Secs. 14-3—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOME OCCUPATIONS 

Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Home occupation means any use, occupation or activity conducted entirely within a dwelling by the residents thereof which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residence purposes and does not change the character thereof, and in connection with which there is no display; no stock-in-trade nor commodity sold or stored on the premises, and no person not a resident on the premises is employed specifically in connection with the home occupation; provided, however, that no mechanical equipment is installed or used except such as is normally used for domestic purposes, and that not more than ten percent of the total floor space of any dwelling is used for home occupation. "Home occupation" shall include the use of premises by a physician, dentist, lawyer, clergyman or other professional person for consultation or emergency treatment, but not for the general practice of the profession. 
(Ord. No. 220-99, § 7-4-1, 6-21-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-32. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced and administered by the code compliance officer in conjunction with and concurrently with any other enforcement agency, office or department designated in section 54-103 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 220-99, § 7-4-3, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 14-33. - Permitted in residential districts. 
Home occupations, as defined in section 14-31 may be established in a dwelling in a residential district. The following requirements and restrictions shall apply in addition to all other applicable requirements, provisions and restrictions of the Code of the City of Mountain Park, Georgia: 
(1)  Home occupations are subject to the occupational taxes set forth in Chapter 54, in section 54-101 through section 54-136 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. 
(3)  No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted. 
(4)  Only one vehicle designed and manufactured to be used primarily as a passenger vehicle shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the home occupations. 
(5)  No equipment that interferes with radio and/or television reception shall be allowed. 
(6)  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation. 
(7)  No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, odor, smoke, glare or electrical interference that would be detectable beyond the interior of the dwelling unit. 
(8)  All activities associated with the home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and only persons residing in the dwelling unit shall be employed to perform those specific home occupation related activities which occur at the location of the home occupation. 
(9)  No more than ten percent of the interior square footage of the dwelling unit shall be used for the conduct of the home occupation. 
(10)  No use shall involve any type of public contact in connection with the home occupation other than occasional and incidental public contact, which shall be limited to no more than two non-resident visitors at any one time at the location of the home occupation and furthermore, no article, product, or service shall be sold, traded or exchanged on the premises other than by telephone. 
(11)  No business vehicles, materials or equipment shall be stored or parked on the exterior of the dwelling except that one vehicle as described in subsection (4) of this ordinance and used exclusively by the resident may be parked at the location of the home occupation. 
(12)  No off-site employees of the home occupation shall congregate on or adjacent to the premises for any purpose concerning the home occupation. 
(13)  No home occupation shall be operated so as to cause a nuisance or create a fire hazard or any other hazard to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 220-99, § 7-4-2, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 254-02, § 7-4-2 (1), 12-16-2002) 
Sec. 14-34. - Application of occupational tax provisions. 
In addition to the provisions of this article, all applicable requirements of article III of chapter 54 of this Code shall apply to businesses conducted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 220-99, § 7-4-2(1), 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 14-35. - Accessory buildings. 
No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used in connection with a home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 220-99, § 7-4-2(2), 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 14-36. - Alterations to building. 
No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building may be permitted in the conduct of a home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 220-99, § 7-4-2(3), 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 14-37. - Use of vehicles. 
Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 220-99, § 7-4-2(4), 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 14-38. - Equipment restricted. 
No chemical, electrical, or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment shall be used in connection with a home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 220-99, § 7-4-2(6), 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 14-39. - Electronic interference. 
No equipment used in the conduct of a home occupation that interferes with radio and/or television reception shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 220-99, § 7-4-2(5), 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 14-40. - Students limited. 
A home occupation offering instruction in music, dance, arts, and crafts, and similar subjects shall be limited to two students at one time. 
(Ord. No. 220-99, § 7-4-2(7), 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 14-41. - Application. 
(a)  Applicants for license under this article must file with the city clerk an application on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. 
(b)  No license shall be issued unless the applicant has satisfied all requirements set forth in the City of Mountain Park's home occupation ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 254-02 § 7-4-4 (2), 12-16-2002) 
Sec. 14-42. - Denial, revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be denied, revoked or suspended by the city council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2)  Any violation of this article; or 
(3)  The inability to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Before denial, revocation or suspension of a license, the city shall provide the licensee written notice of the alleged reason(s) for the potential denial, revocation or suspension of the license. Said notice shall be provided to the potential licensee or licensee by registered certified mail, returned receipt requested, mailed to the address included on the licensee's application. The notice shall set forth the date and time for the hearing to be held before the city council. Said hearing shall be held no earlier than ten days after the postmarked date of the notice of the hearing. Said notice shall set forth the alleged violations of this chapter. The licensee may appear at the hearing before the city council to present argument against the potential denial, revocation or suspension. 
(c)  Appeal. In the event a person whose permit has been denied, suspended or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council, that person may appeal the decision to the Superior Court of the county in which the property that is the subject of the application lies within 30 days of the date of the city council's decision. 
(Ord. No. 254-02 § 7-4-5 (3), 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 289-06, § VI, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 314-12A, § V, 3-26-2012 ) 
Secs. 14-43—14-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq.; exception from local peddler or itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-71. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit before sunrise or after sundown. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit before 9:30 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle within the fire zone of the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit without having registered with the city clerk in accordance with this article or to peddle, solicit or canvass without having on his person and in his possession an identification card issued in accordance with this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter residential premises for the purpose of peddling, soliciting or canvassing where a "no solicitation" or "no trespassing" sign is located at or near the entrance to the property. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to refuse to leave residential premises occupied by another upon the occupant's request. 
(Code 1982, § 7-2-4; Ord. No. 320-14, § 1, 8-25-2014 ) 
Sec. 14-72. - Definitions. 
(a)  The terms "peddle" , "solicit" or "canvass" mean travelling from place to place or door to door and exhibiting, offering to sell, or selling goods or services; or making any other attempt to obtain money, orders, donations, contributions, employment, business or subscriptions. 
(b)  The terms "peddler" , "solicitor" or "canvasser" mean a person engaged in peddling, soliciting or canvassing. 
( Ord. No. 320-14, § 2, 8-25-2014 ) 
Sec. 14-73. - Exclusions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to religious or political speech. 
( Ord. No. 320-14, § 2, 8-25-2014 ) 
Sec. 14-74. - Enforcement. 
Any violation of this article is punishable under section 8-15 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 320-14, § 2, 8-25-2014 ) 
Secs. 14-75—14-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 14-91. - Required. 
Any person peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the city shall be required to register and obtain an identification card as provided by this division. 
(Code 1982, § 7-2-1) 
Sec. 14-92. - Fee; application for identification card. 
(a)  Any person desiring to peddle, solicit or canvass within the city shall pay to the city clerk or his designated representative a registration fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and shall make application with the city clerk for an identification card which shall show payment of the registration fee and the days that the registrant has registered to peddle, solicit or canvass within the city. 
(b)  The application shall include the applicant's full name, home address, telephone number, and date of birth, as well as any other information necessary to allow the city clerk to perform a background check for the purpose of ascertaining whether the applicant has convicted of a felony or has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude. If the applicant is representing an organization, the application shall also include the name, address, and telephone number of the organization. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application and registration fee meeting the requirements of this section, the city clerk shall issue a registration card unless the applicant has been convicted of a felony or has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude. 
(d)  The registration card shall be valid for a period of one year. The registration may be renewed upon submission of an application for renewal and a renewal fee as fixed by the mayor and council. Upon receipt of the renewal application, the city clerk shall issue a renewed registration card unless the applicant has been convicted of a felony or has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude. 
(Code 1982, § 7-2-2; Ord. No. 320-14, § 3, 8-25-2014 ) 
Sec. 14-93. - Exhibition of registration card. 
Each registrant shall at all times while in the city have upon his person the registration card and shall exhibit the same when requested to do so by any law enforcement officer or by any municipal authority and by any person being solicited. Possession of this registration card shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any products or project by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 7-2-3) 
Chapter 18 - COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14; utilities, ch. 62; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference— Avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2; municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BASIC CATV SERVICE RATES 

Sec. 18-31. - FCC regulations applicable. 
The city will follow the FCC Rate Regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the cable television company and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 1, 5-3-1994) 
Sec. 18-32. - Consideration of views. 
In connection with the regulation of basic cable television service rates and charges, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 2, 5-3-1994) 
Sec. 18-33. - Execution of documents. 
The mayor or his designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are required by the FCC Rate Regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic cable television service rates and charges. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 3, 5-3-1994) 
Secs. 18-34—18-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES AND LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affiliated person means each person who falls into one or more of the following categories: 
(1)  Each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; 
(2)  Each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; 
(3)  Each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner of the applicant; and 
(4)  Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the applicant; 
provided that the term "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with the applicant. 
Cable services has the meaning as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. If the term "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, the term "cable services" shall mean as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system has the meaning as defined in the Cable Act. 
Control and controlling interest mean the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of a person, including, but not limited to, a person's compliance with a franchise or revocable license, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by contract, or otherwise, and the beneficial ownership of shares representing ten percent or more of the votes entitled to be cast by a corporation's voting shares shall create a rebuttable presumption of control. 
Facility services means the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of conduit or related facilities in the streets by a person for sale or lease to third parties, other than affiliated persons, that use such conduit or related facilities for the transmission of telecommunication services, but such person does not himself provide telecommunications service or cable service to such third parties or any locations or other persons in the license area. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets by a telecommunications system to provide telecommunications services. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to provide facility services along licensed routes pursuant to a license, or to construct, install, operate and maintain a telecommunications system as necessary to: 
(1)  Furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; 
(2)  Provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; or 
(3)  Transport telecommunications services across the city along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications services at or from any person or location in the city. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Private telecommunications services means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services. 
Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in section 18-101(b). 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications has the meaning as defined by 47 USC 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. 
Telecommunications service has the meaning as defined by 47 USC 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. If the term "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, the term "telecommunications service" shall have the meaning as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Telecommunications system means the system, plant, equipment or property within the streets in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 250-02, § I (1.1), 5-20-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-72. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation on, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this article or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or revocable license or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this article. 
(Ord. No. 250-02, § I (3.2), 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 18-73. - Application to existing telecommunications systems and providers of telecommunications services and private telecommunications services. 
This article shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for the operation of telecommunications systems used to provide telecommunications services existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Ord. No. 250-02, § I (3.3), 5-20-2002) 
Secs. 18-74—18-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION PROCEDURE 

Sec. 18-101. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to construct, operate or maintain a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services or private telecommunications services are provided, or use or occupy the streets to provide facility services, without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city intends to exercise its authority to franchise or license persons pursuant to this article to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, including the 1996 Act. 
(b)  A person shall not use or occupy the streets to operate a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services or private telecommunications services are provided without a franchise, except that such person may use or occupy specific streets without a franchise if the person obtains a revocable license in accordance with the terms of this article. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets as follows: 
(1)  The license may be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is for the sole purpose of providing private telecommunications services or facility services; 
(2)  The license shall be granted to provide telecommunications services only if the use or occupation of such streets, together with the use or occupation of any streets pursuant to revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed 500 linear feet; or 
(3)  The license shall be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is by a telecommunications system that is not used by the grantee or any other person to sell, resell or otherwise provide telecommunications services to any person in the city. 
If an application for a revocable license would cause a person to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in this subsection, then such person must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this article, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
(c)  The city council may grant one or more franchises or revocable licenses in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. 
(d)  The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(e)  Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or revocable licenses as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services, private telecommunications services or facility services. 
(f)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license may only be granted for use of specifically identified streets. 
(g)  The grant of franchises and revocable licenses by the city to persons constructing, operating or maintaining a telecommunications system shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the 1996 Act, as amended, governing telecommunications franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 250-02, § I (2.1), 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 18-102. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise or revocable license shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names and registrations used by applicant; 
(2)  For the purpose of determining who controls the applicant, a detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including the following: 
a.  The names and business addresses of all officers and directors of the corporation or business entity organization; 
b.  The names and business addresses of all persons having control over the applicant; 
c.  Financial information sufficient to demonstrate that the applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system, or to provide facility services, in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law; and 
d.  For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate, and repair the telecommunications system, or provide facility services, in compliance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety and welfare with respect to the applicant's use of the streets, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant and the areas served by such systems. 
(3)  In order to permit the city to manage its streets, a description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the telecommunications system or facility services to be constructed in the streets, which shall include the following. 
a.  A map indicating the location of the system or facility services in the streets, and an estimated construction schedule, if known; and 
b.  A statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant. 
(4)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information on, or references reasonably pertinent to the city's management of the streets or the compensation to be paid to the city, which shall be required or requested by the council or by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 250-02, § I(2.2), 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 18-103. - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises and revocable licenses. 
No application for a new franchise or revocable license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise or revocable license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded, except if required by law. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $1,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city, and each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $1,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. If the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. If the city's reasonable costs are less than the application amount, the city shall reimburse to the applicant the amount in excess of the city's actual cost if required by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 250-02, § I(2.2.04), 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 18-104. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 250-02, § I(2.3), 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 18-105. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises or revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 250-02, § I(2.4), 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 18-106. - Evaluation criteria. 
An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to construct, operate or maintain a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services are provided, provided the city council reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city; 
(2)  Demonstration of adequate financial and technical ability to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, which such demonstration may be made by an adequate bond, security fund, and/or such other demonstration that is reasonably acceptable to the city, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the state or federal communications commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the city; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The willingness and the ability of the applicant to meet construction requirements and to abide by all conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise, including any terms or conditions imposed pursuant to section 18-108, any public, health, safety and welfare requirements reasonably related to the applicant's use of the streets, and the city's management of streets; and 
(5)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations reasonably deemed pertinent by the city for managing the streets and safeguarding the interests of the city and the public in the streets, and for ensuring the city receives fair and reasonable compensation for use of the streets. 
In making any determination under this division as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services and in accordance with applicable law, other than section 253 of the Communications Act which is not applicable to persons providing only private telecommunications services or facility services, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the provisions of subsections (1)—(5) of this section to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. No. 250-02, § I(2.5), 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 18-107. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps, as the city council deems necessary or appropriate, to consider and act on applications for franchises or revocable licenses. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  After considering such information provided pursuant to this article as it determines to be appropriate, the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application, fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain at which such application shall be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. 
(d)  The city council shall consider the application for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with this article and applicable law, including 47 USC 253, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth in section 18-106. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements in order to grant a franchise or revocable license to an applicant when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby or that applicable law requires such waiver. 
(e)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 250-02, § I(2.6), 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 18-108. - Terms and conditions of franchise and revocable license. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise or revocable license granted pursuant to this division shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or revocable license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: 
(1)  The term of the franchise or revocable license; provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five years and shall not be renewed for terms exceeding five years; 
(2)  The franchise area authorized by the franchise, or the streets that may be used pursuant to the revocable license; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license; 
(6)  For the limited purpose of ensuring that the grantee is complying with the terms of the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions and the city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records with respect to its obligations under the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods in the streets; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight by the city of the grantee's use of streets and compliance with the franchise or revocable license; 
(12)  Provisions relating to an assignment or other transfer of the franchise or revocable license or the telecommunications system that results in a change in control; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all licenses and permits necessary to provide telecommunications services by use of the city's streets from any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the federal communications commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of city operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements of the telecommunications system, or from the provision of facility services; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the telecommunications system, or the provision of facility services; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city reasonably determines are necessary or appropriate to permit the city to manage its streets or ensure compliance with the franchise or revocable license, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(b)  The city shall make available to an applicant a model franchise or revocable license, as applicable, containing the terms and conditions the city seeks to impose pursuant to this section. The city shall have the right to modify from time to time such model franchise or revocable license, so long as such modifications are consistent with this article and applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 250-02, § I(2.7), 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 18-109. - Revocation of revocable license. 
The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause or, if the revocable license is for the provision of private telecommunications services or facility services, for the city's convenience. The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than 500 linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services by the grantee, any affiliated persons or any other persons to or from any person or location in the city, or unless the use or occupation of the streets is for the provision of facility services. 
(Ord. No. 250-02, § I(2.8), 5-20-2002) 
Chapter 22 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 38; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Duty of superintendent to fix location of polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-265; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Name of court. 
In keeping with state law as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq., the court shall be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Mountain Park. The Municipal Court of the City of Mountain Park is established and described in article VII of the city Charter. 
(Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 1, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 22-2. - Sessions. 
Regular sessions of the municipal court shall be held at the council chambers or at such other place as may be designated by the municipal judge at such time as the municipal judge directs. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-1; Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 2E, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 22-3. - Procedure. 
The procedure and rules for the municipal court shall be the same as those for magistrate courts of the state. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-3; Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 3, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 22-4. - Indigent defense program. 
The judge of the municipal court shall, upon inquiry and determination of indigency, appoint counsel to represent any and all indigent defendants charged with offenses before the municipal court. The judge shall maintain an appointment list of practicing attorneys from local bar associations or otherwise, and shall appoint counsel therefrom at the city's expense for legal representation of indigent defendants charged with offenses before the court. Counsel appointed for legal representation of indigent defendants shall be compensated from the city's indigent defense fund in accordance with the guidelines established by the council for this purpose. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-6) 
Sec. 22-5. - Indigent defense fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created an indigent defense fund for the purpose of compensating attorneys appointed to represent indigent defendants charged with offenses before the municipal court of the city. The council shall appoint such monies as it deems necessary to adequately fund the indigent defense program. 
(b)  Attorneys appointed by the judge to represent indigent defendants shall be compensated from the city's indigent defense fund at a rate as set by the council from time to time. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-7) 
Secs. 22-6—22-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERSONNEL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-121 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-41. - Clerk. 
(a)  Duties. The clerk of the municipal court shall maintain and keep in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the operation of the court, sign all documents as may be required by the court and perform such other duties as may be required by the judge. 
(b)  Salary. The salary of the court clerk shall be set by the council by resolution. 
(c)  Appointment. The council appoints the city clerk as clerk of the municipal court. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-4; Ord. No. 141-A-96, §§ 5A, 5B, 10-21-1996) 
Secs. 22-42—22-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUDGE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-121 et seq. 

Sec. 22-61. - Appointment. 
The council shall appoint a judge of the municipal court from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 2B, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 22-62. - Term. 
The judge of the municipal court shall serve at the pleasure of the council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-2; Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 2A, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 22-63. - Powers. 
The judge of the municipal court shall exercise those powers set out in sections 7.10 and 7.12 of article VII of the city's Charter at his discretion and to promote justice. 
(Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 2C, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 22-64. - Salary. 
The salary of the municipal judge shall be set by the council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 2D, 10-21-1996) 
Secs. 22-65—22-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOLICITOR 

Sec. 22-91. - Term. 
The solicitor of the municipal court shall serve at the pleasure of the council. 
(Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 4A, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 22-92. - Salary. 
The solicitor shall receive a salary as set by the council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 4B, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 22-93. - Duties. 
The solicitor shall prosecute offenses against the provisions of this Code and ordinances of the city before the court. 
(Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 4C, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 22-94. - Appointment. 
The council shall appoint a solicitor of the municipal court from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 4D, 10-21-1996) 
Secs. 22-95—22-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COURT OFFICER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-121 et seq. 

Sec. 22-121. - Appointment. 
One or more court officers shall be appointed by the council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 6C, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 22-122. - Duties. 
The court officers shall maintain order in the municipal court and perform such other duties as may be required by the municipal court judge. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-5; Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 6A, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 22-123. - Salary. 
The salaries of the court officers shall be set from time to time by the council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 141-A-96, § 6B, 10-21-1996) 
Chapter 28 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 28-1. - Director of public safety. 
Certain duties and authority under this chapter may be assigned to and exercised by the city's director of public safety who shall be eligible to serve as a local director under the Georgia Emergency Management Act, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council, and who shall serve at the direction of the mayor. 
( Ord. No. 315-12, § 1, 7-23-2012 ) 
Sec. 28-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction, or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the city and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency for the City of Mountain Park. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the mayor, via the county emergency management agency, may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the city to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time the mayor shall execute and file with the city clerk a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the mayor. The city council may, by resolution and in accordance with the City Charter, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate the local emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
The director of public safety and/or his/her designees shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred by law, including the implementation of the local emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with county, state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
(5)  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: section 28-5, section 28-6, and section 28-7. If any of these sections is included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
(6)  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the mayor is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 28-4 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(7)  Additional emergency powers. The director of public safety shall have and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues the following additional emergency powers: 
a.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
b.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
c.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
d.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
e.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any city departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
f.  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
g.  To commandeer or utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; 
h.  To suspend any city code provision prescribing the procedures for conduct of city business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
i.  To provide welfare benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; and 
j.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form as set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration, and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
"DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, the City of Mountain Park, Georgia, has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [DESCRIPTION OF EVENT] on [DATE]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Mayor of the City of Mountain Park, there exists emergency circumstances located in [DESCRIBE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Mountain Park, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event; 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
WHEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the local emergency operations plan is hereby activated; 
(2)  That the following sections of the City of Mountain Park Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section 28-5, Overcharging; Section 28-6, Registration of Building and Repair Services; Section 28-7, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews]; and 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from Section 28-2 or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [TIME] on [DATE]. 
[Signed]  Mayor, City of Mountain Park." 
(c)  Contracts with local governments. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
( Ord. No. 315-12, § 1, 7-23-2012 ) 
Sec. 28-3. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the law enforcement authorities of the city shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the director of public safety or mayor during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the director of public safety or mayor upon or after the declaration of an emergency, shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 120 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. The owner of land upon which a violation occurs, and each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the director of public safety is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this code, and/or which are implemented by the mayor during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the law enforcement authorities of the city. 
( Ord. No. 315-12, § 1, 7-23-2012 ) 
Sec. 28-4. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  City business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or other appropriate state officer, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city council shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the mayor or any two members of the city council without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the mayor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(c)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" includes fees or rates charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the city on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the city pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(d)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city or its designees may issue a temporary permit for a mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structure or park, even though not otherwise permitted by the city's code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
( Ord. No. 315-12, § 1, 7-23-2012 ) 
Sec. 28-5. - Overcharging prohibited. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or property within a designated area upon the declaration of emergency or disaster, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the emergency or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses sold or rented within the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Overcharging" means charging prices for goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses which exceed the customary charges by at least 25 percent or, in applicable cases, which exceed by at least 25 percent the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a 25 percent or greater increase in the price at which the merchandise or rate, fee or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency or disaster, but shall not include increases in cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
(2)  "Subsequent recovery period" means that period during which the emergency or disaster continues to cause disruptions in the area designated in the declaration of emergency, but shall not exceed three months after the declaration has been terminated, unless extended by action of the city council. 
(c)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the council of the city, the provisions of this code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
( Ord. No. 315-12, § 1, 7-23-2012 ) 
Sec. 28-6. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the city designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the city clerk and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the city without complying with this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $50.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal Employer Identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; and 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the city council, the provisions of this code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
( Ord. No. 315-12, § 1, 7-23-2012 ) 
Sec. 28-7. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the mayor until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the city; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; and 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by the director of public safety. 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
( Ord. No. 315-12, § 1, 7-23-2012 ) 
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 101; explosives, firearms, or similar devices, § 113-45(7). 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, >Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Tampering with alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or mischievously interfere or tamper with any fire alarm box or any of the appliances or apparatus connected therewith, located within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-4) 
Sec. 30-2. - Fire limits defined. 
The fire limits of the city are defined as all that area within the city limits. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-22) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-3. - Mutual aid agreements. 
(a)  The mayor and council may enter into mutual aid agreements with such other municipalities or localities as they deem appropriate. The fire limits of the city may be expanded during the performance of the duties as specified in such mutual aid agreements, but only while the fire department is actually rendering such aid. The rendering of aid shall include the time traveling to and returning from the location of such incidents. 
(b)  The mayor and council may enter into agreements with any other entities that they shall deem appropriate and qualified, for the purpose of providing operational management of the fire prevention, fire suppression, and first responder emergency medical service functions to the residents of the city. Such entities may include, but shall not be limited to, self-governed, nonprofit corporations registered with the secretary of state's office. Such agreements shall include, but not be limited to, those jurisdictions which have existing mutual aid agreements with the city. Any such agreement shall contain provisions whereby the city can terminate, at the city's discretion, such agreement. In the absence of an agreement pursuant to this section, the language in section 30-31 shall prevail as relates to the operations of the fire department. 
Secs. 30-4—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 30-31. - Composition. 
The fire department shall be headed by a fire chief and such other volunteer members and employees as may be determined necessary by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-1) 
Sec. 30-32. - Interfering with equipment. 
No person other than a duly enrolled member of the fire department shall ride upon the fire trucks of the city at any time, nor use, borrow or interfere with any fire department equipment, or attempt to use the equipment at the scene of a fire unless authorized to do so by the fire chief. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-2) 
Sec. 30-33. - Enforcement. 
Whenever the fire department is answering an alarm or operating at the scene of a fire or other emergency every enrolled member of the department, as well as the code compliance officer for the City of Mountain Park and any other duly sworn peace officer with jurisdiction in the City of Mountain Park, is hereby empowered and authorized to control and direct motor vehicle traffic, stop or move vehicles, and enforce all provisions of this article and any other code provisions the enforcement of which is deemed necessary to assist in the control of the fire or other emergency. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-3; Ord. No. 253-02, § 1, 9-16-2002) 
Sec. 30-34. - Issuance of warnings and citations. 
The fire chief or fire marshal or arson investigator, if they are state certified, as well as the code compliance officer for the City of Mountain Park and any other duly sworn peace officer with jurisdiction in the City of Mountain Park, may issue warnings and citations to any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable provisions of this Code. Whenever applicable, these cases may be adjudicated in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 253-02, § 2, 9-16-2002) 
Sec. 30-35. - Outdoor burning ban. 
(a)  The fire chief, upon the advice and consent of council, may issue an outdoor burning ban. 
(b)  After an outdoor burning ban has been enacted, said ban shall continue until such time as a majority affirmative vote of the mayor and city council ends the ban. 
(c)  The outdoor burning ban shall apply to all areas within the geographic limits of the city, whether located in Cherokee or Fulton counties. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions contained herein, any county issued or state issued outdoor burning ban affecting property within the geographic limits of the City of Mountain Park shall supersede the city imposed ban. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit an outdoor cooking fire, provided that the cooking fire is contained in a properly constructed fire pit, grill or fireplace and that the cooking fire is attended by a competent adult in possession of a readily accessible and adequate means of extinguishment. For purposes of this section a functioning garden hose of such length to encircle the cooking fire and located within 50 feet of the cooking fire shall be considered an adequate means of extinguishment. 
(Ord. No. 252-02 § 1, 9-16-2002) 
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 22; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 38-1. - Enforcement of chapter provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced and administered by the code compliance officer in conjunction with and concurrently with any other enforcement agency, officer or department designated in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-15) 
Sec. 38-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(2)  Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Use fighting words directed toward another, who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(4)  Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(5)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to so do. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-1) 
Sec. 38-3. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be on the streets of the city or in any public place in an intoxicated condition. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-2) 
Sec. 38-4. - Posting signs on poles without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge any sign or advertisement, or to post or display upon any telegraph, telephone or electric company's pole, or upon any public property or the private property of any person any bills, signs or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-4) 
Sec. 38-5. - Weapons; discharge in city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, including pistol, rifle and shotgun, or to shoot an air gun, including BB gun and pellet gun, within the city, except by law enforcement officers in the line of duty, and the military when on drill or parade, or at a funeral in honor of the dead; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to shoot a BB and/or pellet gun upon private property if that person shall have first obtained the express permission of the owner of that property to do so. This exception on private property shall not apply when the BB gun and/or pellet gun is discharged in such a manner that the projectile is intended or in fact does so leave the private property. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-5) 
Sec. 38-6. - Loitering in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons to loiter upon any premises to which the public has access including, but not limited to, such places as parking lots, when such person does not have a legitimate cause or need to be present thereon. Any person who does not have a legitimate cause or need to be present on such premises and who shall willfully fail to remove himself from such premises after being requested by a police officer or other law enforcement officer shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-7) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50. 
Sec. 38-7. - Behavior endangering life, limb, health, or property. 
No person shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any other person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health, or whereby the property of another is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-8) 
Sec. 38-8. - Endangering lawful pursuits of another. 
No person shall endanger the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats or abusive conduct. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-9) 
Sec. 38-9. - Causing, provoking or engaging in fights, brawls or riotous conduct. 
No person shall cause, provoke, or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-10) 
Sec. 38-10. - Assembling for purpose of causing or engaging in fight or brawl. 
No person shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-11) 
Sec. 38-11. - Jostling, crowding or pushing another person in a public place. 
No person shall intentionally jostle, roughly crowd or push any person in any public place. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-12) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50. 
Sec. 38-12. - Language creating a breach of the peace. 
No person shall use fighting words or loud or boisterous language directed toward another so as to create a breach of the peace, potentially dangerous to the safety of persons or property. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-13) 
Chapter 42 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; tree protection, § 105-201 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5); authority to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Enforcement of chapter provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced and administered by the code compliance officer in conjunction with and concurrently with any other enforcement agency, office or department designated in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-12) 
Sec. 42-2. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter and/or concealing a violation of, or harboring, assisting or protecting a person charged with or convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-11(h)) 
Sec. 42-3. - Reservations for use of picnic grounds. 
Arrangements to use the picnic grounds may be made with the city clerk who shall maintain a reservation book for this purpose. Any person using the facilities without a reservation may be removed from the premises. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-2) 
Sec. 42-4. - Motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate and/or park any motor vehicle, minibike or motorcycle within any city park, or on any city property, except in areas designated for such use. This section does not apply to city employees when municipal duties require them to drive over such park and/or to park their vehicles or equipment in order to perform city business. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-11(a)) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 
Sec. 42-5. - Noises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unnecessary, loud noises, engage in noisy disputes or conversation, engage in any indecent or loud acts of behavior, or in any other manner disturb the public peace, quiet and order in any of the city parks or city property. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-11(c)) 
Cross reference— Noise, § 113-41 et seq. 
Sec. 42-6. - Alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess and/or consume any alcoholic beverage, or be under the influence of alcohol, malt and/or vinous beverage, within or upon the lakes, parks, picnic areas, playgrounds and swimming pool of the city; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to nor shall it prohibit the possession, use or consumption of alcoholic, malt and/or vinous beverages within the premises of the city's civic center/senior citizen's building by persons or groups who have applied for and been granted a special use permit for such premises through and by the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-11(b)) 
Sec. 42-7. - Malicious mischief. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break, mutilate, deface, or in any other manner destroy or injure any public property, real or personal, belonging to, owned by, or leased or used by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-11(d)) 
Sec. 42-8. - Water pollution. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or disturb any spring, branch, pond, fountain, or other water owned by or leased to the city. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-11(e)) 
Sec. 42-9. - Posting signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to affix any bill, sign or notice on any tree, building or fixture in any of the parks or on any city property. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any paper, books, refuse or trash of any kind in any of the public parks or on any city property, except in containers provided for such. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-11(f)) 
Sec. 42-10. - Park hours. 
(a)  All city parks, lakes, and property shall be closed at night. For purposes of this section, at night shall mean the time between 30 minutes after sundown and 30 minutes before sunrise. 
(b)  No person shall be permitted to be on the premises or property of any city park or property at night, except authorized city employees or persons engaged in activities authorized by the mayor and council. 
(c)  No person shall be permitted to boat on Lake Cherful or Lake Garrett at night, except authorized city employees or persons engaged in activities authorized by the mayor and council. 
(d)  No person shall be permitted to fish in Lake Cherful or Lake Garrett at night, except from private property with the authorization of the owner or occupant of said private property. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-11(g); Ord. No. 185-A-96, § 5, 6-17-1996; Ord. No. 330-19, § 1(A), 1-28-2019 ) 
Secs. 42-11—42-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAKES AND POOLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-41. - Fees and charges. 
Any fee or charge authorized or imposed by this article shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 93A-96, § 2, 8-26-1996) 
Sec. 42-42. - Swimming tag required. 
No person shall swim in either lake, nor shall any swimmer be admitted to the swimming pool, unless wearing a swimming tag and being in the lawful possession of the same, and being in regulation swimming attire. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-3; Ord. No. 185-A-96, § 2, 6-17-1996) 
Sec. 42-43. - Fees for swimming tags. 
Fees and restrictions for each category of eligible persons shall be fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. Such fees shall be paid before tags are issued and are nonrefundable. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-4(b)) 
Sec. 42-44. - Attire. 
No person shall swim in either lake, nor shall any swimmer be admitted to the swimming pool, unless being in regulation swimming attire. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-3; Ord. No. 185-A-96, § 2, 6-17-1996) 
Sec. 42-45. - Hours of operation of swimming pool. 
The hours of operation of the swimming pool shall be set by the mayor and council and shall be conspicuously posted. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-5) 
Sec. 42-46. - Powers and duties of the lifeguard. 
It shall be the duty of the lifeguard to enforce the rules and regulations prescribed by the mayor and council and to preserve good order within the confines of the swimming pool area. He shall have the power to evict any person from the area who fails or refuses to obey any lawful or reasonable order or who persists and continues in any conduct dangerous to any person. Any person who refuses or fails to obey the instructions of the lifeguard shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The lifeguard shall be diligent in his efforts to protect the life and property of all persons using the swimming pool. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-6) 
Sec. 42-47. - Fishing. 
(a)  No person may fish in either of the lakes without a city-issued permit and state fishing license. No person shall place in the lakes a trot line, seine, net, electrical device, dynamite or other substance or device declared to be illegal by the state game and fish division. 
(b)  Only artificial bait may be used when fishing in Lakes Cherful and Garrett. Anyone fishing with live or non-artificial bait in Lakes Cherful or Garrett shall be in violation of this ordinance and upon citation and conviction shall be punished by fine in an amount no more than $1,000.00 and no less than $100.00. 
(c)  All fishing in Lakes Cherful and Garrett shall be catch and release only. Anyone possessing fish caught in Lakes Cherful or Garrett and which has not been released immediately following catch shall be in violation of this ordinance and upon citation and conviction shall be punished by fine in an amount of no more than $1,000.00 and no less than $100.00. 
(d)  As a condition of any sentence for conviction of this section, the judge of the municipal court may revoke the convicted defendant's city-issued permit to fish in the lakes of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-7; Ord. No. 185-A-96, § 2, 6-17-1996; Ord. No. 321-15, § 1, 4-27-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-48. - Hunting. 
No person shall hunt on or from the waters of any lake in this city and the lakes of this city are hereby designated as a refuge for waterfowl of every kind and description. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-8) 
Secs. 42-49—42-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOATING 

Sec. 42-71. - Permit required. 
The use of motorized boats, jetboats, and other motorized personal watercraft on the lakes of the city is strictly prohibited in the City of Mountain Park, except as provided herein. All boats shall require a city permit. Boating in the lakes in the city requires a state registration, if applicable, city permit and picture identification for boaters 16 to 65 years old. Honorary permits (no charge) will be issued to boaters over 65 years old who are property owners or residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 93A-96, § 1, 8-26-1996; Ord. No. 329-18, § 1(A), 10-22-2018 ) 
Sec. 42-72. - Permit procedures. 
Boating permits may be purchased at the city hall during regular business hours. Applicants who are city residents or city property owners must show a picture identification, proof of residency or property ownership and a current state boat registration. Nonresident or non-property owner applicants must show valid identification and state boat registration. All applicants must sign that they agree to abide by all city and state regulations relative to boating and the use of city properties. At the time of purchase, each permit shall be completed and signed by the applicant and a city representative. With all permits, a key to the boat ramp may be rented for a deposit. Fees for resident and nonresident boating permits shall be set from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 93A-96, § 2, 8-26-1996; Ord. No. 297-08, § I, 1-26-2009) 
Sec. 42-73. - Receipt of regulations. 
Each person receiving a permit shall receive a copy of the state's boating regulations and a copy of this Code relative to boating, fishing and the use of lakes, parks and properties. 
(Ord. No. 93A-96, § 3, 8-26-1996) 
Sec. 42-74. - Violations. 
Any violation of any provision of this article or of any other state or federal regulations relative to boating shall, in addition to any other remedy available to the city, result in revocation of the city boating permit. 
(Ord. No. 93A-96, § 4, 8-26-1996) 
Sec. 42-75. - Boat operation on Lake Garrett and Lake Cherful. 
No person shall operate on Lake Garrett or Lake Cherful any motor powered boat, jetboat, or other motorized personal watercraft, except that electric motors capable of making no more than 5 horsepower or 112 pounds of thrust shall be permissible on Lake Cherful. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of rowboats, canoes, kayaks, or sailing craft with a properly issued permit. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-9; Ord. No. 297-08, § II, 1-26-2009; Ord. No. 329-18, § 1(B), 10-22-2018 ) 
Secs. 42-76—42-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 329-18, § 1(C), adopted Oct. 22, 2018 , repealed Div. 3, §§ 42-101—42-112, which pertained to Lake Cherful and derived from Code 1982, § 4-3-10(a)—(k); Ord. No. 93, § 2, adopted May 21, 1966; Ord. No. 185-A-96, § 2, adopted June 17, 1996. The user's attention is directed to § 42-75. 

Secs. 42-101—42-112. - Reserved. 
Chapter 50 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(6); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(15); peddlers, solicitors, canvassers, § 14-71 et seq.; loitering in public places, § 38-6; jostling, crowding or pushing another person in a public place, § 38-11; parks and recreation, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58; tracked vehicles prohibited on streets, § 58-43; utilities, ch. 62; buildings and building regulations, ch. 101; environment, ch. 105; tree protection and preservation, § 105-201 et seq.; floods, ch. 109; nuisances and hazards, ch. 113; zoning, ch. 117. 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, >Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Sidewalk construction restricted. 
No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any person of any brick, wood or other material without a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-6) 
Sec. 50-2. - Streets and sidewalks not to be damaged. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drag or run, or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine, or tool upon any street or sidewalk of the city which shall be liable in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-7) 
Sec. 50-3. - Improper use of streets. 
No person shall use the streets of the city for the transportation of trees, timber or other purpose other than upon vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-11) 
Sec. 50-4. - Specifications generally. 
All streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public ways in the city shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications promulgated therefor by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 50-5. - Maintenance and repair of streets and sidewalks. 
The public works department shall maintain and repair the streets and sidewalks of the city as may be necessary. 
Sec. 50-6. - Protection of public ways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or damage the surface of any street, sidewalk or other public way in the city. 
Sec. 50-7. - Obstructions. 
No person shall obstruct, or cause to be obstructed, any of the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city. 
Sec. 50-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 294-07, § 4, adopted Sept. 17, 2007, repealed § 50-8, which pertained to temporary obstructions; permission. 
Secs. 50-9—50-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET IMPROVEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, adopted August 16, 2004, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 50-41—50-43, and enacted a new Art. II, §§ 50-40—50-52, as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1982, §§ 4-1-8—4-1-10. 

Sec. 50-40. - Classification of right-of-way. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall mean: 
(1)  Condition 1—An unimproved right-of-way on more or less level terrain, adequately drained with ditches and swales, that needs only sub-grade preparation for paving and utilities (including fire hydrants) installations to be a usable road. 
(2)  Condition 2—An ungraded right-of-way where the grade is not greater than 15 percent and only minor grading is required to produce a road-bed and drainage. All saturated sub grades, wetlands and streams are excluded. All underground utilities shall be provided at the expense of the property owner. 
(3)  Condition 3—A right-of-way that does not meet the above criteria set forth by description as condition 1 or condition 2. Condition 3 right-of-way's shall not be improved, but shall remain city property. 
(4)  All rights-of-way, including paved, unpaved roadways, undeveloped rights-of-way, ditches and utilities shall be public property. 
(5)  All right-of-way improvements shall meet Georgia Department of Transportation guidelines and the current city requirements. These requirements shall apply to all roads, drainage and utilities. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-41. - Project initiation. 
The mayor and council may approve the construction of new streets or the improvement of existing right-of-way under any or all of the following conditions: 
(1)  If the owners of a majority of the parcels of land adjacent to condition 1 or condition 2 right-of-way as described in this article petition the mayor and city council to improve said right-of-way, describe in said petition the improvements desired to said right-of-way, it shall be the duty of the mayor and city council to proceed as provided in this article to cause the improvement to be made in accordance with the prayers set forth in the petition if deemed feasible and desirable by the mayor and city council in the exercise of its discretion. The petition shall be filed with the city clerk who shall investigate the sufficiency thereof, submit the petition to the mayor and city council, and certify the result of his/her investigation. The method of assessment for costs as well as the public hearing provisions and manner of payment for said improvement set forth in this article shall be followed in the completion of a citizen-initiated improvement project. 
(2)  When funds are available and the mayor and council have determined that such street improvements are necessary. 
(3)  When the county has agreed to perform the work and share in the cost of the same as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-42. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article: 
Frontage means that side or limit of the lot or parcel of land in question which abuts on the improvement or on a street within which the improvement is located or installed either above or below ground level. 
Improve and improvement means and includes the grading, regarding, paving, repaving, macadamizing and remacadamizing of streets, sidewalks or other public places or ways; the construction, reconstruction, relocating and altering of curbing, guttering, storm sewers, catchbasins, sidewalks, street lights, devices to control the flow of traffic on streets and roads, sewer lines, taps and connections to sewer lines, lift stations for lines, water lines, taps and connections for water lines, all appurtenances or other connections therein; and the cost of administration. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-43. - Method of assessment for costs for citizen-initiated improvement projects. 
(a)  Each lot or parcel of land abutting upon the improvement to be installed shall be charged on the basis of lineal-foot frontage at an equal rate per foot of such frontage for the pro rata of the cost of the entire improvement. 
(b)  The cost of sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be charged entirely to the lots of parcels of land abutting on that side of the street upon which the sidewalks, curbs and gutters are to be constructed. 
(c)  In the case of a water or sewer line being constructed or installed within the right-of-way of a road or street irrespective of the actual location of the water or sewer line within the road or street, the lots or parcels fronting on both sides of the street, road or highway shall be charged with its just pro rata cost. 
(d)  The frontage of intersecting streets shall be assessed as real estate abutting upon the improvement, and the property owners adjacent to the intersection frontage shall be deemed as the owner thereof for purposes of assessment. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-44. - Resolution on manner of improvements for citizen-initiated improvement projects. 
Upon receipt of a petition requesting the improvements signed by the owners of a majority of the parcels of land to be assessed, if such petition is found to be in proper form and properly executed, the mayor and city council may adopt a resolution expressing the determination of the mayor and city council to proceed with the improvement, setting forth the nature of the improvements and defining the extent and character of the improvements, and such other matters as may be necessary to instruct necessary personnel to prepare the necessary plans, plats, profiles, specifications and estimates. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-45. - Costs included in assessment for citizen-initiated improvement projects. 
Whenever a petition signed by the owners of a majority of the parcels of land liable for assessment is presented to the mayor and city council, the mayor and city council shall enact all ordinances and establish all rules and regulations as may be necessary to require the owners of all the property abutting the improvement to pay the cost of the improvement. All cost, including administrative, and expenses of making the improvement shall be included and made a part of a general assessment to cover the cost of such improvement. Where a water line is to be installed, the cost of water mains, fire hydrants and line connections and pipe to the edge of a street, road or highway shall be made a cost of the general assessment; and where a sewer line is to be installed, the cost of sewer mains, sewer taps or connections shall be made a cost of the general assessment to cover the cost of such improvement. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-46. - Estimate of assessment for citizen-initiated improvement projects. 
Where the project has been authorized by resolution of the mayor and city council, a written report shall be filed with the mayor and city council setting forth the appraisal, assessment, cost estimates and the cost upon the several lots or tracts of land to be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-47. - Public hearing on estimate of assessment for citizen-initiated improvement projects. 
(a)  When the report is returned and filed, the mayor and city council shall set a time and place for the holding of a public hearing of any complaint or objections that may be made concerning the appraisement, apportionment and assessment by any person interested. Notice of the hearing shall be published by the city clerk one time ten days prior to the date of the hearing in the newspaper where city public notices are published. The notice shall provide for an inspection of the report by any property owner or other party interested in the report. 
(b)  The mayor and city council at the public hearing shall have power, and it shall be its duty, to review and correct the appraisement, apportionment and assessment, to hear objections to the same, and to confirm the same as drafted or as corrected and amended by the mayor and city council. 
(c)  The mayor and city council shall fix the assessments against the parcels of land in accordance with the approved appraisement cost estimate and apportionment, as so confirmed against the several parcels of land liable therefore. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-48. - Payment of assessment for citizen-initiated improvement projects. 
Assessments in conformity to the appraisement, cost estimate and apportionment, as confirmed by the mayor and city council, shall be payable to the city clerk, and if paid within 30 days from the date of passage of the ordinance, shall be without interest. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-49. - Installments; interest for citizen-initiated improvement projects. 
The mayor and city council may provide for payment of the assessment in equal annual installments for not less than two nor more than ten years. The installments shall bear interest at the rate set from time to time by the mayor and city council until paid. Each installment together with the interest on the entire amount remaining unpaid shall be payable each year to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-50. - Additional assessment for shortages for citizen-initiated improvement projects. 
If any special assessment shall be found to be invalid or insufficient in whole or in part for any reason whatsoever, the mayor and city council may at any time, in the manner provided for the making of an original assessment, proceed to cause a new assessment to be made and fixed, which shall have like force and effect as an original assessment. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-51. - Collection; liens for citizen-initiated improvement projects. 
Each special assessment and each installment thereof, the interest thereon and the expense of collection are hereby declared to be a lien against the lots and tracts of land so assessed from the date of the ordinance levying the lien, coequal with the lien of other taxes and prior to and superior to all other liens against such lots or tracts. Such lien shall continue until such assessment and interest thereon shall be fully paid, and shall be enforced in the same manner as are state, county and city ad valorem property taxes by issuance of a fi.fa. and levy and sale as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-120 et seq., which procedure is by reference incorporated in this section and made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-52. - Assessment dockets for citizen-initiated improvement projects. 
Assessment dockets shall be prepared which shall identify each parcel assessed, the street or road on which each parcel abuts, the owner of the property at the time the assessment was made, the date of the assessment, the improvement for which the assessment was made, the amount of the assessment and the rate of interest and annual payment schedule. The assessment docket shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk so that the dockets may be available for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. No. 272-04, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 50-53. - Variances. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a variance is to provide a mechanism when, owing to special conditions, the strict application of this right-of -way/street improvement article would impose on a landowner exceptional and undue hardship that can be mitigated without conferring on the applicant special privilege. 
(b)  When the methods for street improvements set forth in section 50-41 have been initiated and denied, the property owner of a conforming building site who desires to establish a driveway lying wholly or partially within an undeveloped right-of-way, for the purpose of vehicular access to the site, in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a residence, may apply for a variance from the restrictions of this chapter. 
(c)  The mayor and council, after public notice and hearing, may, upon application by a property owner, grant, deny or grant with conditions a variance from the restrictions of this chapter. The mayor and council shall not grant the variance with or without conditions unless: 
(1)  The mayor and council are convinced that granting of the variance is necessary to prevent exceptional and undue hardship to the property owner and 
(2)  Granting the variance will not prejudice the rights or interests of property owners of property abutting the undeveloped right-of-way and 
(3)  Granting the variance is consistent with the land use plan of the city. 
The conditions imposed by the variance may include covenants attached to and running in perpetuity with the property owner's deed. 
(d)  The application and procedure for application for the variance is outlined in the attachment hereto entitled "City of Mountain Park Right-of-Way Procedure and Application", a copy of which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 275-04, § 1, 11-15-2004) 
Secs. 50-54—50-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 50-71. - Inspection of street cuts. 
The public works department shall generally supervise and inspect all street cuts and excavations authorized by this article. 
Sec. 50-72. - Permit required. 
No person shall make any excavation or opening, or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole, in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 50-73. - Exception. 
A permit shall not be required under this article where that work is performed under a contract with the city. However, if such work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city clerk at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 50-74. - Application for permit. 
Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 50-75. - City indemnified. 
Any person obtaining a permit under this article shall agree, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees, for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of such operations. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-3) 
Sec. 50-76. - Restoration. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. Any person neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation hereof and punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-4) 
Sec. 50-77. - Protection of public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit under this article to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guardrails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of the work. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-5) 
Chapter 54 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-6(2); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-151 et seq.; businesses, ch. 14; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, >Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-31. - Tax rate. 
An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city, is hereby levied. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-11) 
Sec. 54-32. - Tax due and payable. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes due the city shall be billed and paid in one payment. 
(b)  Ad valorem tax bills, as adjusted to conform to the tax digest of the county, shall be payable on or before June 30, but upon adjustment by the state revenue commissioner, the city, shall, within a reasonable time thereafter as may be determined by resolution of the mayor and council, after receipt from the county, of the adjustment information, refund any overpayments or bill for any underpayments. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-12) 
Sec. 54-33. - Interest and penalty on delinquent taxes. 
(a)  Ad valorem taxes owed the city shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid. For the purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(b)  In any instance in which a person willfully fails to pay, within 90 days of the date when due, any ad valorem tax, except where the tax is $500.00 or less on homestead property, owed the city, he shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax due and not paid on or before the time prescribed by law, together with interest. 
(c)  Any license, privilege or permit granted by the city shall be revoked by the city clerk for the failure to pay any money due the city for taxes, fees, penalties, interest, fines, or other revenue, within three calendar months and 15 days after any payment is due; provided, however, that any person aggrieved by the revocation may, within ten days thereof, appeal to the mayor and council, who, after a hearing thereon, may approve or modify the order or restore the license privilege or permit by adopting a motion to that effect, but only upon the finding that the city clerk's action was not factually or legally correct. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-13) 
Secs. 54-34—54-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT TAXES 

Sec. 54-61. - Issuing executions. 
The city clerk shall issue fi. fas. for the collection of any taxes due the city. The fi. fas. shall be directed to all singular sheriffs of this state and command them to levy upon the goods, chattels, lands and tenements of the taxpayer. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-14(a)) 
Sec. 54-62. - Tax bill. 
The amount due on all fi. fas. for the collection of any taxes due the city as well as any interest or penalty thereon shall be listed as a part of and addition to the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-14(b)) 
Sec. 54-63. - Levying executions. 
Any fi. fa. for delinquent tax due the city may be levied by the city clerk or the marshal of the municipal court. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-14(c)) 
Sec. 54-64. - Notice of sale. 
Wherever any real estate is levied upon by the city for taxes, before proceeding to advertise the property for sale as provided by law, the city shall give 20 days' written notice of the levy to the recorded owner of the property and the owner of each security deed and mortgage contained in the list filed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9. The city shall comply with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9 in giving this notice. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-14(d)) 
Sec. 54-65. - Procedures for sales under tax levies and executions. 
The time, place and manner of the sale of real and personal property for taxes due the city shall be the same as that provided by law for sheriff's sales for the state and county taxes. A sale for taxes due may be conducted by the city clerk or by the marshal of the municipal court and shall be held in the city hall in the usual place of meeting of the city council. If, during any sale of property by the municipality, for taxes due and after the property has been offered a reasonable time, no one present at the sale bids an amount for the property being sold which is as much as the total of the tax due, plus the city's cost due on the sale, then the city clerk or the marshal of the municipal court may purchase the property for the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-14(e)) 
Sec. 54-66. - Advertising sale. 
Notice of sale of real or personal property for taxes shall be published once a week for four successive weeks immediately preceding the week of sale in the newspaper published in the county in which the city customarily publishes public notices. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-14(f)) 
Sec. 54-67. - Time and place of sale. 
Tax sales shall be at public outcry between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday of the month at the city hall where the city council customarily meets. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-14(g)) 
Sec. 54-68. - Sale for taxes due the city. 
Sale for taxes due the city shall be conducted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-14(h)) 
Sec. 54-69. - Property acquired pursuant to sale for taxes; disposition. 
Property acquired by the city pursuant to a sale for taxes due the city, may be divested or sold by the city, only by a public sale of the property to the highest bidder, except as otherwise provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359(c). 
(Code 1982, § 4-4-2) 
Secs. 54-70—54-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 54-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, which is the major and principal source of income of such business. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. 
Gross receipts means: 
(1)  The total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period including, without limitation, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563 (a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
Location and office mean any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied by a local government on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation as designated by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-2, 6-21-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-102. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A.§§ 48-13-5—48-13-28. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-10, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-103. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the code compliance officer to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. The code compliance officer and any duly designated officers and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. It is hereby made the further duty of the code compliance officer, and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, §§ 7-1-19, 7-1-32, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-104. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city or county judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $5,000.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 15 days imprisonment, either or both, in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-18, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-105. - Required. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business if the taxpayer has a fixed business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no fixed business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the code compliance officer or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-1, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-106. - Exemptions generally. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-20, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-107. - Exemption on grounds that business is a nonprofit organization. 
Any nonprofit organization shall be exempt from the levy of occupation tax under this article. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-12, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-108. - Effect of other existing laws. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by laws of this state or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-21, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-109. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $10.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, annual renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provider under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. The regulatory fee levied on this article is an exercise of the police power of the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is as follows: 
(1)  One up to ten employees (plus $20.00 each for every employee over one) ..... $ 20.00 
(2)  Ten up to 15 employees (plus $30.00 each for every employee over ten) ..... 200.00 
(3)  Fifteen or more employees (plus $40.00 each for every employee over 15) ..... 350.00 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-3, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-110. - Levy of tax; structure; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 based upon the criteria of this section. 
(b)  The tax rate will be determined by number of employees (including contract employees) for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city: 
(1)  One up to ten employees (plus $50.00 each for every employee over one) ..... $   50.00 
(2)  Ten up to 15 employees (plus $100.00 each for every employee over ten) ..... 500.00 
(3)  Fifteen or more employees (plus $150.00 each for every employee over 15) ..... 1,000.00 
(c)  Restrictions on imposition of occupation tax: 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(3)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in the state shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the number of employees engaged in substantial efforts in the state; nationwide profitability ratios shall apply only to types of business transacted within the state. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-4, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-111. - Business with no location in state; exemption for tax paid in the state. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the city is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Any business or practitioner of a profession with no location or office in the state shall be exempt from assessment of an occupation tax under this article if such business or practitioner submits proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state on the business's or practitioner's sales or services in the state. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-5, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-112. - Lines of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-6, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-113. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-7, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-114. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 54-110. 
(2)  A fee of $300.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the city; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The prepractitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-8, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-115. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentality's of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-9, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-116. - Date tax and registration due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax and registration delinquent. 
(a)  Each occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. Such registration and occupation tax shall be payable to the city on January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by January 31 of each year, be subject to penalties and interest for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city after June 30, 1999, or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a 100 percent penalty will be imposed on the amount due, plus accruing interest of 1.5 percent per month on the total due. The tax registration provided for in this article shall be issued by the city clerk (or an agent of the clerk) and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the municipal judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000 or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, either or both in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-11, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-117. - Date tax and registration due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax and registration delinquent. 
(a)  Each registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees to the city as provided in this article before January 31 of each year and on each year thereafter. Every person intending to commence business in the city after June 30, 1999, shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city without first having obtained such registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 54-104. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies provided for in this article for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration provided for in this section shall be issued by the city clerk (or a designated agent) of the city, and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation that requires registration without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-17, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-118. - Date occupation tax due and payable. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the city on January 1 of each year and delinquent if not paid on or before January 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-122, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-119. - Casual and isolated activity. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted so as to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, where they involve personal assets only and are not the principal occupation of the individual, to obtain a business license and pay a fee therefor. Projects involving less than $500.00 shall not require a business license. In all cases it is up to the individual to ensure that he is in compliance with all requirements set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-13, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-120. - Evidence of state registration required, if applicable; display. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-14, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-121. - Evidence of qualification required, if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory requirement shall first, before the issuance of a city registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-15, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-122. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person intending to commence business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation that require registration without first having so obtained such registration, shall be subject to penalties provided therefor. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-16, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-123. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year. An additional penalty of 100 percent of the payment due plus interest of 1.5 percent per month on the total due will be imposed for each additional month of delinquency thereof. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-23, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-124. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, such business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-24, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-125. - Required information. 
All businesses and practitioners doing business within the city shall provide to the city clerk (or a designated officer) of the city: 
(1)  The address of any location or office maintained by such business or practitioner within the city; 
(2)  A description of the business or types of business conducted or occupation or profession performed at all such locations; and 
(3)  The payment of any business or occupation tax or regulatory fee to any other city, county or state. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-26(a), 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-126. - Inspection of books and records. 
In any case the city clerk, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The city clerk, officer, agent, employees, or representatives shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city clerk such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure to submit such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city, for examination by the city clerk at that offices discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of 125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount deficient in U.S. dollars will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-26(b), 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-127. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent, or clerk of the city, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of such return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the city using such returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States, and other local governments. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-25, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-128. - Revocation for failure to comply with article. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay such occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of such returns within the time required in this article, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of such business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 54-126. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-27, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-129. - Effect of failure to comply; continuing in business after revocation. 
Any person, his managers, agents, or employees, who do business in the city after the registration for such business has been revoked as in section 54-128, hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make such returns within the time and in the manner provided in this article, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any person, his managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the city request such inspection, during normal business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties shall be 100 percent of the payment due, plus accrued interest of 1.5 percent per month of the total due. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-28, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-130. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided for in this article, a collection of the occupation tax levied by this article, the city clerk, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of such tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for such tax, which such execution shall bear a penalty of 100 percent of the amount due plus accrued interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month on the total due, from the date when such tax becomes delinquent. The lien shall cover the property or business of the person liable for such tax, penalty and interest, all as provided by the city's ordinances and Charter and state law. The lien of such occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the code compliance officer upon the property of defendant located in such jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of such execution, including all accrued penalties, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and Charter of the city and state law, and the defendant in such execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the code compliance officer against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full, all penalties, together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-29, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-131. - Amendment; repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-30, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-132. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. Any and all parts of ordinances passed that provide for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that impose fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinances, or for failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-31, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-133. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-33, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-134. - Public hearing before adoption, amendment, repeal of ordinance; when revenues derived from occupation tax increases. 
The city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting, amending, or repealing any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax. In addition, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing to determine how to use the additional revenue derived from occupation taxes in any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue derived from such taxes for the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-34, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-135. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in or credit against tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax or a credit against occupation tax owed to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging, or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-35, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-136. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 222-99, § 7-1-36, 6-21-1999) 
Secs. 54-137—54-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— General assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c); local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 54-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross direct premiums means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
Independent insurance agency means a company which is authorized to transact business in the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 219-99, §§ 2-5-41, 2-5-45, 6-21-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-172. - Insurance license fees. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each independent insurance agency doing business within the city. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 54-173, which is operating on behalf of such independent insurance agency within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee. The amount of such license fees shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 219-99, § 2-5-41, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-173. - Insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee per location per year. The amount of such license fee shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 219-99, § 2-5-42, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-174. - Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 54-172, for each location within the city. The amount of such license fees shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 219-99, § 2-5-43, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-175. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in this article shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 219-99, § 2-5-44, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-176. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each life insurance company writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-88.1. 
(Ord. No. 219-99, § 2-5-45, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-177. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurance company, other than an insurance company transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
(Ord. No. 219-99, § 2-5-46, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 54-178. - Criminal penalties; licenses revoked. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. Each day in violation of this article shall be a separate offense under this article. Any person so convicted shall be subject to the revocation of any city business license. 
(Ord. No. 219-99, § 2-5-48, 6-21-1999) 
Chapter 58 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 38; motor vehicles in parks, § 42-4; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; special provisions for old, unused, stripped, junked automobiles, § 113-6; vehicle repair in residential areas, § 113-45(12); abandoned motor vehicles, § 113-111 et seq.; collection and maintenance of garbage, trash, debris, debris, derelict vehicles or equipment, § 117-10. 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1-1) 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 58-2. - Enforcement of chapter provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced and administered by the code compliance officer in conjunction with and concurrently with any other enforcement agency, office or department designated in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1-7) 
Sec. 58-3. - Sight obstructions at intersections; notice. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in manner controlling property in this city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of this city so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from crossing or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of this city after ten days' notice by the city to do so. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1-5) 
Sec. 58-4. - Motor vehicle accident reparations act. 
Pursuant to the applicable provisions of the O.C.G.A. §§ 33-34-10 and 33-34-12—33-34-14 are hereby adopted as and for ordinances of the city with like effect as if set forth in this section. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1-6) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt provisions of Georgia Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act by reference, O.C.G.A. § 33-34-13. 
Sec. 58-5. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the roads of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the mayor and council may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them, shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1-2) 
Secs. 58-6—58-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 58-41. - Free flow of traffic; obstruction. 
All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways and other public ways of the city. Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver, or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic or to needlessly circle the block or dawdle or make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
(Code 1982, § 8-2-1) 
Sec. 58-42. - Covering of loads. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1-3) 
Sec. 58-43. - Tracked vehicles prohibited on streets. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate any tracked or other vehicle having metal tracks or wheels upon the city streets. 
(Code 1982, § 8-2-4) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50. 
Sec. 58-44. - Nonmotorized vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate skateboards, pushcarts, wheeled sleds, roller skates and other such nonmotorized vehicles upon the public streets of the city. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, bicycles and other similar vehicles shall not be deemed as nonmotorized vehicles unless operated in a hazardous manner in violation of any other provision of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 8-2-5) 
Secs. 58-45—58-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES 

Sec. 58-81. - Obedience to traffic signs, signals and markings. 
All traffic shall obey and be directed by official traffic control signals, signs and markings erected at street intersections and other locations now or hereafter approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 8-2-3) 
Sec. 58-82. - General signposting authority. 
(a)  The mayor and council are authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)  Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians. 
(3)  Traffic lanes. 
(4)  Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones. 
(5)  Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices. 
(6)  Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the city. 
(b)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(c)  No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(d)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this article shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1-4) 
Sec. 58-83. - Speed limits generally. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any of the streets and highways of the city at a greater speed than is reasonable and proper having regard to the width, traffic and use thereof, or so as to endanger the property or life or limb of any person. 
(b)  Twenty-five miles per hour shall be the maximum speed limit on all roads and streets or portions thereof within the city unless otherwise indicated by officially posted signs designating the maximum vehicular speed upon those streets as approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1982, § 8-2-2; Ord. No. 314-12B, § 1, 7-23-2012 ) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 314-12B, states that: This ordinance shall not impair the prosecution of any citation issued prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
Sec. 58-84. - Maximum speed limits on specific streets. 
The mayor and city council may alter the maximum speed limits established by section 58-83 on any street or portion thereof within the city in accord with the provisions of state law. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. 
Sec. 58-85. - Speed detection devices. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to use speed detection devices for the purpose of traffic control on the roads and streets in the city. 
(b)  Such speed detection devices shall be used only for the purpose of public safety and traffic control, and shall not be used for the purpose of raising revenue. 
Secs. 58-86—58-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Off-street parking, § 117-8. 

Sec. 58-121. - Parking in deceleration or acceleration lanes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any automobile, truck, bus, truck tractor, trailer, tractor, trailer combination, motorcycle, moped, or other motor vehicle within or upon the deceleration or acceleration lanes lying in the unincorporated areas of the city. 
(b)  Deceleration and acceleration lanes shall be defined for the purpose of this section as those strips of pavement lying adjacent to and to the east of the northbound lanes of traffic and adjacent to and to the west of the southbound lanes of traffic which are not part of the regular roadway but afford access into and out of the driveways and side roads along the highway. 
(c)  Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a violation of a city ordinance and shall be prosecuted in the municipal court. A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
Sec. 58-122. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
Whenever a space is marked off on any highway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Code 1982, § 8-3-1) 
Sec. 58-123. - Special purpose parking zones established, parking otherwise prohibited. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any locations on the streets and alleys of the city established and designated as special purpose parking zones indicated and specified by posted signs approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 8-3-5) 
Sec. 58-124. - School bus parking restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall park along the city property, city streets or along the city rights-of-way. 
(b)  The parking of off-duty school buses on private property within the corporate limits of the city shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1982, § 8-3-7; Ord. No. 303-09, § 1, 12-29-2009) 
Sec. 58-125. - Prohibited vehicle parking. 
(a)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer, no person shall: 
(1)  Park a vehicle, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of property or passengers, in an acceleration or deceleration lane; 
(2)  Park a vehicle overnight in a cul-de-sac located in a residential district; 
(3)  Park a vehicle on an unpaved surface in the front yard of a residence or the side yard, if the side yard faces the street. For the purposes of this section, the term "paved driveway" means a driveway surfaced with either asphalt, concrete, gravel, brick or other approved material. Natural materials, such as, but not limited to, wood chips, stones, crushed seashells and mulch, may also be used as paving, provided that such material is contained on three sides by secured landscape timbers or finished masonry and is of a depth sufficient to prevent exposed soil and/or erosion. In all cases, the property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the driveways and parking areas of a residence in such a manner as to prevent any of the surfacing materials from crossing the property boundaries or entering the rights-of-way, roads and streets, streams, lakes or waterways of the city; or 
(4)  Park a vehicle in the city rights-of-way or in such a manner as to encroach on the paved or unpaved streets of the city. 
(b)  (1)  The mayor and council, after public notice and hearing, may, upon application by a property owner, grant variances from the restrictions of this chapter prohibiting parking on unpaved property adjacent to a paved street in the city. In considering an application for such a variance, the mayor and council shall not approve the same unless it is convinced that: 
a.  Approval of the proposal is necessary to prevent undue hardship to the applicant; 
b.  Approval of the proposal will not prejudice the rights or interests of adjoining and nearby property owners; and 
c.  Approval of the proposal is consistent with the objectives of this chapter. 
(2)  The process for submitting an application for variance is outlined in the attachment titled, "City of Mountain Park Variance Procedure and Application for Parking." 
(c)  The city may, but is not required to post "no parking" signs in areas where parking is prohibited in subsection (a) of this section, and the failure to post said signs shall not excuse any person from compliance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is temporarily parked in connection with the driver's attendance at a public meeting, public polling place during elections or other such public event, provided that no portion of the parked vehicle encroaches on the paved or unpaved streets of the city and parked vehicle is removed immediately upon the conclusion of such event. 
(e)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the any vehicle which is parked in a manner consistent with a temporary parking permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 243-01, § 1, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 267-03, §§ 1, 2, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 294-07, § 1, 9-17-2007) 
Sec. 58-126. - Restricted vehicle parking. 
(a)  Within the residential districts of the city, ordinary passenger vehicles and noncommercial pickup trucks may be parked within a garage, carport or accessory structure or on a paved driveway providing ingress and egress to a residential lot on which an occupied dwelling exists, provided that such activity shall be in compliance with the other provisions of this Code, particularly related to, but not limited to, land use, zoning, building regulations, home occupations and nuisances. For the purposes of this section, the term "paved driveway" means a driveway surfaced with either asphalt, concrete, gravel, brick or other approved material. Natural materials, such as, but not limited to, wood chips, stones, crushed seashells and mulch may also be used as paving, provided that such material is contained on three sides by secured landscape timbers or finished masonry and is of a depth sufficient to prevent exposed soil and/or erosion. In all cases, the property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the driveways and parking areas of a residence in such a manner as to prevent any of the surfacing materials from crossing the property boundaries or entering the rights-of-way of roads and streets, streams, lakes or waterways of the city. 
(b)  Within any residential district of the city, no person shall cause the regular parking or storage of any business vehicle other than a pickup or panel truck used to provide daily transportation to and from work or used in connection with a properly licensed home occupation, provided that any such vehicle has a manufacturer's, published carrying capacity not in excess of one ton. 
(c)  No person shall cause to be parked within the residential districts of the city on a regular, ongoing or continuous basis any equipment trailers or wheeled or tracked equipment or vehicles not typically used in connection with normal household activities or those prohibited by the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 244-01, § 1, 7-16-2001) 
Sec. 58-127. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this title shall be enforced and administered by the code compliance officer in conjunction with and concurrently with any other enforcement agency, officer or designated department. 
(Ord. No. 255-02 § 8-3-9 (1), 1-27-2003) 
Sec. 58-128. - Temporary parking permit. 
(a)  A temporary parking permit may be obtained from the City of Mountain Park by any current resident of the City of Mountain Park. A permit may be obtained by filing a written application with the city clerk at least 24 hours before the permit becomes effective, during regular business hours, and by paying the permit fee of $5.00. If two different residences in close proximity both wish to obtain a temporary parking permit that would conflict with each other, the first permit application will take precedence and the second permit will not be issued unless the second applicant can modify their parking plan to work in conjunction with the first permit applied for. 
(1)  This permit allows for the temporary parking of vehicles along the side of city streets in instances where enough off-street parking is not available for a particular event or occasion. 
(2)  All permits are of a temporary duration not to exceed 24 hours. 
(3)  All vehicles covered under the permit must be positioned off the street sufficiently to allow for the orderly flow of traffic while the vehicles are parked. 
(4)  Temporary parking permits may not be obtained for commercial ventures other than for yard sales. 
(b)  Possession of a temporary parking permit does not convey any rights to obstruct access to fire hydrants, obscure visibility at corners or driveways, or to block intersections. A temporary parking permit does not diminish the rights of other nearby property owners regarding trespassing or other damages to their properties. 
(c)  The permit applicant shall provide the following information. 
(1)  The location requesting the permit; 
(2)  The date for the permit; 
(3)  The starting time for the permit and permit duration; 
(4)  The approximate number of vehicles that will be covered by the permit; 
(5)  The contact phone number for the applicant for the time that the permit is valid; and 
(6)  A brief description of the parking plan, including the side of the street where the vehicles will be located. 
(d)  Once the permit is issued, it shall be displayed at the residence to which the permit is assigned for the entire period when the permit is actually active. 
(Ord. No. 294-07, § 2, 9-17-2007) 
Chapter 62 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 14; communications, ch. 18; solid waste, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; buildings and building regulations, ch. 101; environment, ch. 105; floods, ch. 109; nuisances and hazards, ch. 113. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide stormwater, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); Water Resources Center, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AND WASTE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air hammer is caused when the inclusion of air into the city's water system results in air escaping into the atmosphere from the valves, toilets and other related plumbing accessories in homes and other structures, creating pressure spikes in the plumbing system that causes reverberations, banging, thumping, rattling or shaking until the spike is absorbed. 
Application means a person's written petition to the city on the city's forms for each utility service. Such application shall in any case state the official house number or numbers of the property, the street number, address where mail is to be sent and telephone number where the person can be reached during the day and in the evening. A person's signature on the application obligates the person to governance by and subject to the laws of the city. 
Bill means the invoice from the city to a person for utility services. 
Billing statement means the invoice from the city to the owner or renter of the property showing utility sum(s) due to the city and is composed of two parts: the statement proper and the attached billing stub that should be returned with payment. The words invoice and billing statement may be used interchangeably. 
Building contractor means any contractor, sub contractor, builder, remodeler, repairman, person, company, corporation or organization building on or making improvements and repairs to property and its existing buildings and improvements. 
Charges means fees for connection to utility services furnished by the city set forth in city law. 
Code compliance officer means any employee or agent of the city who is authorized to issue citations to all consumers, customers or users of the city's utility services who are in violation of the city's laws. 
Connection means any utility service furnished by the city to any person, such connection only being made after approval of the person's application by the city and its agents, and issuance of all requisite permits and approvals specified by city law and upon agreement by the person to comply with the rates and laws of the city. 
Construction means all building of, or modifications of or additions to, new or existing buildings or structures requiring a building permit or having a total cost of $1,000.00 or more. 
Consumer means a person at any property served by or through any utility service, other than the customer in whose name the meter is listed or from whom payment may be required. 
Customer means the owner of the property served by a utility service, or the tenant, lessee, renter, or occupant of such property, or the person in or against whose name such utility service for such property is listed on the books and records of the city, and who is responsible to the city for payment of bills incurred for all utility services furnished by the city to such property and for use by such property, either or both. 
Deposit means the security payment the person applying for utility service may be required to pay to the city as set forth in city laws. 
Discolored water means any foreign matter in the water that causes a change from crystal clear to turbid. 
Disconnect means to physically sever the water line between the city's main to the customer's water meter. 
Disconnection for nonpayment. If bills for utility services are not paid when due, the city shall have the right to disconnect and discontinue all utility services furnished by the city to the person so in arrears, so long as the disconnection is in accordance with city, state and federal rules, regulations and laws. 
Fees means the monthly amount billed to a person for all city utility services that are performed. 
Hazardous waste means any chemical, compound, mineral, mixture, substance or article, in solid, liquid, or gaseous form, which is designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate agency of the state to be hazardous as that term is defined by or pursuant to federal or state law or regulation. Hazardous waste may not be disposed of in the city's waste management systems. A person who generates such waste must properly and legally dispose of their hazardous materials at legal, designated disposal centers located in the Atlanta area. 
Late payment penalty means a fee added to the utility bill if such bill is not paid on or before the discount date shown on the face of the bill. 
Laws mean the entire Code of the City of Mountain Park, Georgia, and all rules and regulations promulgated in such Code. 
Meter means a device for the measurement of certain utility services furnished by the city to a person and property, either or both. 
Minimum monthly bill means the fixed minimum monthly payment required for a utility service calculated under the provisions of this article. 
Notification of hearing means the city has mailed to the person a written notice of a hearing regarding a delinquent utility service account that is subject to disconnection for nonpayment. Failure of the person to respond to the notification of hearing or to appear at the schedule hearing date is not in any way a responsibility of the city. 
Offense means any violation of this article, including but not limited to a failure to pay the utility service bill on time. 
Owner means the legally registered owner of the building, structure or location where utility services are supplied by the city. 
Payments due. All bills for utility services furnished by the city shall be due and payable prior to midnight of the date of the month specified on such bill; provided, however, if such due date shall fall on a weekend or legal holiday observed by the city, such bill shall be due and payable by midnight of the following business day. 
Person means all owners, consumers, customers and users, or any builder or developer acting as the person's agent or on the person's behalf in order to receive utility services on the property. 
Person(s) means all owners, consumers, customers and users, or any building contractor, remodeler, developer or any designee acting as the person's agent or on the person's behalf in order to receive utility services on the property. 
Property means all land, buildings, structures, premises, units and space at any location. 
Rates mean the schedules of fees for usage of any utility service furnished by the city in accordance with city law. Rate schedules are available from the office of the city clerk. 
Reauthorize means the city council has determined that a utility that has been shut off or disconnected may be turned back on or reconnected. 
Reconnect means the city has determined that a utility may be reconnected after it has been disconnected. All fees, permits, deposits, approvals and expenses for new connections of a utility service will apply. 
Reconnect after disconnection. If any utility service is disconnected for nonpayment of the bill, the person responsible therefor shall have the right to have such service reconnected only upon payment of the amount due and a reconnection fee as set forth in the city law on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Refund means the amount of money due from deposits to the city when a person terminates his utility service, and only after payment of all indebtedness of the person to the city for his utility service. The city may make a partial or total settlement of a person's utility service accounts when supply is cut off for nonpayment of bills, or for any infraction or violation of any law of the city related to utility services. 
Shut off means to turn off the person's water at the stopcock before the meter and to lock the meter so it cannot be opened. 
Supply utility service means to supply any form of utility service in any manner to any property served by the city. 
User means a customer of any utility service furnished by the city, and whose property may also discharge sewage, waste or water into the public sanitary sewer system in any quantity. 
Utility contractor means any person, company, corporation or organization that furnishes utility services for the city. 
Utility service means water, sewer, solid waste collection or disposal and/or any other similar utility service furnished by the city to a person. 
Voluntary discontinuance of service. A person wishing to discontinue the use of any or all utility services shall give written notice thereof at the city hall; the city has five working days thereafter to cut off the utility services. Failure of the person to give written notice renders the person liable for the payment of all bills until such written notice is received by the city. 
Water hammer is caused when the flow of moving water through a pipe is suddenly stopped by rapidly closing a valve, which creates a pressure spike in the plumbing system that causes reverberations, banging, thumping, rattling or shaking until the spike is absorbed. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 1, 11-21-2005) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-32. - Scope of article. 
All pertinent provisions of this article are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish any utility service to any person, or whereby the city shall make any utility connections or perform any work or furnish a service of any kind in connection with the furnishing of utility services pursuant to the laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-33. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the city's code compliance officer in conjunction with and concurrently with any other enforcement agency, office or department the city may designate. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-34. - Penalty. 
Whenever in this article any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of that provision shall be as set forth in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-35. - Use contrary to permit. 
Any person having permits or legal permission from the city for the use of any utility service offered by the city who shall use such utility service for any purpose other than mentioned in such permits or legal permission, or who shall make unauthorized changes or use in any manner not intended for the utility service, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-36. - Damage of equipment, trespass. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, not having authority to do so, to open any hydrant or tamper with any utility service furnished by the city to any person or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass upon any containers, equipment or premises belonging to the city or it agents that are in any way connected with any utility service. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-37. - Utility service to comply with technical provisions of all laws. 
Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this article shall be in accordance with, and in compliance with, all applicable technical provisions of city, county, state and federal law. The city shall not issue any utility service when it appears such service will be against the health and welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-38. - Laws, standards and specifications. 
The council and mayor shall have the authority to establish any law and such standards and specifications as may be deemed necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service or system operated, owned or used by the city within or without the city, which may or may not be under the management of the city. Such laws, standards and specifications shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Violations of such laws, standards and specifications shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-39. - Unlawful supplying of service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to supply any utility service to any property on a temporary basis, without proof being visibly shown that a building permit has been issued by the city to the owner, building contractor, agent or other person in control of such property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to supply any utility service to any property on a permanent basis without proof being shown that a certificate of occupancy, through the duly constituted laws of the city, has been issued by the city to the owner, building contractor, agent or person in control of such property. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 2, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-40. - Illegal connection. 
Any person who shall make any connection in any manner to any utility system, whether owned or operated by the city or not, without prior knowledge and consent of the owner or operator of such utility system shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-41. - Unlawful use. 
No person, other than employees or designated agents of the city, shall be authorized to block, connect, turn on, turn off or disconnect any utility service offered by the city, or remove, replace, or repair any equipment connected to any such utility service without prior knowledge and written approval of the city clerk, council and mayor and in compliance with all laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-42. - Resale of service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resell any utility service obtained from the city to others except by special arrangement, such arrangement having been discussed and approved in an open meeting with the council and mayor. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-43. - Right of entry. 
Any authorized employee, inspector or agent of the city shall have free access at any reasonable time to all property supplied with any utility service by the city for the purpose of examination in order to protect services from abusive use. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-44. - Termination or refusal of service. 
The city shall have the right to shut off, disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any utility service, in accordance with city, state and federal rules, regulations and laws, for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to meet the applicable provisions of the law; 
(2)  Violation of the laws pertaining to utility service; 
(3)  Nonpayment of bill; 
(4)  Willful or negligent waste of any utility service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise; 
(5)  Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility service; 
(6)  Harassing or preventing the city or its designated agent from inspecting or reading meters or other devices; 
(7)  Harassing or preventing the code compliance officer from performing duties specified by city law; 
(8)  Theft or diversion and/or use of any utility service without payment therefore; 
(9)  Vacancy of premises. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 3, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-45. - Liability of city for damage. 
(a)  The city shall not be liable for any damage to any customer of any utility service furnished by the city due to water leakage, backflow of the sewerage system, failure of supply, interruption of service, air and water hammer, discolored water or any other cause. 
(b)  The city shall not be liable for any debris resulting from waste management, recycling or solid waste disposal services. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 3, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-46. - Service prerequisites. 
In order to protect the utility service supply, the city will not make any taps or connections until the property involved has been issued all proper permits and has been inspected and approved by the city or its agent. Utility service may be provided to any person outside the city limits on the same contractual basis as any person within the city. The council and mayor shall regulate the utility service. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-47. - Service connections and arrangements—Supervision. 
Connections or arrangement for any utility service furnished by the city shall be made under the supervision of the city clerk, who will follow the laws of the city in allowing such connections and arrangements for utility services. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-48. - Same—Separate connections. 
Every property or person in the city shall have a separate, legal utility service connection or arrangement, except by special dispensation, such dispensation having been discussed and approved by vote of council in an open council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-49. - Application for service. 
Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall make application for such service to the city clerk, located in city hall. Such application shall contain the applicant's name, address and the uses for which such utility service is desired, or as defined by the council and mayor in the city's codes, ordinances, rules, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-50. - Permission and obligations. 
(a)  Approval of the application for any utility service is given by the city clerk, as defined by council and mayor in city laws, and such approval shall be deemed permission for that person to use the city's utility services. 
(b)  Permission granted to a person to use the city utility service obliges that person to abide by the laws pertaining to this article. 
(c)  Failure to abide by the laws pertaining to this article is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-51. - Use assumed. 
All property connected to any utility service of the city shall be assumed to be using such utility service and the owner or occupant shall be charged therefor so long as such premises use or remain connected with the utility service. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-52. - Change in ownership, tenancy or service. 
A new application for utility services shall be made, and approved by the city, upon any change in ownership or tenancy of the property or service, as described in the original application. The city shall have the right to discontinue the utility service until a new application is made. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-53. - Interruption and restriction of service in emergency. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to cut off any utility service without notice in case of emergencies. When an interruption in service is necessary for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected persons will be notified as circumstances permit. 
(b)  The city hereby reserves the right to, at any time, restrict or prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the city during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-54. - Service not available to debtors. 
The city may decline or fail or cease to furnish utility service to any person who may be in debt to the city for any reason, except where limited by city, state and federal codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-55. - Maintenance of equipment by customer, consumer or user. 
Any person who uses any utility service furnished by the city shall maintain and keep in good repair all appliances, connections, containers and other apparatus installed and used in connection with utility services. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-56. - Responsibility for and method of payment. 
Payment of utility service accounts is the responsibility of the consumer, customer or user. All payments are to be made either through the U.S. Postal Service or by payment made at City Hall. Payments made at city hall may be made in cash or check and all payments sent by U.S. mail or private courier must be by check payable to the city with the billing stub attached. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 4, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-57. - Schedule of rates, fees and charges. 
(a)  The schedule of all utility service rates, connection fees, deposits and reconnection fees, as set from time to time by the council and mayor, shall be kept current and maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Rates, connection fees, deposits and reconnection fees may only be changed by action of the council and mayor. 
(c)  A connection fee shall be charged for all new connections or services, and this fee is to be paid before any actual connection of utility services is made. 
(d)  Security deposits will be required for all new service connections and services. Deposits are refundable when utility services are discontinued, and all payments owed or due by the person to the city for utility services have been made in full. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-58. - Payment of utility service bills; late and in arrears accounts. 
(a)  Itemized utility service bills, showing the amount charged for each service provided are mailed by the fifth business day of each month for the preceding month's service, unless otherwise noted on the bill. The utility service bills are due in full on or before the first working day of the following month. If utility service bill mailings are postmarked later than the sixth business day of the month or are delayed for any reason, the due date shall be not less than 15 days nor more than 25 days after the postmarked date. The postmark date on the bill shall determine the date mailed, and if the postmark is illegible, the day following the date the city's utility billing system shows the billing was completed shall determine the date mailed. 
(b)  The city is not responsible for U.S. mail delivery. If a bill is not received before the end of any month, the customer shall contact the city hall for billing information and pay the bill in a timely manner based upon the information received from City Hall. 
(c)  If an entire utility service bill is not paid by the due date, a $25.00 late penalty will be assessed. If the entire utility service bill remains unpaid ten days after the due date, utility service may be shut-off disconnected without further notice. After shut-off, any unpaid balance may be paid from the customer's deposit, and renewed service may be conditioned upon the customer making a new deposit. 
(d)  The customer may appeal the bill to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with city clerk on or prior to the utility bill's due date. The appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. The city council may adjust the charge upon a finding of error in the bill or undue hardship on the part of the customer. Service shall not be shut-off while the bill is under appeal. 
(e)  After utility services have been shut-off for nonpayment three times in one 12-month period, utility services will be disconnected or discontinued and new service applications, including all the permits, approvals, deposits and expenses for new connections of utility service, will apply. 
(f)  All reconnection fees will be added to the utility service bill due and outstanding and shall be paid, along with all utility services late penalties and sums due to the city, before utility services are reauthorized or reconnected. 
(g)  Utility service for one day in any month constitutes services for that entire month for billing purposes. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 5, 11-21-2005) 
Secs. 62-59—62-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER SUPPLY 

Sec. 62-81. - Meters. 
(a)  Meters for the measurement of water furnished by the city, shall be furnished by, and remain the property of the city. 
(b)  Two or more meters cannot be combined for billing purposes to take advantage of more favorable bulk rates, unless approved by council in a public vote in a council meeting. 
(c)  Meters shall be located on the property owner's property at no cost to the city. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 6, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-82. - Responsibilities of city. 
The city shall be responsible for the waterworks stops at the meter box and meter discharge. The city and its inspector shall determine the size of all lines, valves, meters and other fittings, fixtures or appliances necessary to supply water services in compliance with city law. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-83. - Application for service. 
(a)  All applications for water service shall specify the approximate location where such services shall enter the property, such location being adjacent to the nearest city water line or system. 
(b)  The making of all water service connections from the meter to improvements on the property, including laying pipes, setting of water service fixtures, whether on private property or on public grounds, served by city water shall be made by duly licensed plumbers, under the approval and supervision of the city's building inspector. The cost incurred shall be the responsibility of the owner or building contractor. 
(c)  A valid permit shall have been issued to the person and property, and shall be visibly displayed, before any water service connection is made by the city. 
(d)  A valid permit shall be issued to the person and property, and shall be visibly displayed, before any water service connection is made by the city. 
(e)  All persons receiving water service from the city will have a city approved water meter installed by the city, and which will remain property of the city, at that persons expense, to record the amount of water used so as to pay the city for all of water consumed. 
(f)  If new water service is required, the building contractor may not commence any construction or improvements until the city has installed a water meter. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 7, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-84. - Deposits. 
(a)  A person applying for water supply is required to pay to the city a deposit as set forth in the schedule of charges, deposits and fees on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Refund of deposit may be made upon termination of water service in accordance with the laws of the city, and after all monies owed by the person to the city for water service have been netted out. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-85. - Leaks. 
All leaks in the water service beyond the city's defined responsibility are to the expense of the person with the service. All leaks shall be immediately repaired. Failure to make immediate repairs may subject the water service in question to be discontinued until repairs are made to the satisfaction of the city and its agents. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-86. - Damages. 
(a)  The city shall in no event be responsible for maintaining any service line owned, rented, leased or on property occupied by any person, nor is the city liable for damages done by water escaping therefrom, nor from defects. 
(b)  All damage to water service pipes or street mains caused by careless, negligent or improper work, or careless, negligent or improper filling at excavation, shall be at the expense of the person with the water service and the repair of same shall be at the expense of such person. 
(c)  The city shall not be held responsible by reason of breaking of any water service, pipe or apparatus, water coil, or for failure to supply water. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-87. - Prevention of access to shut-off valves, meters and boxes. 
(a)  Each person is responsible for ensuring the shut-off valves and water meter box area are easily and safely accessible and neatly maintained. 
(b)  No person shall cover a shut-off valve, water meter box or meter with dirt or other material so that the cover or top of the valve or box is not visible. 
(c)  No person shall erect, construct or maintain any fence, structure, vehicle or other barrier which denies or impedes direct, safe and easy access to the shut-off valve, water meter box or meter by the city or its agents. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-88. - Service taps; back flow installations, water hammer arresters and auxiliary pressure relief systems. 
(a)  The installation and cost of all taps beyond the city's meters, such as backflow prevention installations, auxiliary pressure relief systems and water hammer arresters are the responsibility of the person receiving the service. 
(b)  All water service taps shall be made in accordance with the city's standard plans, standard construction specification, or as otherwise approved in a public vote in an open meeting of the council and mayor. 
(c)  All water service connections to any property supplied by the city shall install backflow and thermal expansion devices as specified by the state plumbing code and this section. City standards, specifications and laws are available from the city clerk. 
(d)  All water service furnished by the city shall be equipped with an appropriate backflow prevention device. All such devices shall be of a double valve design and shall be approved by the American Water Works Association. 
(e)  The city shall have the right to install, or cause to be installed, at the owner's expense, an approved backflow prevention device on all meters where the city furnishes water service. 
(f)  All water service equipped with a backflow prevention device also requires an auxiliary pressure relief valve or expansion chamber be installed to limit thermal or other expansion of the water above 80 pounds per square inch static pressure at any fixture in or on the system. 
(g)  Water service to any person may be immediately discontinued if service taps, backflow installations and auxiliary pressures relief systems are found on inspection to malfunction or it is found such taps, installations and systems have been damaged, removed or bypassed. Service will not be restored until such condition or defect have been corrected to the satisfaction of the city and its inspectors. 
(h)  Any person receiving water service from the city is responsible for testing and periodic maintenance of taps, backflow installations and auxiliary pressure relief systems and shall maintain appropriate records to verify such testing. The failure to test and maintain such taps, installations and systems shall constitute grounds for discontinuance of water service to the property until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 8, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-89. - Water line service extensions. 
(a)  The city shall develop all undeveloped water line extensions at its discretion, and property owners abutting the line, except those who are already using metered city water on their property, will pay for this extension as each property owner's percent of total linear feet of line extension, hydrants, components and fixtures added by the city. Such payments are due at the time of line extension development. All water lines (and their extensions) including meters, valves, fire hydrants, components, fixtures and other attachments are the property of the city. 
(b)  Water line extension development shall meet all federal, state, county and city standards and ordinances. 
(c)  All extensions must be made within the city right-of-way to the nearest existing city water trunk line or water system. 
(d)  All extensions are the property of the city. 
(e)  The city may, at its discretion, use water from water line extensions free and without cost or reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 9, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-90. - Water restrictions. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of each person to ensure that all county, state and federal water restrictions are strictly observed at all times. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit the use of the water supply of the city for outside purposes, except as provided below in this section. For the construction of this section, the term "outside purposes" means the use of the city's water supply outside of any residence, and such term shall be deemed to include, but shall not be limited to, the use of the city's water supply for the washing of vehicles or any other item located outside of the residence, the filling of swimming pools or the watering of outside plants, shrubs, grass, trees or any other vegetation. 
(c)  The city may enforce any applicable restriction on water use or consumption promulgate by state or federal law or regulation. Further, the city council may adopt restrictions on water use and consumption from time to time as necessary by resolution. Such resolution shall be posted at City Hall after it is adopted, and until such time as the city council determines by resolution that the restriction is no longer necessary. 
(d)  Any person violating this section shall be cited to appear in the magistrate's court and, if found guilty, shall be subject to a maximum fine of $100.00 for the first offense, a maximum fine of $300.00 for the second offense and, in the case of a third offense, the violator shall be subject to a maximum fine of $500.00 and disconnection of city water service. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 10, 11-21-2005) 
Secs. 62-91—62-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 105 

Sec. 62-111. - Sanitary sewer hook-ups and septic tank systems; prohibitions. 
(a)  All structures, premises and residences within the city occupied by a person for any purpose shall have either a sanitary sewer hookup or, if the property qualifies as an exception, a septic tank system that meet the requirements and laws of the city, county and state, and their health departments. 
(b)  No sanitary sewer hookup or septic tank system shall be installed or covered until a permit shall have been issued by the county health department, and such county having already inspected and approved the installation before covering with backfill. 
(c)  All privies are forbidden. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-112. - Occupied premises to be connected to accessible sewer lines; exceptions. 
(a)  Subject to all applicable state and federal laws and regulations, all occupied structures, premises and residences within the city shall be connected to the sanitary sewer lines where sewer lines are located within 100 feet of the property; provided that the owner of any structure, premises, or residence served by an existing septic tank that, at the time of the adoption of this article, complies with all applicable rules and regulations, shall not be required to connect to the sanitary sewer lines unless and until the existing septic tank system has been condemned by the county health department. 
(b)  Where sewer lines are not located within 100 or more feet of the property, and where the property is not less than 33,750 square feet, a septic tank system may be utilized when approved by the county health department. New septic tanks are not permitted on lots less than 33,750 square feet. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person except an authorized city employee or the city's agent to connect with or tap into any sewer main of the city or county, except with specific legal authorization of the city or it's agent and under their supervision. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 11, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-113. - Application for service. 
(a)  All applications for sanitary sewer service shall specify the approximate location where such services shall leave the property, such location being adjacent to the nearest county sanitary sewer line, main or system. 
(b)  The making of all sanitary sewer service connections from the county sewer lines or mains to improvements on the property, including laying pipes and setting of sewer service fixtures, whether on private property or on public grounds, served by county sewer shall be made by duly licensed plumbers, under the approval and supervision of the city's building inspector and shall be at the person's expense. 
(c)  All necessary and valid permits shall have been issued to the person and property from the city and county, and shall be visibly displayed, before any sanitary sewer service connection may be made. 
(d)  All costs for permits, fees, meters, taps, deposits and any other incidental costs will be borne by the person applying for the sanitary sewer system. 
(e)  All persons receiving sanitary sewer service from the city will have a city approved water meter installed by the city, and which will remain property of the city, at that person's expense, to record the amount of water used so as to pay the city and county for all sanitary sewer discharges. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-114. - Protection from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, carelessly or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, obstruct or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of a sewage system. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-115. - Discharging substances, materials or living items into sewer. 
No person shall discharge into any sanitary or storm sewer in the city any substance, material or living thing, or pollute with hazardous waste, that is against city, county, state, or federal law, code and regulation or likely to obstruct, cause undue injury or to interfere materially with the sewer drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 12, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-116. - Fulton County Sewer Adjustment Procedures. 
Persons asking for adjustments to their sewer assessment must meet the following criteria: 
(1)  There must be proof of a leak in a water line not leading to the sewer. High water meter readings do not constitute proof of a leak or circumstances for adjustment. 
(2)  No adjustments will be considered until documented proof is provided the leak existed and has been repaired. 
(3)  A written statement is required from the homeowner stating the number of people who reside in the home. 
(4)  The homeowner or renter is required to present proof (original bill and receipts) from a licensed, certified plumber that a water leak existed and a leak repair was made. The owner or renter is required to state in writing that he/she made the repairs and include all the receipts for materials. 
(5)  The homeowner or renter must send a covering letter, with all required documents enclosed, by certified mail to the city. Then and only then can adjustments be considered. 
(6)  A maximum of the last two service periods will be adjusted. 
(7)  The second request for adjustment in one calendar year requires that the city must verify with the plumber, and by visual inspection if deemed necessary, that repairs were made. 
(8)  No adjustments will be made for running toilets, as all of that water goes into the sewer. Adjustments can only be made where water leak(s) definitely does not go into the sewer. 
(9)  The city has the right to deny any adjustment. All adjustments must follow the above procedure and no adjustment may be considered without documented, original proof (bill and receipt). 
(Ord. No. 280-05, § 13, 11-21-2005) 
Secs. 62-117—62-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WASTE MANAGEMENT, RECYCLING AND SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 105; garbage and debris, § 117-10. 

Sec. 62-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction materials means all materials generated in building new homes and other structures or in renovating old homes and other structures, including carpets, lumber, roofing materials and wallboard. 
Garbage means all accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attend the preparation, use, cooking or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables. 
Garbage container means the tall, rectangular shaped receptacle on wheels with handles and a hinged lid that is approved by the city or its utility contractor for waste management and disposal services provided by the city or its utility contractor, which will hereinafter be called toter cart. 
Hazardous waste means any chemical, compound, mineral, mixture, substance or article, in solid, liquid or gaseous form, which is designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate agency of the state to be hazardous as that term is defined by or pursuant to federal or state law or regulation. Hazardous waste may not be disposed of in the city's waste management systems. A person who generates such waste must properly and legally dispose of their hazardous materials at legal, designated disposal centers located in the Atlanta area. Failure to do so may constitute a felony of county, state or federal laws. 
Inert trash means that which is not defined as garbage, recyclable material, rubbish or yard waste, such as appliances (other than those containing freon), furniture, swings or any nongarbage or nonyard waste or nonapproved cans, broken glass, paper, or plastic which cannot fit into approved trash containers. Inert trash does not include bricks, concrete, rocks and other similar solid material, or batteries, construction materials and hazardous waste, dirt, petroleum products, plaster, tires or any item not approved by the city, county, state or federal authorities for dumping in public landfills. 
Recyclable materials means material such as aluminum and metal cans, unbroken glass bottles and containers and approved paper and plastic used in recovering and recycling waste, when accepted by the city's utility contractor. An exact list of acceptable materials is available from city hall and is subject to change from time to time. 
Recyclable materials container means the approved rectangular shaped, open container furnished by the city for recycling and disposal services provided by the city or its utility contractor, hereinafter called big blue or big green or BBG. 
Rubbish and refuse mean all that not defined as garbage, inert trash, recyclable or yard waste and any other material not specifically excluded by this division or the city and its independent contractor providing waste collection services. Rubbish or refuse does not include tree stumps, tree limbs more than three feet in length or more than six inches in diameter, bricks, concrete, rocks and other similar solid materials, or batteries, construction materials and hazardous waste, dirt, petroleum products, plaster, tires or any item not approved by the city, county, state or federal authorities for dumping in public landfills. 
Waste means garbage, trash, anything discarded as worthless or useless. The term "waste" includes but is not limited to garbage, rubbish or refuge, recyclable materials and yard waste. 
Waste management services means all services the city provides for picking up garbage, recyclable materials, rubbish and yard waste. The city waste management services specifically exclude construction materials and hazardous waste, in addition to tree limbs more than three feet in length or more than six inches in diameter, bricks, concrete, rocks and other similar solid materials, or batteries, construction materials and hazardous waste, dirt, paint, petroleum products, plaster, tires or any item not approved by the city, county, state or federal authorities for dumping in public landfills. 
Yard waste means plant material including branches, heavy brush, leaves, grass clippings, thatch, hedge clippings, pine cones and straw and tree limbs less than three feet in length or less than six inches in diameter. Yard waste does not include tree stumps or tree sections larger than described in this definition. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 14, 11-21-2005) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-142. - Use of service required; authorized providers. 
(a)  Waste management services shall be provided for by the city either on its own or through an independent contractor operating under formal contract with the city. 
(b)  It shall be mandatory for all persons in possession, charge or control of property in the city in or from which garbage, recyclable materials and rubbish are created, accumulated or produced to pay for and; use the collection service provided for by the city or its utility contractor, except as noted in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  During the construction of a building, dumpsters may be used to collect inert trash and construction materials for disposition in public landfills by outside collection services other than those offered by the city. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the use of garbage disposal devices within the home as provided for in the city plumbing code. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 15, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-143. - Independent contractors; dumpsters. 
(a)  The city may use an independent contractor, either private or another municipal corporate entity, for waste management services. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prevent building contractors and individuals doing their own construction or repairs from using other waste management service contractors to dispose of items excluded from city waste management services, such as construction materials, stumps, tree limbs more than three feet in length or six inches in diameter, bricks, concrete, rocks, dirt and non-hazardous materials. 
(c)  The city may from time to time provide dumpsters to residents of the city for collection of inert trash and waste management materials. It shall be a misdemeanor for nonresidents to use city provided dumpsters. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 16, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-144. - Disposal of hazardous material. 
The disposal of hazardous waste within the city is not permitted, be it in a container or on property. It is the responsibility of all persons wishing to dispose of hazardous waste to take said materials or objects to the appropriate hazardous waste recycling centers. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 17, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-145. - Littering prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall throw, discharge, discard or otherwise cause to be deposited waste of any character into the streets, gutters, drains, walkways, alleys, rights-of-way, streams, lakes or impoundments or other property of the city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise set forth in this code, no person shall maintain or accumulate on his property or discard on the property of another, waste of any character. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-146. - Accumulated waste constituting a nuisance. 
(a)  During noncollection times, no waste containers may be kept stored or located in public view or in such a way as to create a public nuisance. 
(b)  No person on any property may allow or cause waste or materials of any sort to accumulate on the property. 
(c)  Accumulated waste or materials deemed a nuisance may be picked up at the discretion of the city. Charges for full costs and expenses incurred by the city, plus an administrative fee, will be added to the person's utility service bill for the month following the action taken by the city, and, in addition, the person on the property will be issued a citation. If necessary, the provisions for abatement of a nuisance set forth in article I of chapter 113 may be utilized to abate the nuisance. 
(d)  Any waste or material not in the proper containers or not as specified for waste management service pickup will not be picked up and will be considered a nuisance if left on the property's curb side. 
(e)  It is the responsibility of the person to deposit all inert trash in the scheduled dumpster provided by the city, and the person must ensure his inert trash is stored or located out of public view or in such a way as to not create a public nuisance until the dumpster is available. 
(f)  Any person violating this section shall be cited to appear in the magistrate's court and, if found guilty, shall be subject to a maximum fine of $100.00 for the first offense, a maximum fine of $300.00 for the second offense and, in the case of a third offense, the violator shall be subject to a maximum fine of $500.00. For each additional offense, the violator shall be subject to a maximum fine of $1,000.00 and 60 days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-147. - Approved containers—Conditions. 
(a)  Persons may only use approved containers for city waste management pickup services. Each person shall receive approved containers from the city or its utility contractor when he or she signs up for solid waste management services and pays deposits on approved containers. It is each person's responsibility to keep his approved waste management containers in clean, neat, sanitary and sound condition at all times. 
(b)  Lost, destroyed, damaged or otherwise unusable or unsightly containers for waste management services must be replaced, by the person using the service, by purchasing new containers from the city or its utility contractor. 
(c)  All approved containers remain property of the city and are only for the lawful use by the person for the city's regularly scheduled waste management services. 
(d)  Approved containers shall be placed at the edge of the person's property, immediately abutting the city's street, before 7:00 a.m. on the regular assigned day of the city's waste management services. Such approved containers at curbside may in no event be placed before 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection day and must be removed from the curbside no later than 8:00 a.m. on the morning following the assigned day of collection. 
(e)  At all times when the approved container is not permitted to be at the curbside pursuant to subsection (d) above, the container must be stored outside of the public right-of-way and at least ten feet away from the edge of pavement. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 18, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 324-16, § 1, 9-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 62-148. - Same—Deposits and refunds. 
(a)  Deposits are assessed on all reusable containers approved by the city and the amount of the deposit shall be determined, and amended, by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  Deposits are refundable only when the person who has paid the deposit moves out of the city and the reusable containers are found to be in clean, sanitary and sound physical condition, and net of all utility bills owed by the person to the city. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 19, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-149. - Regularly scheduled collections. 
(a)  All items approved for waste management services, properly placed in their approved containers, shall be left at the property's curbside abutting the city's street. 
(b)  Approved waste management service materials shall be picked up once a week from each person's driveway abutting their city street. Pickup time and services are posted in city hall and may be changed from time to time, with the approval of council and mayor. The waste management service contractor will publish changes in weekly pickup time or services and circulate this publication to city citizens. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-150. - Conditions of garbage collection. 
(a)  All garbage and household rubbish shall be drained and free of liquid and shall be placed in plastic garbage bags. No liquid garbage shall be placed in an approved garbage container. 
(b)  Plastic bags shall be sealed or secured with twist ties and placed in the approved toter cart. 
(c)  If the volume of bagged garbage and household rubbish exceeds the capacity of the toter cart, such excess shall be stacked neatly alongside the toter cart. No more than seven excess garbage bags may be so placed during any regularly scheduled garbage service pickup day. 
(d)  If the volume of bagged garbage and household rubbish exceeds the capacity of the toter cart, such excess shall be stacked neatly alongside the toter cart. No more than two excess garbage bags may be so placed during any regularly scheduled garbage service pickup day. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 20, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-151. - Same—Recyclable waste collection. 
(a)  The interior of all aluminum cans, plastic and unbroken glass bottles and containers shall be thoroughly rinsed, drained and placed in the approved big blue or big green recyclable container. All lids, tops, and caps shall be removed and shall be disposed of as nonrecyclable, garbage or rubbish. 
(b)  Pending collection, newspapers shall be maintained in a dry condition and shall be either tied in bundles or placed in a large paper bag or sack and shall be stacked neatly on top or along side of the recyclable container. 
(c)  When feasible, cans and plastic bottles or jugs shall be crushed by stepping on them before placement in the recyclable container. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 62-152. - Same—Yard waste collection. 
(a)  The city encourages persons to compost or mulch their yard waste for use on their property, in preference to using city yard waste services, so long as persons have the space on their property to do so and the process remains odor free. 
(b)  Yard waste placed in anything other than paper or plastic waste containers and not sealed or properly sized, weighed, bundled and bound in the manner proscribed in this article, will not be picked up. 
(c)  Collection of yard waste in sealed paper bags or plastic waste containers shall be limited to no more than eight bags, including the trash container, per time of normal waste management service pickup. 
(d)  Yard waste may be picked up at times different from other waste management service pickup times. 
(e)  Any changes in collection procedures or definitions contained in this section require the approval of the council and mayor. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 21, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 62-153. - Yard waste to be sorted. 
(a)  Twigs, grass clippings, pine straw, leaves and other similar, small and light types of yard waste shall be placed in approved paper bags from the city, which shall be sealed with twist ties and collected with normal waste management service pickup. 
(b)  Branches, heavy brush, tree limbs less than three feet in length and less than six inches in diameter and other similar types of yard waste not exceeding these size specifications shall be cut into lengths not exceeding three feet and tied into bundles not exceeding 50 pounds (22.75 kg.). 
(c)  Secured bundles of approved yard waste in paper or plastic containers shall be stored out of sight from the neighbors and street until the city's normal weekly waste pick-up times. 
(d)  Fees for the pick up of such bundles shall be set by the city council and are payable by the person who orders the pick up when the order for service is requested. 
(e)  Each person who generates brush, tree limbs and other yard waste outside the definition of this division shall be responsible for its proper disposal. 
(Ord. No. 246-02, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 280-05, § 22, 11-21-2005) 
SUBPART B - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Chapter 101 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; solid waste, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 62; environment, ch. 105; stormwater management, § 105-141 et seq.; floods, ch. 109; nuisances and hazards, ch. 113; noise from construction or repairing of buildings, § 113-45(2); zoning, ch. 117. 
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 306-11B, § I, adopted June 27, 2011, repealed the former Art. I, §§ 101-1—101-3, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to general provisions and derived from Code 1982, §§ 6-2-1, 6-2-2; Ord. of 9-5-1996; Ord. No. 210-96, adopted July 21, 1996; Ord. No. 210A-96, adopted Sept. 16, 1996; Ord. No. 245-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 26, 2001. 

Sec. 101-1. - State minimum standard codes adopted. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council to enforce the latest edition of the mandatory Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as may be adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs from time to time. 
(b)  The purpose of this Building Code is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(Ord. No. 306-11B, § I, 6-27-2011) 
Sec. 101-2. - Code remedial. 
(a)  General. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof - which are public safety, health, and general welfare - through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use, and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The City of Mountain Park, Georgia, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 306-11B, § I, 6-27-2011) 
Sec. 101-3. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  One and two-family dwellings. In addition to those codes referenced herein, the provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the building, mechanical, and gas systems in new one-and two-family dwellings, including additions, alterations, renovations and general repairs of existing one- and two-family dwellings. 
(8)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating, and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices. Any appendices referenced in the Georgia amendments to the mandatory Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 306-11B, § I, 6-27-2011) 
Sec. 101-4. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair, or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within the fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 306-11B, § I, 6-27-2011) 
Sec. 101-5. - Building department. 
(a)  Creation of building department. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The governing body shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. The duties of the department may be contracted out in full to a third party entity. 
(b)  Restrictions on Employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the construction board of adjustment and appeal, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the construction board of appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall submit a report each year covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He/she may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the construction board of appeals during said year. 
(Ord. No. 306-11B, § I, 6-27-2011) 
Sec. 101-6. - Building official. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. The city may contract with a third party to provide the duties of the building official. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of Code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by Code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not specifically covered by or the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 306-11B, § I, 6-27-2011) 
Sec. 101-7. - Permits 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. A permit shall not be issued to an owner, who is neither a licensed contractor nor the occupant of a residential structure being altered. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs, with a value of less than $2,500.00, may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m^ 2) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
Exception: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor, or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes, and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment, and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley, or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he/she proposes to build, erect, or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon. 
(5)  Notice of materialmens lien. 
a.  Any permit issued to a general contractor or homebuilder for residential or commercial construction shall have prominently printed thereon at least one inch apart from any other text on such permit and in type size and boldness equal to or greater than any other type size and boldness in the body of the permit the following: 
"The issuance of this permit authorizes improvements of the real property designated herein which improvements may subject such property to mechanics' and materialmen's liens pursuant to Part 3 of Article 8 of Chapter 14 of Title 44 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. In order to protect any interest in such property and to avoid encumbrances thereon, the owner or any person with an interest in such property should consider contacting an attorney or purchasing a consumer's guide to the lien laws which may be available at building supply home centers." 
b.  Any construction permit, including but not limited to mechanical, plumbing, or electrical permits, issued on existing residential or commercial property shall have prominently printed thereon at least one inch apart from any other text on such permit and in type size and boldness equal to or greater than any other type size and boldness in the body of the permit the following: 
"The issuance of this permit authorizes improvements of the real property designated herein which improvements may subject such property to mechanics' and materialmen's liens pursuant to Part 3 of Article 8 of Chapter 14 of Title 44 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. In order to protect any interest in such property and to avoid encumbrances thereon, the owner or any person with an interest in such property should consider contacting an attorney or purchasing a consumer's guide to the lien laws which may be available at building supply home centers." 
(e)  Contractor responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler, or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his place, a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he/she shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his/her authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (6), herein below. He/she may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
a.  Building. 
1.  Foundation and foundation wall inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated, the reinforcement is in place, and the forms erected, prior to the placing of concrete. The building official may require an as-built footing / foundation survey, signed by a registered land surveyor and showing the following: (i) the foundation/footing location, (ii) the outer perimeter of the proposed structure, (iii) building setbacks to property lines, (iv) any easements, (v) setback and buffer dimensions, (vi) any existing structures on site, and (vii) any buffers of the waters of the State of Georgia and City of Mountain Park. 
2.  Slab inspection: To be made prior to the placing of concrete. 
3.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking, bracing and fasteners are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents are complete. 
4.  Moisture barrier inspection: To be made prior to the installation of the exterior finishing materials. 
5.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for immediate occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and all soil, waste, and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
4.  Note: See Section 312 of the International Plumbing Code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
2.  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(i)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature, or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a commercial building, which in the opinion of the building official, may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. The temporary/partial certificate of occupancy shall be forfeited if the certificate of occupancy is not issued within 90 days. 
d.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel, or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure, or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial, or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory—Industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor, or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial, or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 306-11B, § I, 6-27-2011; Ord. No. 328-18, § 1, 3-26-2018 ) 
Sec. 101-8. - Tests 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his/her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 306-11B, § I, 6-27-2011) 
Sec. 101-9. - Construction board of appeals. 
(a)  Appointment. The council shall establish a board to be called the "construction board of appeals." Members shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the council. 
(b)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  The board shall be comprised of not less than three and not more than five persons. Each member shall serve a term of four years and may serve consecutive terms. 
(2)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of the construction codes, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(3)  Secretary of the board. The building official shall appoint a secretary for the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(4)  As provided in Code Section 2-5-3, the council shall establish qualifications for board members. 
(c)  Powers. The construction board of appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (d) herein below, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(d)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure, or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Variances. The construction board of appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures, or service system. 
d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will made possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or service system. 
e.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(3)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(4)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(e)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  Establishment. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(2)  Decisions. The construction board of appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 306-11B, § I, 6-27-2011) 
Sec. 101-10. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish, or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 306-11B, § I, 6-27-2011) 
Secs. 101-11—101-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 306-11B, § II, adopted June 27, 2011, repealed §§ 101-31—101-37, which pertained to building codes and derived from Code 1982, §§ 6-2-11, 6-2-12, 6-2-21, 6-2-24, 6-2-31, 6-2-41; Ord. No. 216-98, adopted March 16, 1998; Ord. No. 233-99, § 6-2-3, adopted Nov. 22, 1999; Ord. No. 248-02, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 15, 2002. Section 101-38 was renumbered as § 117-24. 

Secs. 101-31—101-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 101-71. - Purpose of article. 
It is the purpose of this article to: 
(1)  Require the use of ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings; 
(2)  Require the certification of plumbing fixtures regarding flow rates and serviceability standards; 
(3)  Promote compliance with state laws for the purpose of conserving water; 
(4)  Maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies; and 
(5)  Reduce wastewater flows. 
Sec. 101-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial building means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Plumbing fixtures means any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators. 
Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
(Code 1982, § 6-7-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 101-73. - Standards for fixtures. 
No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 101-75. The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be April 1, 1992, and for commercial buildings the effective date shall be July 1, 1992. 
(1)  All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to in this section shall not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 
a.  Toilets: 1.6 gallons per flush. 
b.  Urinals: 1.0 gallons per flush. 
c.  Showerheads: 2.5 gallons per minute, at 60 psi gauge pressure. 
d.  Kitchen faucets: 2.5 gallons per minute. 
e.  Bathroom and lavatory faucets: 2.0 gallons per minute. 
(2)  The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)  The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.1M-1989, Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in subsection (1) of this section. 
(5)  All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for low consumption water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990, Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME A112.19.6-1990, Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended. 
(Code 1982, §§ 6-7-2—6-7-4) 
Sec. 101-74. - Product certification. 
The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards in section 101-73 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described in this section and providing, upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the code compliance officer. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in section 8 of such standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
Sec. 101-75. - Exceptions. 
Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the code compliance officer. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building may be exempt from the standards of section 101-73 for the following: 
(1)  Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc. 
(2)  Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for the physically handicapped. 
(3)  Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in a correctional institution which may require more water for proper operation. 
(4)  Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes that cannot be accommodated by existing technology. 
(Code 1982, § 6-7-5) 
Sec. 101-76. - Enforcement; penalty for violation of article. 
Citations for violations of this article may be issued by the code compliance officer or his authorized representative. Any person violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, such person found guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 6-7-6) 
Secs. 101-77—101-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UNFIT DWELLINGS AND STRUCTURES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 317-12, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 2012, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 101-111—101-121, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 218-99, §§ 3-1—3-6, adopted May 17, 1999. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances related to unfit dwellings, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq. 

Sec. 101-111. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words, terms and definitions shall apply: 
Applicable codes means: (a) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property, including the Mountain Park Building Code Ordinance; (b) any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia, including all state minimum standard codes; and (c) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those buildings or standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Code compliance officer means the officer or officers who are appointed by the governing authority and authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this article relating to the inspection for violations of the article's provisions and the issuance of complaints upon determining that a violation has occurred, including the building official and including also the city code enforcement officer. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwelling, building, structure, or property means any building, structure or property, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwelling, building, structure, or property" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the mayor and city council of the City of Mountain Park, Georgia. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership (general or limited), limited liability company, estate, trust or other entity or artificial person, or combination thereof. 
Public authority means the governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, structure or property. 
Resident means any person residing in the City of Mountain Park on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
( Ord. No. 317-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-112. - Code compliance officer; powers. 
(a)  The code compliance officer shall assume all of the duties and exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the abatement of nuisances, as set forth in this article, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17, as amended. The powers which may be exercised by the code compliance officer, as the code compliance officer is contemplated by this article, in carrying out and effectuating the purpose and provisions of this article, pursuant to such statutes, include, without limitation, the following powers in addition to others granted in this chapter: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate; and 
(6)  To issue citations and complaints for violations of the provisions of this article. The code compliance officer shall also be authorized to request the city attorney or other designated attorney prepare and file complaints under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life, safety and general welfare of the properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Neither approval of a permit nor inspection of a property shall guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 317-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-113. - Standards for determining unfit buildings and structures. 
(a)  Any building or structure that has any of the following conditions (as listed below under subsection (b)), such that the life, health, property, or safety of its occupants or the general public are endangered, is hereby declared illegal and unfit for human habitation or use (as applicable) and shall be abated by repair or demolition. The complaint and inspection of an unfit building or structure shall be as set forth in section 101-114 of this article. 
(b)  The code compliance officer is authorized to determine that a dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the City of Mountain Park. Examples of such conditions include, but are not limited to, the following conditions of any building or structure: 
(1)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Severe uncleanliness, rodent infestation; 
(7)  Damage by fire, flood, wind or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the applicable state minimum standard codes for similar new buildings; 
(8)  Construction or maintenance in violation of a specific requirement of the state minimum standard codes, of any other applicable building code or ordinance, or of any other applicable state law; 
(9)  Decay, deterioration or dilapidation such that full or partial collapse is likely; 
(10)  The stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads, including dead load, which exceeds the stresses allowed by the applicable state standard minimum code for similar new buildings; 
(11)  The means of egress are not of adequate size or are not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic; or the fire doors, closing devices and similar features are in disrepair or in a dilapidated or non-working condition to render the building or structure unsafe in case of fire or panic; 
(12)  Exterior siding that is inadequate and unsecured, or is not weather, water, and windproof, such that the building would not pass existing state minimum standard codes for similar new buildings; 
(13)  Conditions such that the structure or portion thereof, for whatever reason, is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used; 
(14)  The dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation of the code compliance personnel or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed; and 
(15)  Any other condition constituting a public nuisance, including, for example, maintaining stagnant or fetid water on the premises; an accumulation of trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary and unsafe conditions; the generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of Mountain Park; and/or maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl or maintaining such a number of animals in such foul and unsanitary conditions as to constitute a public nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 317-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-114. - Complaint and inspection; in rem procedure. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the code compliance officer by a public authority, or by at least five residents of the city, that any dwelling, building, structure, or property: 1) is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 2) is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 3) constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 4) has an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions constituting a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity; 5) constitutes a public nuisance; or 6) has one or more of the conditions defined in section 101-113 above, the code compliance officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. The code compliance officer may also inspect properties on his own information or determination regarding potential violations of this or other city ordinances. 
(b)  The code compliance officer may, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists. The complaint may be filed and prosecuted by the city attorney or city solicitor. The complaint may be filed in the municipal court, pursuant to that court's jurisdiction under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, or in the Superior Court of the county in which the property where the violation is alleged to exist lies. A summons and the complaint shall be served on all interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(c)  The complaint shall: 
(1)  Identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; 
(2)  Identify the interested parties; 
(3)  State with particularity the factual basis for the action; and 
(4)  Contain a statement of the action sought by the code compliance officer to abate the alleged nuisance, as well as other relief sought. 
(d)  The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain and at a place as specified, depending on whether the complaint is filed in municipal court or Superior Court. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(e)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; or otherwise constitutes a public nuisance, then the court shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order stating: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, structure, or property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, structure, or property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this provision, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
In any action brought to enforce the provisions of this article, the city shall be entitled to its reasonable attorney's fees and other litigation costs, such to be a lien against the property, unless the court determines that the failure to comply with this article was substantially justified based on the record as a whole. 
(f)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the code compliance officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed, or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The code compliance officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes, has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(g)  If the code compliance officer has the structure demolished, reasonable efforts shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any sale of such salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The code compliance officer and the governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(h)  Where the abatement action is commenced in municipal court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the Superior Court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(i)  In addition to the procedures and remedies outlined above, the code compliance officer may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, and life safety codes adopted by or applicable in the city, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
( Ord. No. 317-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-115. - Service of complaints and orders. 
(a)  Complaints initiated under this article shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the code compliance officer or attorney filing the complaint shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable; 
(2)  Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any; and 
(3)  A copy of the complaint shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of Superior Court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
( Ord. No. 317-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-116. - Lien established; collection of amount due on lien. 
(a)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, attorney's fees and expenses awarded by the court, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(b)  The lien provided for in this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of Superior Court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection 101-115(c) of this article. The clerk of Superior Court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(c)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the code compliance officer shall transmit to the tax commissioner of the county in which the property lies a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner or other official who is responsible, or whose duties include the collection of taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-359.1 and 41-2-9(b). The county tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of Mountain Park. 
(d)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this article may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this chapter. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. 
(e)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this article shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this article together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority or county tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(f)  The governing authority may waive and release such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the City of Mountain Park agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
( Ord. No. 317-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-117. - Duty to maintain property; violations and enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of every owner of real property within the city to maintain such property free of the conditions listed in subsection (b) of section 101-113. In addition to any other remedy provided by law or by this article, any owner of real property willfully failing to maintain it free of such conditions may be cited and prosecuted for violating this article, and upon conviction, shall be punished by fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Each day that the violation continues after a citation is issued shall be considered a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 317-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Secs. 101-118—101-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FORECLOSED AND VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRY 

Sec. 101-131. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Mountain Park Vacant and Foreclosed Property Registry Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 316-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-132. - Findings and intent. 
This article is adopted to address the interest of public safety. 
(1)  The governing authority finds that there is a need to establish a foreclosure and vacant real property registry as a mechanism to protect property values in neighborhoods for all property owners. 
(2)  Due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of properties that are foreclosed or where ownership has been transferred after foreclosure, the property values and quality of life of neighboring properties are negatively impacted. 
(3)  Improperly maintained and secured foreclosed properties can become a hazard to the health and safety of persons who may come on or near the property and can adversely affect the aesthetic and economic attributes of communities. Difficulties also often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of foreclosed real property. The governing authority finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the provisions in this article. 
(4)  This foreclosure and vacant real property registry will require owners and agents to provide the city with official information for contacting a party responsible for bringing foreclosed and vacant real property into compliance with applicable provisions of the Municipal Code of Mountain Park, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 316-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-133. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in this state in which he or she is authorized to accept inquiries, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner. The definition of "agent" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, should that definition differ from the definition in this article. 
Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued by a county or municipal corporation and is held pursuant to a judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, should that definition differ. 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. The definition of "street address" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, should that definition differ from the definition in this article. 
Vacant real property means real property that: 
(1)  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least 60 days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past 60 days; or 
(2)  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
Such term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. The definition of "vacant real property" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, should that definition differ from the definition in this article. 
( Ord. No. 316-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-134. - Registration of vacant or foreclosed property. 
(a)  Owners or agents of foreclosed real property or vacant real property, including foreclosed real property and vacant real property which is also residential rental property, are required to register such property with the city clerk within 90 days of such property becoming foreclosed or vacant real property by following the provisions of this section unless otherwise exempted by this article or state law. 
(b)  Any such owner or agent of foreclosed real property or vacant real property located within the jurisdiction of the city is required to file with the city clerk a registration in the form promulgated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, which shall only require submission of the following information: 
(1)  The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The real property's street address and tax parcel number; 
(4)  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(c)  Registration is required for all vacant or foreclosed real property unless otherwise exempted, pursuant to this article, but is not required for vacant or foreclosed real property for the first 90 days after such real property's transfer: 
(1)  Pursuant to a deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure; or 
(2)  To the first subsequent transferee after the vacant real property has been acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160, or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(d)  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to Georgia Law shall also be required to update the information specified in subsection (a) of this section within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
( Ord. No. 316-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-135. - Foreclosed and vacant real property exemptions. 
(a)  Registration or payment of any administrative fees of foreclosed real property pursuant to this article and Georgia Law is not required of transferees as described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any transferee who acquires any real property by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160, or acquires any real property pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure and: 
(1)  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure contains the information specified in subsection (b) of section 101-134; 
(2)  The deed is filed with the clerk of the Superior Court within 60 days of the transfer; and 
(3)  Proof of the following is provided to the office or the officer in charge of the city foreclosed real property registry: 
a.  A filing date stamp or receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
b.  The entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(c)  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to Georgia Law shall also be required to update the information specified in subsection (a) of this section within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
( Ord. No. 316-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-136. - Removal from registry. 
(a)  Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property may apply to the city to remove a vacant or foreclosed real property from the city registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes a vacant or foreclosed real property. 
(b)  Any application for removal allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall be granted or denied by the city administrator within 30 days, and if no such determination is made within 30 days, then the application for removal from the registry shall be deemed granted. 
( Ord. No. 316-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-137. - Administrative fees. 
Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property which is required to be registered with the city under this article shall pay an administrative fee in the amount of $100.00 per registration. 
( Ord. No. 316-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-138. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  Any owner or agent aggrieved of any determination or decision of the city administrator or the city in the administration of this article may appeal to the municipal court of the city. All appeals hereunder must be taken within 30 days of the decision in question by filing with the city clerk a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
(b)  The city clerk shall forthwith transmit the notice of appeal and all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken to the municipal court clerk who shall schedule an appeal hearing within 60 days following the date the appealing party submits its completed written appeal with subsection (a) above. 
(c)  The municipal court judge may call for further information to be provided within the next 35 days following the hearing, and may continue the hearing for the purpose of receiving such information or for such other proceedings and reasons as the municipal court judge deems appropriate. 
(d)  The municipal court judge may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the decision, requirement, or determination of the city administrator appealed by the owner or agent and may make such decision, requirement, or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
( Ord. No. 316-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-139. - Nuisances and unfit property. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair, limit, or preempt in any way the power of the city to enforce any applicable codes, as defined in state law, or to define or declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. Nothing in this article shall impair or limit the power or authority of the city or its officers to enforce and seek relief under the city's unfit property ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 316-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Sec. 101-140. - Penalties. 
Any owner or agent required to register a vacant or foreclosed real property under this article who fails to register or fails to update the information specified in subsection (a) of section 101-134 of this article may be fined up to $1,000.00 per occurrence. 
( Ord. No. 316-12, § 1, 9-24-2012 ) 
Chapter 105 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 105-1—105-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOUNTAIN PARK SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 326-16, § 1, adopted Dec. 27, 2016 , repealed the former Art. II, §§ 105-31—105-40, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 305-10, § 1, adopted August 23, 2010; Ord. No. 312-11, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 2011. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

Sec. 105-31. - Title. 
This article will be known as "Mountain Park Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 326-16, § 1, 12-27-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-32. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Fulton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage Structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 105-34(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 105-33(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: Generally, the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). For the purposes of this article, references to local issuing authority shall mean the City of Mountain Park, Georgia. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by the EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by the EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Fulton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication: Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov . Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication: Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. No. 326-16, § 1, 12-27-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-33. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority in a manner consistent with the regulations provided by this article in sections 105-35 through and including 105-40 and Georgia law; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 105-34(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. No. 326-16, § 1, 12-27-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-34. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of paragraphs (b) and (c) below. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this paragraph and paragraph (c) of this section of the article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The local issuing authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in 105-34(c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § § 12-7-6(c); Mountain Park has established such stream buffers in Article VIII of Chapter 105 of the City Code. 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or to preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 105-34(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer, and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer, and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 326-16, § 1, 12-27-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-35. - Undisturbed area. 
(a)  For each property for which a land development permit application is filed, an aggregate total of at least 40 percent of the area of the property shall remain undisturbed during construction and until the certificate of occupancy is issued. This undisturbed area may not be used for construction staging and/or the storage of any construction or other man-made materials, ground disturbance, permanent or temporary parking, or any other use except landscaping which has been installed without the use of mechanized equipment. The only exception to the restricted, undisturbed area may be the installation of the septic tank and discharge lines on lots without connection to the public sewer system. 
(b)  The undisturbed area may be in separate portions on the property which shall be shown upon the site plan filed with the building permit application. The site plan shall include the area calculations of the undisturbed area and verification that the minimum 40 percent undisturbed area requirement has been met and must include the note: THE UNDISTURBED AREA SHALL NOT BE USED FOR CONSTRUCTION STAGING, STORAGE OF CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS, GROUND DISTURBANCE, TEMPORARY OR PERMANENT PARKING, OR ANY OTHER USE EXCEPT AS PROVIDED BY CITY CODE SECTION 105-35. If the installation of a septic tank or discharge system is required within the designated undisturbed area, the full extent and location of this system must be shown on the site plan. 
( Ord. No. 326-16, § 1, 12-27-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-36. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review the general development plans before submittal. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Mountain Park without first obtaining a permit from the City of Mountain Park to perform such activity and providing a copy of a notice of intent submitted to the EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Mountain Park and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in paragraph (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 105-34(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division, except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district; any variances required by section 105-34(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained; all fees have been paid; and bonding, if required as per section 105-36(b)(6), has been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 105-34(b) and (c) of this article or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types; geological and hydrological characteristics; topography; watershed; vegetation; proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, and sediment control and storm water management facilities; local ordinances; and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable, but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the District and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article; any variances required by section 105-34(c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained; bonding requirements, if necessary as per section 105-36(b)(6), are met; and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons, and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(e)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or District for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder, or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
( Ord. No. 326-16, § 1, 12-27-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-37. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The City of Mountain Park will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The City of Mountain Park shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
( Ord. No. 326-16, § 1, 12-27-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-38. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning. 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order. 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit; failure to maintain a stream buffer; significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters; or where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 105-36(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this article or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, pursuant to general law and notwithstanding any provisions in the city's charter to the contrary, the municipal court shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. No. 326-16, § 1, 12-27-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-39. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and who meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. No. 326-16, § 1, 12-27-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-40. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan; that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of Fulton County in the manner provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 326-16, § 1, 12-27-2016 ) 
Secs. 105-41—105-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 101; floods, ch. 109. 

Sec. 105-141. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
This article shall be enforced by the code compliance officer or such person as appointed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 2(2), 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-142. - Findings. 
(a)  Uncontrolled stormwater drainage/discharge may have a significant adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. More specifically, surface water runoff can carry pollutants and nutrients into receiving waters. The potential impacts of these pollutants and nutrient loadings include: 
(1)  Changing natural ecosystems through sediment and pollutant deposits which affect the quantity and quality of water flow, the destruction of habitats, and the loss of plant and animal life; 
(2)  Posing significant health risks through increased bacteria; 
(3)  Accelerating eutrophication of receiving waters by introducing excessive nutrient loads; 
(4)  Increasing metal deposits creating toxicity for aquatic life; 
(5)  Reducing oxygen levels because of oil, grease and organic matter; and 
(6)  Affecting animal and plant life, adversely, due to changing temperatures of receiving waters. 
(b)  Uncontrolled stormwater drainage can increase the incidence of flooding and the level of floods which occur, endangering roads, other public and private property and human life. 
(c)  Altered land surfaces can change the rate and volume of runoff as follows: 
(1)  Erosion and slumping of streambanks, resulting in widening of streams; 
(2)  Undercut root systems; 
(3)  Increased erosion rates; and 
(4)  Uniform and shallow streambeds, providing less varied aquatic habitats. 
(d)  Adverse water quality and quantity consequences described above may result in substantial economic losses. Potential losses include, but are not limited to, increased water treatment costs, as well as state and federal fines associated with water quality violations. 
(e)  Many future problems can be avoided through proper stormwater management. 
(f)  Every parcel of real property, both public and private, either uses or benefits from the maintenance of the city's stormwater system. 
(g)  Current and anticipated growth will contribute to and increase the need for improvement and maintenance of the stormwater system. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 3, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-143. - Objectives; purpose. 
(a)  Protection, maintenance, and enhancement of the shortterm and longterm public health, safety, and general welfare. This objective will be achieved by: 
(1)  Protecting, preserving, and enhancing water quality and fish and wildlife habitat within the city and in downstream receiving waters; and 
(2)  Protecting those downstream from water quality and quantity impacts. 
(b)  Compliance with state and federal stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act Amendments of 1987. The objectives of these regulations include: 
(1)  Controlling the quality of water discharged by controlling the contribution of pollutants to the stormwater system by stormwater discharges associated with commercial and industrial activity; 
(2)  Prohibiting illicit discharges to stormwater systems; 
(3)  Controlling the discharge of spills and dumping or any disposal of materials other than stormwater into the stormwater system; and 
(4)  Controlling, through intergovernmental agreements, contribution of pollutants from one municipal system to another. 
(c)  Requiring development plans to minimize the transport of pollutants to community waters by requiring approval and implementation of stormwater management plans for activities which may have an adverse impact on community waters. 
(d)  Establishing procedures which minimize damage from flooding caused by development, while recognizing that natural fluctuations in water levels are beneficial. 
(e)  Requiring construction of drainage systems which aesthetically and functionally approximate natural systems. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-144. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the municipal storm sewer system which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Agriculture practices means practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land, farm ponds, and the construction of farm buildings. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a wide range of management procedures, activities, and prohibitions on practices which control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with the planned land use. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
Conveyance means stormwater features designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, etc. 
Cooling water means water used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance, device, or apparatus. 
Department means the city department which is responsible for all stormwater management activities and implementation of the provisions of this article. 
Development activity means: 
(1)  The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, plots, sites, tracts, parcels or other divisions by plat or deed; 
(2)  The construction, installation, or alteration of a structure, impervious surface, or drainage facility; 
(3)  Clearing, scraping, grubbing, or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site; or 
(4)  Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, or otherwise disturbing the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site. 
Director means either the director of the city department responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this article or any of that person's duly authorized representatives or designees. 
Discharge means the release of treated or untreated water to the stormwater system. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for a specific use of land owned by others. 
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flowing stream means any stream which is designated and shown as a permanent stream on the 7.5-minute quadrangle maps of the U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey, plus any stream which the mayor and city council may determine to be, and designate as a flowing stream. 
Illicit connection means a connection to a storm sewer system which results in discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the municipal storm sewer). 
Land disturbance permit means a permit issued by the city which must be obtained before any land disturbing activity begins. 
Maintenance means any action necessary to preserve stormwater management facilities in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this article and to prevent structural failure of such facilities. 
Municipal storm sewer system (municipal stormwater system) means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, highways, rights-of-way, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) which is: 
(1)  Owned, operated or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
(3)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(4)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works (POTW). 
The term "municipal storm sewer" system also includes privately owned and maintained facilities that are a component of, or constitute a link in, the city system. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental, or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Post-development conditions means the conditions which exist following the completion of the land disturbing activity in terms of topography, vegetation, land use and rate, volume, or direction of stormwater runoff. 
Predevelopment conditions means those land use conditions that existed prior to the initiation of the land disturbing activity in terms of topography, vegetation, land use and rate, volume or direction of stormwater runoff. 
Private means property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by city, state, or federal government. 
Procedure means a procedure adopted by the department, by and through the director, to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this article or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of the city or other agencies. 
Sanitary sewer system (wastewater system) means the complete sanitary sewer system in the city which discharges sewage directly or indirectly into the sewage treatment plant, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes and flushing inlets and appurtenances to the foregoing, but shall exclude any portion or facilities of the sewage treatment plant. 
Sediment means solid particulate matter, both mineral and organic, that has been or is being transported by water, air, ice or gravity from its site of origin. 
Site means any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land. 
State waters means the most recent definition for state waters adopted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater management refers to the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this article and which shall include a system of vegetative or structural measures, or both, that control the increase volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. 
Stormwater management design manual means the most recent manual of design, performance, and review criteria for stormwater management practices, prepared under the direction of the director. Copies of this manual will be made available to the public. Nothing in this definition shall be deemed to impose an obligation upon the director or the department to track down all members of the development community to provide them with a copy of the manual, or any updates thereof. 
Stormwater management facilities means constructed or natural components of a stormwater drainage system, designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions including, but not limited to, pipes, swales, ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catchbasins, oil/water separators, sediment basins, natural systems and modular pavement. 
Stormwater management plan means the set of drawings and other documents that comprise all of the information and specifications for the drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts, and techniques that will be used to control stormwater as required by this article and the stormwater management design manual. Also included are the supporting engineering calculations and results of any computer analysis. 
Stormwater runoff means the direct response of land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff that enters a ditch, stream, storm drain or other concentrated flow during and following the precipitation. 
Subdivision means any division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel, regardless of its existing or future use, into two or more lots, tracts or parcels. The term "subdivision" shall mean the act or process of dividing property, except that, where appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" may be used in reference to the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership at the time of subdivision. 
Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements for specific circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. 
Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. The term "water quality" also means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5, 9-18-1995) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 105-145. - Scope of department responsibility. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the city limits. 
(b)  The department shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The department shall be responsible for conservation, management, maintenance (where applicable), extension and improvement of the stormwater system, including: 
(1)  All activities necessary to control stormwater runoff; and 
(2)  All activities necessary to carry out stormwater management programs included in the city's NPDES stormwater permit. 
(d)  The application of this article and the provisions expressed in this article shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other local requirements authorized by state statute. Other stormwater project improvements, as defined under state law, may be required. 
(e)  The department shall develop, and update periodically, a stormwater management design manual for the guidance of persons preparing stormwater management plans, and designing or operating stormwater management systems; provided, however, that the failure of the department to develop or update a stormwater management design manual shall not affect the validity of this article. 
(f)  The department may prepare and periodically update a stormwater management master plan. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 6, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-146. - Powers of the department. 
(a)  The department shall have the power to administer and enforce all regulations and procedures adopted to implement this article, including the right to maintain an action or procedure in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(b)  The department shall: 
(1)  Administer, coordinate and oversee acquisition, design, construction, operation and management of the city's stormwater facilities and conveyances; 
(2)  Establish or oversee the establishment of development standards and guidelines; 
(3)  Determine the manner in which stormwater facilities should be operated; 
(4)  Inspect private systems which discharge to the city's stormwater system; 
(5)  Advise the city council, other departments and any affected governments on issues related to the stormwater system; 
(6)  Protect facilities and properties controlled by the department and prescribe how to be used by others; 
(7)  Require new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater contributions to comply with the terms of this article; 
(8)  Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the storm sewer system; and 
(9)  Adopt and implement the stormwater management manual for the city. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 7, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-147. - Prohibited discharges generally. 
It is unlawful for any person to throw, drain, run, or otherwise discharge, into any component of the city's stormwater system, or to cause, permit or suffer to be thrown, drained, run or allow to seep or otherwise discharge, into such system, all matter of any nature excepting only such stormwater or surface water as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 8(1), 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-148. - Authorized exemptions of prohibited discharges. 
The director may exempt the following, provided that they are not identified as a significant source of pollution, from section 105-147: 
(1)  Unpolluted industrial cooling water, but only under the authorization and direction of the director and appropriate NPDES permit. Per state requirements, the discharge should not raise the temperature of the receiving stream more than five degrees; except for secondary trout streams, in which there shall be no elevation in temperature exceeding two degrees above the natural stream temperature. 
(2)  Water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, and uncontaminated groundwater infiltration. 
(3)  Unpolluted pumped groundwater. 
(4)  Discharges from potable water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water. 
(5)  Discharges or flows from firefighting. 
(6)  Other unpolluted water. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 8(2), 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-149. - Prohibited pollutants. 
(a)  It is unlawful to discharge, or allow to be discharged, pollutants and contaminated water into any: 
(1)  Public street, highway, right-of-way; 
(2)  Stormwater conveyance or facility; and 
(3)  Other public/private property that is a part of or drains to the municipal storm sewer system. 
(b)  Pollutants that are prohibited include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Petroleum products including but not limited to oil, gasoline, grease, fuel oil and heating oil; 
(2)  Trash or debris; 
(3)  Pet wastes; 
(4)  Chemicals; 
(5)  Paints; 
(6)  Steam cleaning wastes; 
(7)  Washing of fresh concrete for cleaning and/or finishing purposes or to expose aggregates; 
(8)  Laundry wastes; 
(9)  Soaps; 
(10)  Pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers; 
(11)  Sanitary sewage; 
(12)  Heated water; 
(13)  Chlorinated water or chlorine, except as exempted in section 105-148; 
(14)  Degreasers and/or solvents; 
(15)  Bark and other fibrous material; 
(16)  Antifreeze or other automotive products; 
(17)  Lawn clippings, leaves, or branches; 
(18)  Animal carcasses; 
(19)  Silt; 
(20)  Acids or alkalis; 
(21)  Recreational vehicle wastes; 
(22)  Dyes (without prior permission of the department); and 
(23)  Construction materials. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 8(3), (4), 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-150. - Accidental discharges. 
Upon an accidental discharge or an unavoidable loss into the municipal storm sewer system of any material or substance other than stormwater runoff, the person responsible shall immediately notify the fire department of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. The person responsible shall take immediate steps to contain, treat or minimize the affects of the discharge on the municipal system and receiving streams. The person shall also take immediate steps to prevent a recurrence of the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 8(5), 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-151. - Illicit connections. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to connect any pipe, open channel, or any other conveyance system that discharges anything except stormwater or unpolluted water which is approved by the director, based on the exemptions listed in section 105-148, to the municipal stormwater system. 
(b)  The person responsible for any connection in violation of this article shall immediately cause the illegal connection to be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to the county's sanitary sewer system upon approval by the director of the county's sanitary sewer system department. Such person shall provide the department with written confirmation, satisfactory to the director, that the connection has been disconnected, and if necessary, redirected to the county sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 9, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-152. - Applicability and exemptions. 
(a)  No person shall conduct a development activity without having provided for appropriate stormwater management measures that control or manage runoff, in compliance with this article, unless exempted in this section. In accordance with this provision, no land disturbance permit shall be issued without the following: 
(1)  An approved stormwater management plan; 
(2)  Right of entry for emergency maintenance if necessary; 
(3)  Right of entry for inspections; 
(4)  Any off-site easements needed; and 
(5)  In addition to all plans and permits required by the city, applicants shall obtain all state and federal permits required for the proposed development. 
(b)  Stormwater management plans shall not be required for the following activities: 
(1)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, individual residential repairs, individual residential maintenance work, and other individual residential activities which result in minor soil erosion as determined by the director; 
(2)  The construction of single-family residences when constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy; or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a larger project and not exempted under subsection (a) of this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence not otherwise exempt does not conflict with an approved stormwater management plan for the existing subdivision and the residence is not within 50 feet of the bank of any state waters: For purposes of this subsection, state waters excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway must prevent sediment and pollutants from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such projects is located and provided, further, that nothing contained in this article shall prevent the city from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted otherwise in this section; and 
(3)  Agricultural practices unless it is determined by the director that such practices are contributing excessive nutrients or pollutants to any receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 10, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-153. - Stormwater management plan approval process. 
(a)  Unless granted an exemption, any person planning a development shall submit to the director a stormwater management plan for review and approval. This plan may be incorporated within the overall development plans. The plan must be sealed by a civil engineer. 
(b)  A permit fee, as administratively established from time to time by the director, will be collected at the time the stormwater management plan or application for an exemption is submitted. This fee will reflect the cost of administration and management of stormwater plan review process. 
(c)  The director or designee shall review the plan as follows: 
(1)  The director shall issue a decision approving, rejecting or conditionally approving the plan with modification. 
(2)  The director's decision will be based on conformance with requirements included in the city's stormwater management design manual. No plan shall be approved unless it conforms with the requirements included in the stormwater management design manual. The director may require additional documents or other items necessary to make this determination. 
(3)  If rejected, the director shall attempt to reasonably identify the plan deficiencies so as to facilitate the approval process at the next submission. However, nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the director to rewrite the plan, it being understood that the applicant is ultimately responsible for submitting a plan that complies with this article. 
(d)  If the plan involves any stormwater management facilities or land to be dedicated to public use, the plan shall be submitted for review and approval to the department having jurisdiction over that land, or other appropriate departments or agencies identified by the director for review and approval. 
(e)  Construction pursuant to approved plans shall be initiated within 12 months of approval and providing land disturbing activities have begun prior to the expiration of such 12 months, are being pursued in good faith, and following a reasonable schedule, then such work shall be permitted to be completed without modification to such approved plans. 
(1)  Extension or renewals of plan approvals may be granted by the director upon written request by the person responsible for the land development activity; 
(2)  A stormwater management plan shall not be considered approved without the inclusion of an approval stamp with a signature and date on the plans from the department. The department's stamp of approval on the plans is solely an acknowledgment of the applicant's apparent satisfactory compliance with this article. The approval stamp does not constitute a representation or warranty to the applicant or any other person concerning the safety, appropriateness or effectiveness of any provision or omission from the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 11, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-154. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Any development-related permit may be suspended or revoked upon the occurrence of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Violation of any provision of this article; 
(2)  Violation of any condition imposed by the director as a condition to stormwater management plan approval; 
(3)  Construction not in strict accordance with intent of an approved stormwater management plan; 
(4)  Noncompliance with a correction notice or stop work order; or 
(5)  Existence of immediate danger in the downstream area, as determined by the director. Immediate danger includes, but is not limited to, danger to human life, the ecosystems, and other health or safety related dangers as determined by the director. 
(b)  Upon the occurrence of one or more of the above, a written notice of violation shall be served upon the owner or his representative, or posted on the work site if no owner or representative is available, and an immediate stop work order may be issued. 
(1)  The written notice shall identify the violation and set forth measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plans; and 
(2)  Correction of the violations shall be started immediately. 
(c)  The remedies set forth in this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 12, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-155. - Stormwater management design manual. 
(a)  The stormwater management design manual shall be developed by the department under the supervision of the director to assist in design and evaluation of stormwater management facilities and practices. The manual may include the following information and other information deemed appropriate by the director: 
(1)  Guidance and specifications for the preparation of stormwater management plans. A description of acceptable techniques for obtaining, calculating and presenting the information required in the plans shall be included, and the design conditions which must be accounted for shall be identified. 
(2)  Guidance in selecting environmentally sound practices for managing stormwater. A description of specific techniques and practices shall be included. Development and use of techniques emphasizing use of natural systems shall be encouraged. 
(3)  Minimum specifications for designing, constructing, and maintaining stormwater management facilities. These specifications shall be established in accordance with current good engineering practices. 
(4)  Minimum easement requirements. 
(5)  More complete definitions of some concepts included in this article. 
(6)  Development performance standards for stormwater management facilities and practices. Methodology/criteria for evaluation will include: 
a.  Hydrologic and hydraulic evaluations; 
b.  Evaluation of best management practices (BMP's); and 
c.  Evaluation of downstream impacts. 
(7)  Criteria for 100-year floodplain analysis. 
(b)  The manual may be updated periodically to reflect the most current and effective practices and shall be made available to the public. However, the failure to update the manual shall not relieve any applicant from the obligation to comply with this article, and shall not prevent the director from imposing the most current and effective practices. 
(c)  The manual is not designed to replace the need for engineering judgment. Rather, other accepted engineering procedures for conducting hydrologic and hydraulic studies may be imposed by the director, or used by the applicant if approved in advance by the director. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 13, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-156. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Any stormwater management facility or BMP which services individual subdivisions shall be privately owned with routine maintenance (controlling vegetative growth and removing debris) provided for by the owners. The owner shall maintain a perpetual, nonexclusive easement which allows for access for inspection and other maintenance. 
(b)  Any stormwater management facility or BMP which services an individual subdivision in which the facility or BMP is within designated open areas or an amenity with an established homeowners association shall be privately owned and maintained. The owner shall maintain a perpetual, nonexclusive easement which allows for access for inspection and emergency maintenance. 
(c)  Any stormwater management facility or BMP which services commercial and industrial development shall be privately owned and maintained. The city shall reserve the right, but not the duty to enter premises for emergency repair. 
(d)  All regional stormwater management control facilities proposed by the owners, if approved by the mayor and council, and accepted by the department for dedication, as a public regional facility, shall be publicly owned and/or maintained. 
(e)  All other stormwater management control facilities and BMP's shall be publicly owned and/or maintained only if accepted for maintenance by the city. 
(f)  The director may require dedication of privately owned stormwater facilities, which discharge to the city's stormwater system, to the city. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 14, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-157. - Inspection. 
(a)  The department shall determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  An initial inspection prior to stormwater management plan approval; 
(2)  A bury inspection prior to burial of any underground drainage structure; 
(3)  Erosion control inspections as necessary to ensure effective control of erosion and sedimentation; and 
(4)  A finish inspection when all work, including installation of storm management facilities, has been completed. 
(b)  The director or designee, bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted in accordance with local, state and federal law, to enter all properties (public or private) for regular inspection, periodic investigations, observation, measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, in accordance with provisions of this article. The director or designee shall duly notify the owner of such property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(c)  The director or designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted, in accordance with local, state and federal law, to enter all properties for which the city holds an easement for repairs, maintenance and other purposes related to any portion of the stormwater management facilities lying within such easement. The director or designee shall notify the owner of the property or a representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(d)  Measurements, tests and analysis performed by the department or required of the discharger to the storm sewer system shall be in accordance with 40 CFR 136, unless another method is approved or imposed by the director. 
(e)  If, after inspection, the condition of a facility presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, the city shall have the right, but not the duty, to take action as may be necessary to protect the public and make the facility safe. 
(f)  The department shall inspect the work and shall either approve it or notify the applicant in writing in what respects there has been failure to comply with the requirements of the approved stormwater management plan or this article. Any portion of the work which does not comply shall be promptly corrected by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 16, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-158. - Off-site drainage facilities. 
(a)  The director may allow stormwater runoff that otherwise is of unacceptable quality or which would be discharged in volumes or at rates in excess of those otherwise allowed by this article, to be discharged into drainage facilities off-site of the development, provided the applicant has demonstrated: 
(1)  Off-site drainage facilities and channels leading to them are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequate provision is made for sharing of construction, maintenance and operating costs of facilities. The developer may be required to pay a portion of the cost of constructing facilities as a condition to receiving approval of the stormwater management plan; and 
(3)  It is not feasible to completely manage runoff on-site in a manner that meets the design and performance standards in the city's stormwater management manual. 
(b)  A request to use off-site facilities and all information related to proposed off-site facilities should be made part of the developer's stormwater management plan. Guidelines for consideration of off-site facility use may be defined in the city's stormwater management design manual. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 16, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-159. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Upon determination that a violation of this article has occurred, the director shall give written notice to the accused violator within seven days. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation, the potential penalty involved and the amount of time in which to correct deficiencies, if appropriate. 
(b)  Each violation of this article is subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(1)  The city may institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. 
(3)  Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. 
(4)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief. 
(c)  Any violator may be required to restore land to its condition prior to the violation. If corrective action is not taken in the time specified, or within a reasonable time if no time is specified, the department may take the corrective action, and the cost of the corrective action shall be the responsibility of the owner and the developer. The cost of the corrective action shall also become a lien upon the property. 
(d)  Any person who undertakes any development activity requiring a stormwater management plan hereunder without first submitting the plan for review and approval shall pay to the city, in addition to any permit or inspection fee, an administrative fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(e)  The determination by the director that a violation of this article has occurred shall be conclusive and final unless the accused violator submits a written request for a hearing within seven days of the violation notice being served. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 17, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-160. - Variances from requirements. 
(a)  The director may grant a variance from requirements of this article if exceptional circumstances applicable to a site exist such that strict adherence to the provisions of the article will result in unnecessary hardship and will not fulfill the intent of the article. 
(b)  In order to have a variance considered, the applicant shall submit a written request to the director identifying the specific variance sought and the reasons that the variance should be granted. The written request shall include supporting data and all other information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance. 
(c)  The director will conduct a review of the request for a variance within ten working days of receiving the request. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 18, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-161. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director, including any decision to deny a variance, may appeal the decision by filing a written notice of appeal to the director within ten days of the issuance of such decision by the director. The director shall vote on the appeal within ten days of receipt of the notice. 
(b)  If the director does not reverse the decision, the aggrieved party may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal within ten days of the director's decision on the appeal. The notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the decision of the director is alleged to be in error, and shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  The hearing before the city council shall be held within 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal or on a date mutually agreed upon in writing by the appellant and the city council. The city council shall make its findings within five days after the appeal hearing. 
(d)  If the appellant or the director is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council, either can appeal the decision to the county superior court. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 19, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-162. - Cooperation with other governments. 
The city may enter into agreements with other local governments to carry out the purpose of this article. These agreements may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Enforcement of provisions; 
(2)  Resolution of disputes; 
(3)  Cooperative monitoring; and 
(4)  Cooperative management of stormwater system and management programs. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 20, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 105-163. - Property owner liability; supplemental charges. 
Any person violating this article shall pay for all of the city's costs associated with the violation including, but not limited to, containment, cleanup, injury, death, legal and other costs. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 21, 9-18-1995) 
Secs. 105-164—105-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, adopted April 25, 2016 , amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 105-201—105-219, App. A, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 239-00, §§ 6-9-1—6-9-19, adopted August 21, 2000; Ord. No. 292-06, §§ IV, V, adopted August 21, 2006; Ord. No. 296-08, §§ 1—9, adopted Nov. 17, 2008; Ord. No. 314-12A, § VI, adopted March 26, 2012 . 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; buildings and building regulations, ch. 101; floods, ch. 109; vegetation a nuisance, § 113-151 et seq.; zoning, ch. 117. 

Sec. 105-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the City Clerk of the City of Mountain Park or designee who shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
Buffer means an area required to remain undisturbed pursuant to the zoning regulations, a condition of zoning, state regulations or this article. 
Caliper means a standard of trunk diameter measurement for understory or replacement trees. Caliper for new trees is measured at the height of six inches above the ground for trees up to and including four-inch caliper and 12 inches above the ground for trees larger than four-inch caliper. Caliper for existing trees is measured at four feet six inches above the median grade (also referred to as "breast height"). 
Conifer tree means any tree with needle leaves and a woody cone fruit including, but not limited to, pine, juniper and cedar species. 
Critical root zone means the minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone (CRZ) will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to 1½ times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. Example: The CRZ radius of a 20-inch diameter is 30 feet. 
Development activity means any alteration of the natural environment which requires the approval of a site plan and issuance of a permit. By way of illustration but not limitation, development activity shall also include the thinning or removal of trees from land in conjunction with a forest management program, the removal or destruction of trees incidental to the development of land or to the marketing of land for development, the removal or destruction of trees in conjunction with any grading activity, including the removal or filling (stockpiling) of soil, and logging or the removal of trees not in conjunction with an ongoing forest management program. Nothing in this definition shall be deemed to require or authorize the issuance of a permit for any activity described in this article. 
Density factor means a unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a lot. 
Grading activity means altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions and/or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Hardwood tree means any tree that is not coniferous (cone bearing). The term "hardwood tree" is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
Lot means any legal lot of record. 
Nondevelopment activity means any alteration of the natural environment which does not require building approval, but which would include the proposed removal or destruction of any tree. 
Overstory trees means those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
Pervious surface means all that area of land that can be landscaped or planted, allows the natural passage of water from the surface into the water table, and is not covered by manmade materials or structures such as buildings or paving. 
Planting season means the time period or season during which newly planted trees will have the best opportunity for survival. The planting season generally begins on October 1 and ends on March 1. 
Semipervious means hardscape, aggregate or porous paver that allows at least 50 percent of surface water to pass through the manmade material and into the underlying soil. 
Specimen tree means trees which qualify for special consideration due to their size and type. The following size and condition criteria are used to identify specimen trees; except as expressly provided herein, both the size and condition criteria must be met for a tree to be considered a specimen tree: 
Size criteria: 
Pine Trees: 30-inch diameter or larger 
Overstory Trees (Excluding Pines): 24-inch diameter or larger 
Understory Trees (Excluding Pines): 8-inch diameter or larger 
Condition criteria: 
Greater than 15 years life expectancy, 
Trunk is relatively sound and solid with no extensive decay, 
Free of major dead limbs, and free of major insect or pathological problem. 
Tree means any living, self-supporting woody or fibrous plant which normally attains a caliper of at least three inches and typically has one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree planting list means the recommended species of trees listed in Appendix A to this article. 
Tree protection area means an area encompassing the critical root zone of a tree. 
Tree removal and removal of trees mean any act which causes a tree to die within two years after commission of the act including, but not limited to, damage inflicted upon the root system in the critical root zone or trunk as the result of: 
(1)  The improper use of machinery on the trees; 
(2)  The storage of materials in or around the trees; 
(3)  Soil compaction; 
(4)  Altering the natural grade to expose the roots or to cover the tree's root system with more than four inches of soil; 
(5)  Causing the infection or infestation of the tree by pests, fungus or harmful bacteria; 
(6)  Pruning judged to be excessive by the administrator or not in accordance with the standards set forth by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA); and 
(7)  Paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious surface within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree or its root system. 
Tree save area means an area designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving natural trees, and/or preserving natural buffers. 
Understory tree means those trees that compose the lower layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of less than 30 feet. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-202. - Purpose and intent of article. 
The city deems it necessary and desirable in the interest of public health, safety and welfare to enact an ordinance for the conservation, planting and replacement of trees and to prevent the indiscriminate removal of trees in the city without denying the reasonable use and enjoyment of real property. The importance of trees is recognized for their shade, cooling, noise and wind reduction, soil erosion prevention, oxygen production, dust filtration, carbon dioxide absorption, aesthetic and economic enhancement of all real property, and their contribution to the general wellbeing and quality of life of the citizens of the city. Consistent with the expressed purpose of this article, all persons shall make reasonable efforts to preserve and retain existing, self-supporting trees. It is also the intent of this article that all applicable lots within the city maintain or obtain a minimum tree density. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-203. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The removal of trees with a four-inch caliper or less, provided that the removal does not reduce the tree density of the lot below the minimum specified in section 105-206. 
(2)  The necessary removal of trees within dedicated utility easements by the utility company having the easement. 
(3)  The removal of trees on public rights-of-way (and adjacent areas within the construction limits of rights-of-way) conducted by, on behalf of, or any activity pursuant to work to be dedicated to, a federal, state, county, municipal or other governmental agency in pursuance of its lawful activities or functions in the construction or improvement of public rights-of-way. 
(4)  The removal of trees from lakes and drainage easements. 
(5)  The removal of any tree which has become or threatens to become a danger to human life or property. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, all reasonable efforts shall be made to save specimen trees. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-204. - Approval letter required for nondevelopment activity (activity which does not require a building permit). 
(a)  Except for routine or seasonal pruning or transplanting of trees, and except as exempted in section 105-203, no person shall engage in any nondevelopment activity without first obtaining an approval letter. The request for an approval letter shall be submitted to the city and shall be, unless waived by the city clerk, in the form of a brief, written narrative stating the reason for the proposed work and include either a site sketch or photograph of the tree proposed to be removed, identifying such tree by size and species. If the application is complete, complies with this article, and requests tree removal for one of the purposes identified in subsection (b) of this section, the city shall issue an approval letter not later than 30 working days from receipt of a complete request, and shall inform the applicant if replanting will be required. If the application is incomplete or denied, the city shall notify the applicant in writing regarding the specific reason for denial. 
(b)  The city shall allow submittal of dated photographs instead of an approval letter for the following if a letter of approval or denial has not been issued within 30 working days: 
(1)  The removal of dead, substantially injured, damaged or diseased trees; and 
(2)  The removal of trees occupied within ten feet to the side, front or rear of an existing authorized structure, provided that the applicable minimum tree density requirement is maintained. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-205. - Application requirements. 
(a)  When a person applies for a permit, such person shall also file an application providing the following information: 
(1)  A complete tree survey and inventory, as described in section 105-207; 
(2)  An integrated site plan showing specimen trees, the trees to be saved and those to be removed, utilities to be installed, grading, the approximate location of all structures, driveways and curb cuts, and proposed tree planting and other landscaping; 
(3)  A detailed plan to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of two years after construction, which plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Calculations showing compliance with the required lot density factor, using existing trees and replacement trees. Existing trees to be saved must be located on the same lot as the trees to be removed; 
b.  Locations of all existing and proposed utility lines or easements; 
c.  Locations of all specimen trees and indications whether they are to be removed or preserved; 
d.  Locations of all tree protection devices, materials to be used in each location and details; 
e.  A delineation of tree save areas in which trees have been inventoried for density calculations; and 
f.  Additional information as may be requested on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)  The items in subsection (a) of this section may be integrated into the normal permit application requirements and submittals. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-206. - Minimum tree density requirements. 
(a)  All lots within the city shall maintain a minimum tree density of 400 caliper inches per acre. The density requirement must be met whether or not a lot had trees prior to development. The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees in accordance with the minimum standards of this article, or some combination of the two. Minimum tree density shall be calculated and established pursuant to the following formula and analysis: LDF-EDF equals RDF. 
Where: LDF (lot density factor)—The minimum tree density required to be maintained on a lot (400 inches per acre). 
EDF (exiting density factor)—Density of existing trees to be preserved on a lot. 
RDF (replacement density factor)—Density of new trees to be planted on a lot. 
The SDF is calculated by multiplying the number of lot acres by 400. Example: A 0.5-acre lot has a LDF of 0.5 × 400 equals 200 inches. 
The RDF is calculated by subtracting the EDF from the LDF. Example: RDF equals 200 minus 15 (five three-inch caliper trees to remain) equals 185 (185 inches of replacement trees required). 
(b)  All newly constructed single-family residential lots in the city shall maintain a minimum tree density based upon 400 caliper inches per acre. The developer shall base its density calculations on the net lot area, excluding the acreage for required buffers and infrastructure improvements (utility lines and easements). Trees located in required buffers are not to be counted toward the minimum density requirement. 
(c)  The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, including, but not limited to, those in the undisturbed buffer, planting new trees according to the minimum standards of this article, or some combination of the two. 
(1)  No more than 30 percent of any one genus may be included in any replanting plan. 
(2)  All trees to be planted to meet required replacement densities must be at least one-inch caliper and greater than or equal to six feet tall. 
(3)  Specimen tree replacement/recompense trees must be at least four-inch caliper. 
(4)  All trees must have a minimum of 200 square feet of pervious root zone. 
(5)  A minimum of two trees must be located in the front yard of all properties, and two additional trees in the street side yard of corner lots. 
(6)  Existing overstory trees less than four-inch caliper shall not be counted toward the replacement requirement. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section, it is required that all reasonable efforts be made to save specimen trees. Reasonable efforts shall include, but not be limited to, alternate building design, building location, parking area layout, driveway location, and the like. If a specimen tree is to be removed, a plan or written document indicating the reason for the removal must be submitted to the administrator. 
(1)  Specimen trees that cannot be saved must be replaced with trees having a total density equal to three times the value in inches of the tree removed with a minimum four-inch tree caliper. Specimen trees removed without prior approval shall be replaced with trees equal to five times the value in inches, with a minimum four-inch tree caliper. If the administrator determines that replacement trees cannot be planted on the same lot from which the tree(s) were removed, the administrator may approve an alternate public location(s) for replacement tree planting. 
(2)  Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval, and there is no evidence of its condition. 
(3)  In order to encourage the conservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, additional density credit will be given for specimen trees which are successfully saved by a design feature specifically designated for such purpose. Credit for any specimen tree thus saved would be two times the assigned unit value. The critical root zone of specimen trees will be protected with hog-back/wire-back tree save fencing with metal support poles. 
(e)  For each removal request of more than four trees within a five-year period, it shall be demonstrated that at least 40 percent of the property area shall remain undisturbed after the requested removal. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-207. - Tree survey plan and inventory. 
(a)  The tree survey, as required in section 105-205, shall be in the form of a site plan prepared and sealed by a registered surveyor or registered engineer, noting the location of all specimen trees (as described in subsection (b) of this section) within the area to be modified from its natural state and 25 feet beyond in each direction or to the property line, whichever is less. 
(b)  All specimen trees and all trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be shown on the survey and inventoried by size in inches and species. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-208. - Tree survey inspection. 
Following the receipt of the completed site plan application and supporting data, the administrator shall conduct an inspection of the proposed development site. Following inspection, the administrator shall advise the applicant of any recommended changes in the applicant's proposed tree removal, protection or replanting plans necessary to make the plans comply with the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-209. - Tree removal approval applications. 
(a)  The administrator shall review all applications and supporting data and take one of the following actions: approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove. Applications which meet the requirements of this article shall be approved. 
(b)  Tree removal and replacement shall begin no later than 30 days after issuance of the permit, and shall be completed no later than one year after the issuance of the permit. 
(c)  If a specimen tree is to be removed, a plan or written documentation indicating the reason for the removal must be submitted to the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-210. - Tree conservation standards. 
Prior to any tree removal or commencement of construction on a lot and continuing until a final plat has been recorded, or a certificate of occupancy has been issued, the following system shall be used: 
(1)  Location and types of tree protection devices. 
a.  Tree protection devices are to be installed as shown on the plan or otherwise completely surrounding the critical root zone. 
b.  Active protection (see subsection (2) of this section) is required where tree save areas are located in proximity to construction activity. 
c.  The locations of all tree protection devices will be verified prior to the issuance of the construction permit for clearing and/or grading. 
d.  The critical root zone of specimen trees will be protected with a minimum four-foot tall chainlink or rail fence. 
(2)  Materials. Active tree protection shall consist of chainlink, orange laminated plastic, wooden post and rail fencing or other equivalent restraining material placed at the edge of the critical root zone. 
(3)  Sequence of installation and removal. All tree protection devices shall be installed prior to any clearing, grubbing or grading. The administrator must inspect the installation of tree protection and erosion and sedimentation control devices prior to land disturbance. Tree protection must remain in functioning condition until the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-211. - Tree protection. 
(a)  The cleaning of equipment, storage of materials or dirt, disposal of waste material, such as paint, oil solvents or other harmful substances, or any other such act which may be harmful to the continued vitality of the tree within the tree protection area is prohibited. 
(b)  All buffers of state waters shall remain undisturbed except for approved driveway crossing points. 
(c)  All tree and brush debris shall be chipped and returned to the lot or removed from the lot to reduce the possibility of insect infestation. Burial is not allowed. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-212. - Tree damage. 
Any tree designated in the plan to be saved that is damaged during construction, or as a result of such construction, shall be replaced with a tree equal to the value in inches of the tree removed. However, any specimen tree damaged as described in this section shall be replaced with a tree five times the unit value of the tree removed with a minimum four-inch tree caliper. If the administrator determines that replacement trees cannot be planted on the same lot as the damaged tree(s), the administrator may approve an alternate public location(s) for replacement tree planting. If a damaged specimen tree must be removed, the location occupied by the tree's critical root zone must remain in an impervious state, with no structures or buildings placed in this area, and violations shall be subject to the applicable penalties as described in section 105-219. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-213. - Tree replanting standards. 
(a)  Unless otherwise approved by the city, trees selected for replanting must be on the tree planting list. Trees selected for planting must be free from injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and must be of good vigor in order to ensure a reasonable expectation of survivability. Standards for transplanting shall be in keeping with those established in the International Society of Arboriculture publication, Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual or similar publication. Reference the American Association of Nurserymen Publication, American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60, 1973) for plant material quality specifications. Reference the "Manual of Woody Landscape Plants" (Michael Dirr, 1983, Castle Books) or similar publication for information on tree species site requirements. 
(b)  It is desirable that replanted trees be ecologically compatible with the lot and neighboring lots. Accordingly, the replanted trees shall be of the same or similar species as those removed, when practical. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-214. - Tree removal compliance inspection. 
Following the issuance of a building permit, the administrator shall from time to time inspect the lot for the purpose of certifying compliance with the requirements of the tree removal. In the event of noncompliance, the code compliance officer or city arborist may revoke or modify the city permit. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until actual compliance is obtained. After development is complete, the code compliance officer or city arborist shall continue to make random inspections to ensure that required trees are maintained. Replacement shall be required or bond/letter of credit posted within 30 days of notice by the administrator should any of these trees die, be removed or be destroyed within two years after completion of development. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-215. - Enforcement; appeals and variances. 
(a)  Enforcement. The code compliance officer shall be primarily responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. All requests for approval letters and all applications for tree removal shall be submitted to and reviewed by the city. 
(b)  Appeals. Requests for appeal of any administrative decision must be submitted to the city clerk in writing within 30 days of the date of such decision. Such written appeal shall be made in the form of a letter, which outlines the grounds of the appeal. 
The appeal shall be heard by the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Variances. Requests for the variance of the strict requirements of this article may be granted by the mayor and city council when the following conditions are found to exist: 
(1)  The strict enforcement of this article will result in an unreasonable hardship not of the applicant's own making; and 
(2)  The grant of the variance will not compromise the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Hearings. Public hearings before the mayor and city council shall be held for appeals and variance requests. The hearing shall be recorded. The applicant shall be given notice of the time and place of the hearing, and the opportunity to present his or her request. Interested parties may also be allowed to address the mayor and council, but in all cases, the applicant shall be allowed equal time to opponents of the application and the opportunity to cross-examine the opposing speakers. 
(e)  Appeal to the Superior Court. Decisions on appeal and variance requests may be appealed to the Superior Court of the county in which the subject property lies within 30 days of the mayor and city council's decision. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-216. - Tree conservation. 
Every property owner or occupant shall be responsible for the normal care of trees located on such property. Willful injury or disfigurement of any tree growing within the city shall be a violation of this article. No person shall: 
(1)  Attach any sign, notice or other object to any tree or fasten any wires, cables, nails or screws to any tree in a manner that could prove harmful to the tree, except as necessary in conjunction with activities in the public interest. 
(2)  Pour any material on any tree or on nearby ground which could be harmful to the tree. 
(3)  Cause or encourage any unnecessary fire or burning near or around any tree. 
(4)  Construct a concrete, asphalt or brick pavement, significantly compact the soil, place fill material, or create other impervious surfaces around any tree so as to cut off air, light or water from the roots of the tree, so as to adversely impact the tree's root system. 
(5)  Pile building material or equipment around any tree so as to cause injury thereto. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-217. - Applicability of article provisions. 
The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to all property within the corporate limits. The terms and provisions of this article shall be consistent with any requirements imposed by state law. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-218. - Nonliability of city. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impose any liability on the city or upon any of its officers or employees, or to relieve the owner and occupant of any private property from the duty to keep trees and shrubs upon private property or under his control in a safe condition. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Sec. 105-219. - Penalties for violation of article; stop work order 
(a)  A violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or a sentence of up to 30 days incarceration per day, per occurrence. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy any violations. Replacement shall also be required as provided herein. 
(b)  Upon notice from the code compliance officer, work on any development that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall immediately cease. The stop work notice shall be in writing and shall go to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. When an emergency exists, the code compliance officer shall not be required to give written notice prior to stopping the work. Further, if work on any development is being done contrary to the provisions of this article, the code compliance officer may revoke any permit previously issued by the city pertaining to the activity for which the building permit has been issued, and may refuse to issue any further permit, until at the discretion of the code compliance officer, the work on the development is brought into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
Secs. 105-220—105-300. - Reserved. 
Appendix A. - Recommended Tree List 
APPENDIX A. RECOMMENDED TREE LIST 
(a)  Recommended Species List of Overstory Trees: 

 
(b)  Recommended Species List of Understory Trees: 

 
** Indicates species suitable for screening and buffers. 
( Ord. No. 323-16, § 1, 4-25-2016 ) 
ARTICLE V. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 105-301. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city separate storm sewer system; and, 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-302. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-303. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-304. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-305. - Responsibility for administration. 
The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-306. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Accidental discharge" means a discharge prohibited by this article that occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
"City separate storm sewer system" means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads, streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
"Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
"Construction activity" means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
"Illegal connection" means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain, ditch or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
"Illicit discharge" means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as expressly exempted by this article. 
"Industrial activity" means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit" means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
"Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
"Person" means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
"Pollutant" means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
"Pollution" means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
"Premises" mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
"State waters" means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
"Stormwater runoff" or "stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
"Structural stormwater control" means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 105-307. - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the (municipal/county) separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-308. - Prohibition of illegal connections. 
The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the City of Mountain Park and Fulton County. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-309. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-310. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility are a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-311. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or Waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-312. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement pursuant to section 105-316 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-313. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the code enforcement officer of the city finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the code enforcement officer may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-314. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the code enforcement officer. The notice of appeal must be filed with the city clerk within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Mountain Park City Council shall take place at the next regularly scheduled meeting after the filing of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final, and may be judicially reviewed by certiorari to the Superior Court of the county in which the violation occurred, pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-315. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within two days of the decision of the city council upholding the decision of the code enforcement officer, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-316. - Costs of abatement of the violation. 
Within ten days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within ten days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall became a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-317. - Civil penalties. 
In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate, after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-318. - Criminal penalties. 
Whenever an intentional violation of this article has been committed, the code enforcement officer may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in city municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-319. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Sec. 105-320. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. 
The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 282-05, 11-21-2005) 
Secs. 105-321—105-349. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION 

Sec. 105-350. - Purposes. 
(a)  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(b)  To promote flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(c)  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(d)  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(e)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(f)  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(g)  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(h)  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(i)  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(j)  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(k)  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(l)  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(Ord. No. 286-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-351. - General regulations. 
(a)  Applicability of regulations. This conservation subdivision article shall apply only to residentially zoned areas annexed into the city after the effective date of this article. Applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. Nothing in this article shall require a property owner to develop a property as a conservation subdivision under this article. 
(b)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(c)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: 
(1)  Calculation: The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The 100-year floodplain; 
c.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or, 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
(2)  Yield plan: The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 286-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-352. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, Applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall included the following features: 
(1)  Property boundaries; 
(2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
(4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in section 105-353 of this article; 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics; 
(6)  General soil types; 
(7)  The planned location of protected open space; 
(8)  Existing roads and structures; and, 
(9)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(b)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in section 105-353, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(c)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in section 105-353, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(d)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying boning and the [subdivision code]. 
(Ord. No. 286-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-353. - Open space. 
(a)  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(b)  Standards to determine open space. 
(1)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
(2)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
a.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Buffer zones of at least 75-foot width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and, 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(3)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible. 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and, 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(4)  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(5)  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
(6)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(c)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
(1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(3)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(4)  Passive recreation areas; 
(5)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(6)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(7)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(8)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(9)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
(1)  Golf courses; 
(2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted Best Management Practices; and, 
(4)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(e)  Ownership and management of open space. 
(1)  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a Homeowners Association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a Homeowners Association is the owner, the Homeowners' Association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(2)  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the mayor and city council; and, 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
(3)  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, [the jurisdiction] may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, Homeowner's Association, or to the individual property owners that make up the Homeowner's Association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(f)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
(1)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
1.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
2.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this article. 
If the entity accepting the easement is not [the jurisdiction], then a third right of enforcement favoring [the jurisdiction] shall be included in the easement; 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or, 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by [the jurisdiction]. 
(2)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. No. 286-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-354. - [Effective date.] 
The public welfare demanding, this article shall become effective immediately following approval by the Mayor and Council of the City of Mountain Park. 
(Ord. No. 286-06, 1-23-2006) 
Secs. 105-355—105-359. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 105-360. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and, 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Ord. No. 285-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-361. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all public and private property within the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 285-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-362. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 285-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-363. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 285-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-364. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Litter" means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A., § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
"Public or private property" means the right of way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Ord. No. 285-06, 1-23-2006) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 105-365. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city or any waters in this city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or, 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare and all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Notwithstanding paragraph (a), when such property or waters is a construction site, construction site operators must control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. "Control waste" means to properly contain and dispose of waste. Loose construction debris (e.g., packing materials, scraps of lumber, etc.) shall be promptly contained and removed from the site and properly disposed of. 
(Ord. No. 285-06, 1-23-2006; Ord. No. 327-18, § 1, 3-26-2018 ) 
Sec. 105-366. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. This shall require at a minimum covering any waste load with a tarp. 
(Ord. No. 285-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-367. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials authorized to operate with the city, including the code enforcement officer of the city, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 285-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-368. - Evidence. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 285-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-369. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and 
(3)  a.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and, 
(4)  The court may cause to be published, at the convicted violator's expense, the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(Ord. No. 285-06, 1-23-2006) 
ARTICLE VIII. - STREAM BUFFER 

Sec. 105-370. - Purposes. 
It is the purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of Mountain Park for the protection of water resources; and, 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-371. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Buffer" means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area lying adjacent to the stream. 
"Impervious cover" means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
"Land development" means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
"Land development activity" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
"Land disturbance" means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
"Land disturbance activity" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
"Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
"Parcel" means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
"Permit" means the permit issued by the City of Mountain Park required for undertaking any land development activity 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
"Protection area, or stream protection area" means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
"Riparian" means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
"Setback" means, with respect to a stream, the area established by Section 5.1.2 extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
"Stream" means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city council may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
"Stream bank" means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
"Stream channel" means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
"Watershed" means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 105-372. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements does not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-373. - Grandfather provisions. 
This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. 
(2)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-374. - Exemptions. 
The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
• A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
• Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
• Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
• Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
• Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
• Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in section 105-374(1). 
(3)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
(4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city clerk on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the code enforcement officer to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(7)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources' guidance document entitled Minor Land-Disturbing Activities and dated September 2009 is hereby incorporated by reference and shall govern which land-disturbing activities qualify as minor for the purpose of this exemption, provided that whenever that guidance document limits an activity or structure to a certain maximum square footage, that figure shall be the maximum allowable under the state and city's combined 50-foot undisturbed buffer in order to qualify as an exempt minor land-disturbing activity. 
After the effective date of this article, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006; Ord. No. 312-11, § 2, 12-21-2011) 
Sec. 105-375. - Buffer and setback requirements. 
All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream, measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-376. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this article, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the city council finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the city council may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the city council shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the city council. The variance applicant shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within city. The applicant shall post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
(b)  Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
(1)  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
(2)  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the article would create an extreme hardship. 
(c)  A variance request shall include the following information: 
(1)  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
(2)  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(3)  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
(4)  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
(5)  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
(6)  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
(7)  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and, 
(8)  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(d)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
(1)  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(2)  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
(3)  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and, 
(4)  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
(5)  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
(6)  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-377. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-378. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks under this article must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and, 
(3)  Any other documentation that the (review and permitting authority) may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-379. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-380. - Inspection. 
The city may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city and its code enforcement officer or authorized representative in making such inspections. The city and its code enforcement officer or authorized representative shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as may reasonably be deemed necessary to carry out the provisions of this article, and to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-381. - Violations, enforcement and remedies. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-382. - Notice of violation. 
If the code enforcement officer or authorized representative determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, a written notice of violation shall be issued to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the property owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-383. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the code enforcement officer or authorized representative shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city or code enforcement officer or authorized representative may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The code enforcement officer or authorized representative may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city council may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as the city council may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days or such greater period as the code enforcement officer or authorized representative shall deem appropriate (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city council may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional violations of this article, the code enforcement officer or authorized representative may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the Municipal Court of the City of Mountain Park to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-384. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the code enforcement officer or authorized personnel may appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the city council and shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council at a regularly scheduled public meeting within 40 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city council, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of the county in which the subject property is located. Such appeal shall be by writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-385. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or invalidate the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 284-06, 1-23-2006) 
Secs. 105-386—105-389. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 105-390. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and, 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-391. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempted by this article. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city council to be a hotspot land use; or, 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items (1) and (2) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-392. - Designation of article administrator. 
The code enforcement officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-393. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-394. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-395. - Stormwater design manual. 
The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-396. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Applicant" means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
"Channel" means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
"Conservation easement" means an agreement between a land owner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
"Detention" means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
"Detention facility" means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
"Developer" means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
"Development" means a land development or land development project. 
"Drainage easement" means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
"Erosion and sedimentation control plan" means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
"Extended detention" means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
"Extreme flood protection" means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
"Flooding" means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
"Greenspace" or "open space" means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
"Hotspot" means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
"Hydrologic soil group (HSG)" means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
"Impervious cover" means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
"Industrial stormwater permit" means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
"Infiltration" means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
"Jurisdictional wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
"Land development" means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
"Land development activities" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. "Land development project" means a discrete land development undertaking. 
"Inspection and maintenance agreement" means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
"New development" means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
"Nonpoint source pollution" means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
"Nonstructural stormwater management practice" or "nonstructural practice" means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
"Off-site facility" means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
"On-site facility" means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
"Overbank flood protection" means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the 2-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
"Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
"Permit" means the permit issued by the (local permitting authority) to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
"Person" means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
"Post-development" refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
"Pre-development" refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
"Project" means a land development project. 
"Redevelopment" means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
"Regional stormwater management facility" or "regional facility" means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
"Runoff" means stormwater runoff. 
"Site" means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
"Stormwater better site design" means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
"Stormwater management" means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
"Stormwater management facility" means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
"Stormwater management measure" means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
"Stormwater management plan" means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
"Stormwater management system" means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
"Stormwater retrofit" means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
"Stormwater runoff" means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
"Structural stormwater control" means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
"Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 105-397. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond, if applicable; and, 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-398 - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer meet with the code enforcement officer or authorized personnel for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting should take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum; existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
Local watershed plans and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-399. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria in this article. 
This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and be prepared under the direct supervisory control of either a registered professional engineer or a registered landscape architect licensed in the State of Georgia. Section (3), (4), (5), and (6) shall be prepared under the direct supervisory control of a registered professional engineer, who shall seal and sign the work. Portions of the overall plan may be prepared and stamped by a registered land surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia as appropriate, such as boundary surveys, contour maps, erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in this article; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in this article must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in subsection (4); drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act (or reference to the local Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance) or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice. 
(12)  The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006; Ord. No. 301-09, § 1, 8-17-2009) 
Sec. 105-400. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in this article. 
The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-401. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a land disturbance permit subject to the requirements of this article that is complete with all attachments required by this article, the city shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(b)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same. 
(c)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city shall issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the (local permitting authority); and, 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-402. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city council and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-403. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(b)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city council that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-404. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the (local permitting authority) are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  24-hour extended detention storage of the 1-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the 1-year, 24-hour storm is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the 2-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24 hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from (local permitting authority) before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required by this article. The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and, 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-405. - Construction inspections. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the code enforcement officer or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and, 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the code enforcement officer or authorized personnel is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-406. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may correct the violation as provided in this article. 
Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the code enforcement officer or authorized personnel to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when there is a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city. 
(d)  If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Sec. 105-407. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)  If the code enforcement officer or authorized personnel determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, a written notice of violation shall be issued to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(c)  In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the code enforcement officer or authorized personnel shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The code enforcement officer or authorized personnel may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city council may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as the council may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the code enforcement officer or authorized personnel shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city council may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. The code enforcement officer or authorized personnel may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the Municipal Court of Mountain Park to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 287-06, 1-23-2006) 
Chapter 109 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 62; buildings and building regulations, ch. 101; environment, ch. 105; stormwater management, § 105-141 et seq.; zoning, ch. 117. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 109-1—109-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, adopted Oct. 24, 2011, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 109-31—109-42, 109-61—109-68, 109-91—109-100, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 201, Arts. 1—6, adopted May 29, 1996. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 109-31. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-32. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the City of Mountain Park 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-33. - Designation of article administrator. 
The city's code enforcement officer shall by the floodplain administrator appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article, unless the city council by resolution designates another officer, person or entity to serve as floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-34. - Basis for area of special flood hazard—Flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of this article, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The Flood Insurance Rate Map, Fulton County, dated June 18, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Mountain Park; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the City of Mountain Park. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Mountain Park or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authorized by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the City of Mountain Park 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIRM, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at Mountain Park City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-35. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-36. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Mountain Park or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision made there under. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-37. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of an action or decision of the floodplain administrator taken under this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1—30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other flood prone areas as referenced in section 109-34. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the date of the adoption of this article or amendments thereto. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced after the date of adoption of this article or amendments thereto and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Mountain Park to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and, 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, and also includes gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a 10-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the city's building inspector or code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a property, structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Secs. 109-38—109-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 109-41. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City of Mountain Park a permit application on a form provided by the City of Mountain Park for that purpose. 
(c)  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-42. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 109-62(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 109-61(5). 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre-and post development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-43. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the floodplain administrator a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-44. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the floodplain administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of subsections (4) and (5); 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
(6)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the floodplain administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and, 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in City Hall and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-45. - Variances and appeals. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the City of Mountain Park or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall review the request and make a written recommendation on the request to the construction board of appeals, who shall hold a public meeting at which the applicant, interested citizens and the floodplain administrator shall be allowed to comment. The floodplain administrator shall provide written notice of the variance request and the date, time and location of the construction board of appeals meeting at which the request shall be considered to the owners of record of the properties adjacent to the subject property, as shown by the records of the county tax assessor. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 14 days prior to the public meeting. The floodplain administrator shall also post a sign on the subject property giving notice of the variance request and the date, time and location of the construction board of appeals meeting at least 14 days prior to the date of the meeting. At the public meeting, the construction board of appeals shall consider the information presented by the applicant, the floodplain administrator, and any interested citizen. The construction board of appeals shall vote on whether the variance request should be granted or denied, and shall issue a written decision stating the grounds for the decision. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the floodplain administrator shall have the right to appeal such decision to the construction board of appeals, who shall consider such appeal at a public meeting after providing notice and an opportunity to be heard to all affected parties. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the construction board of appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of county in which the affected property lies in the manner provided by Section 5-4-1 et seq., of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the floodplain administrator and construction board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the floodplain administrator and construction board of appeals shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the construction board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as its deems necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(12)  Applicants for variances or appeals shall pay a fee in an amount set from time to time by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Secs. 109-46—109-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 109-51. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the City of Mountain Park. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the City of Mountain Park then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Mountain Park 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-52. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the City of Mountain Park. If floodway data is not available from the City of Mountain Park then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Mountain Park 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-53. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or, 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under (a) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 109-54; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City of Mountain using the Community Consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-54. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 109-63 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the City of Mountain prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the City of Mountain Park. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-55. - Floodway encroachments. 
Areas designated as floodway are located within areas of special flood hazard. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the City of Mountain Park until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the City of Mountain Park. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-56. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The floodplain administrator may order the property owner at the property owner's cost to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Secs. 109-57—109-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 109-61. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or non-residential) shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 109-53, 109-54 and 109-55 have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings—All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "Lowest Floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; and, 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(11)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-62. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
The following provisions, in addition to those in section 109-61, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 109-53, 109-54 and 109-55 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 109-53, 109-54 and 109-55 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 109-61(5). 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 109-61(5). 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 109-53, 109-54 and 109-55 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 109-53, 109-54 and 109-55 may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered Professional Engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain administrator. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1—30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the floodplain administrator to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain administrator 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with section 109-61(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings—Substantial improvements (section 109-62(1)b.), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-63. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings: For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Non-residential buildings: For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-64. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the floodplain administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with section 109-61(5). 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-65. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-Zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 109-61(5). 
(2)  Substantial improvements of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and, 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-66. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 109-42. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(f)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of law and city code to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Secs. 109-67—109-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 109-71. - Violations of article, plans or permits subject to enforcement. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-72. - Notice of violation. 
If the floodplain administrator determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the construction board of appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 109-73. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the floodplain administrator shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the floodplain administrator may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order: The floodplain administrator may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy: The city's building official may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit: The city's building official may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the building official may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties: In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the floodplain administrator shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the floodplain administrator or building official has taken one or more of the actions described above, the floodplain administrator may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties: For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the floodplain administrator may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 309-11, § 1, 10-24-2011) 
Chapter 113 - NUISANCES AND HAZARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6; solid waste, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 62; buildings and building regulations, ch. 101; environment, ch. 105; zoning, ch. 117; collection of garbage, debris and derelict vehicles, § 117-10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 113-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything within the city that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 113-2. - Enumeration. 
(a)  The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
(b)  The following are declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the city. 
(2)  Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors, the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood. 
(3)  Discharging of offensive matter. The placing, throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)  Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. 
(5)  Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, as published and used by the United States Geological Survey, shall be the standard for such grading; and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(6)  Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  Nonconforming structures and machines. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or city ordinance. 
(8)  Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
(9)  Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. 
(10)  Depositing trash, garbage and refuse on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, junk or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the city or which unreasonably annoys others. 
(11)  Unoccupied buildings. Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed. 
(12)  Unsafe vehicles, machinery and equipment. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more, except in licensed junkyards. The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junk. 
(13)  Gutters or spouts. Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-1) 
Sec. 113-3. - Prohibited generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-6) 
Sec. 113-4. - Issuance of summons for abatement. 
Whenever any nuisance exists within the city, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the city that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the city, and the owner or other responsible person refuses or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate the nuisance, the chief of police, or the officer having responsibility for enforcement of this article, may issue a summons and cause the summons to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts of ordinances claimed to be violated, and requiring such person to appear before the municipal judge at a time, date and place specified in the summons, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-3) 
Sec. 113-5. - Order for abatement. 
(a)  If the municipal judge at the hearing required by section 113-4 shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code or the ordinances of the city is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his order and judgment so finding and shall order the property owner or other responsible person to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated, including but not limited to rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property owner or other responsible person shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the city shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever actions deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition; and the expense shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for city taxes. 
(b)  Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of city taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall be the same as in the case of city taxes. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-4) 
State Law reference— Authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 113-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 261-03, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 2003, repealed § 113-6, which pertained to special provisions for old, unused, stripped, junked automobiles. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
Sec. 113-7. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in sections 113-4 and 113-5. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-5) 
Sec. 113-8. - Service on nonresidents and others. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the city to proceed under sections 113-4 and 113-5 and the owner of the property or other responsible person resides outside the city limits, or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 113-5 shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved, and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the city once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to the hearing. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the city limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
Sec. 113-9. - Other powers preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his order. 
Secs. 113-10—113-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Noises in parks, § 42-5. 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler that causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 113-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm means any fire, burglary, motor vehicle or civil defense alarm, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Demolition means any dismantling or intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private rights-of-way services, or similar property. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention. 
Emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle belonging to a fire department or certified private vehicle belonging to a volunteer fireman, or firefighting association, partnership or corporation, an ambulance, a motor vehicle belonging to a private security agency, or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; provided such vehicles are in use as an emergency vehicle by one authorized to use such vehicle for that purpose. 
Emergency work means any work for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Motor vehicle means a vehicle with two or more wheels, or a machine, propelled or drawn by mechanical power and used on the public roads and highways in the transportation of passengers or property, or any combination thereof, which is required to be licensed, but does not include any vehicle, locomotive or car operated exclusively on rails. 
Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Noise disturbance means any sound which: 
(1)  Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; 
(2)  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or 
(3)  Endangers or damages personal or real property. 
Noise-sensitive area means an area where a school, hospital, nursing home, church, court or public library is located within 1,000 linear feet of the source of such noise. 
Powered model vehicles means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a government entity. 
Real property line means a line along the surface, and its vertical plane extension, which separates the real property owned, rented or leased by one person from that owned, rented or leased by another person, excluding intrabuilding real property division. 
Residential area means an area classified as RS-220, RS-150, RS-75, RM or M by the city's zoning ordinance. 
Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity, or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal or interval forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
(Ord No. 214A-97, § 1, 4-21-1997) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 113-42. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise that unreasonably or unnecessarily annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city. 
(Ord No. 214A-97, § 2, 4-21-1997) 
Sec. 113-43. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or for the purpose of emergency work. 
(2)  Organized school-related programs, activities, events, or parades or other public programs, activities or events authorized by the city council. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses that are noncommercial in character. 
(Ord No. 214A-97, §§ 2, 7, 4-21-1997) 
Sec. 113-44. - Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals and warning devices. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or responding to an emergency. 
(3)  Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work requited to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(4)  Applications for other exemptions should be filed with the city clerk for approval by the mayor, and should state the time, date, organization and reason for the request. 
Sec. 113-45. - Enumeration. 
The acts contained in this article, among others, shall constitute a violation of this article; but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(1)  Air conditioners. The maintenance of any refrigeration machinery or air conditioning, consisting of air compressors or rotating or reciprocating machinery, in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary shall be a violation of this article. 
(2)  Construction or repairing of buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, or demolition work on weekdays between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary, except for emergency work of public service utilities or by special variance. No home construction shall be allowed on Saturday or Sunday except for construction between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 101. 
(3)  Domestic animals. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or keeping an animal to allow that animal to continuously (exceeding 15 minutes in duration, or greater than five minutes between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.) or repeatedly (consisting of 15 minutes over the course of one hour) howl, bark, whine or make other loud noises plainly audible from inside any adjacent or nearby residential structure owned by any person other than the animal owner. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6. 
(4)  Domestic power tools. It shall be a violation of this article to operate or permit the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawnmower, or other similar device used outdoors, other than powered snow removal equipment, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or on Saturday or Sunday before the hour of 9:00 a.m. 
(5)  Emergency signaling devices. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to intentionally sound or permit the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar, or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing. Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall occur at the same time of day each time such a test is performed, but not before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed 60 seconds. Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling and the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. In no case shall such test exceed ten minutes. Further, it shall be unlawful to sound or permit the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is automatically terminated within two minutes of activation. 
(6)  Horns; signaling devices. It shall be unlawful to sound any horn or other auditory signaling device on or in any motor vehicle on any public right-of-way or public space, except as a warning of danger. 
(7)  Explosives, firearms, or similar devices. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or fire any explosives, firearms, or similar devices which create impulsive sound so as to cause a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or on a public space or right-of-way, without first obtaining a special variance. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
(8)  Loading; unloading; opening boxes. It shall be unlawful for any person to load, unload, open or close boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. 
(9)  Loudspeakers; amplifiers. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate, or permit the operation of any loudspeaker, public address system, mobile sound vehicle or similar device amplifying sound therefrom on a public right-of-way or public space for any commercial purpose. Further, it shall be unlawful to use, operate, or permit for any noncommercial purposes any loudspeaker, public address system, mobile sound vehicle, or similar device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends. 
(10)  Powered model vehicles. The operation of, or permitting the operation of, a powered model vehicle so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary in a public space between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends, shall be a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(11)  Radios phonographs, musical instruments and similar devices. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, play, or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device: 
a.  Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary, except as allowed by permit issued by the mayor and city council; or 
b.  In such a manner as to create a continuing noise disturbance at 50 feet from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space. 
(12)  Vehicle repair in residential areas. The repairing, rebuilding, or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor bicycle or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary in any residential district. 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 
(13)  Motorcycles, go-carts, off-road vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorcycle, go-cart, personal watercraft, dune buggy, or motorized off-road vehicle in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary in any residential district. For purposes of this section, the term "personal watercraft" means a vessel less than 16 feet in length which: 
a.  Has an outboard motor or which has an inboard motor which uses an internal combustion engine powering a water jet pump as its primary source of motive propulsion; 
b.  Is designed with the concept that the operator and passenger ride on the outside surfaces of the vessel as opposed to riding inside the vessel; and 
c.  Has the probability that the operator and passenger may, in the normal course of use, fall overboard. 
Such term includes, without limitation, any vessel where the operator and passenger ride on the outside surfaces of the vessel, even if the primary source of motive propulsion is a propeller, and any vessels commonly known as a jet ski as defined in O.C.G.A. § 57-7-8.2. 
(Ord. No. 214A-97, § 3, 4-21-1997; Ord. No. 230-99, § 1, 11-22-1999; Ord. No. 242-01, § 1, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 291-06, 5-15-2006; Ord. No. 322-15, § 1, 12-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 113-46. - Inspections. 
The code compliance officer, in addition to any other authority vested in such officer, has the power, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter and inspect any single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, building, structure or premises within the city as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article, provided permission is obtained from the occupant or, in the case of unoccupied property, from the owner or the owner's agent. If such permission is refused, or is otherwise unobtainable, a search warrant must be obtained upon the showing of probable cause to believe that a violation of this article may exist, before such entry or inspection is made. 
(Ord. No. 214A-97, § 4, 4-21-1997) 
Sec. 113-47. - Citation procedure. 
Whenever any city resident shall complain to the city as to a violation of this article, the code compliance officer, or, on weekends or after normal working hours, the police, prior to the issuance of a citation, shall notify the alleged violator that a complaint has been received. If the notice given to the alleged violator is ineffective, then the code compliance officer or police officer shall issue a formal warning to the alleged violator that the alleged violator shall take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the violation. If the warning given to the alleged violator is ineffective, a citation shall be issued to the alleged violator. 
(Ord. No. 214A-97, § 6, 4-21-1997; Ord. No. 242-01, § 2, 5-21-2001) 
Secs. 113-48—113-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL VARIANCES 

Sec. 113-71. - Authority to grant. 
The city council shall have the authority, consistent with the provisions of this article, to grant special variances from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 214A-97, § 5(a), 4-21-1997) 
Sec. 113-72. - Application. 
(a)  Any person seeking a special variance pursuant to this division shall file an application with the city clerk. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound into compliance with this article would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. 
(b)  Notice of an application for a special variance shall be given by the city clerk to persons who frequent the area of the sound or activity and who may be adversely affected by the granting of the variance. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the special variance may file a statement with the city clerk containing information to support such individual's claim. 
(Ord. No. 214A-97, § 5(b), 4-21-1997) 
Sec. 113-73. - Consideration of application. 
(a)  In determining whether to grant or deny the application for a special variance under this division, the city council shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community, and other persons of not granting the special variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse impact of granting the special variance. 
(b)  Applicants for such special variances may be required to submit any information the city clerk may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the city council shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the special variance. 
(Ord. No. 214A-97, § 5(c), 4-21-1997) 
Sec. 113-74. - Manner and scope of grant. 
Special variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. The special variance shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 214A-97, § 5(d), 4-21-1997) 
Sec. 113-75. - Termination. 
Noncompliance with any condition of the special variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this article regulating the source of sound or activity for which the special variance was granted. 
(Ord. No. 214A-97, § 5(d), 4-21-1997) 
Sec. 113-76. - Modification of permit. 
Application for extension of time limits specified in special variances issued under this division or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial special variances. 
(Ord. No. 214A-97, § 5(e), 4-21-1997) 
Sec. 113-77. - Guidelines. 
The city council may issue guidelines approved by city council defining the procedures to be followed in applying for a special variance and the criteria to be considered in deciding whether or not to grant a special variance. 
(Ord. No. 214A-97, § 5(f), 4-21-1997) 
Sec. 113-78. - Stay of enforcement. 
Enforcement of this article shall be stayed as to any person filing an application for a special variance pursuant to this division until such time as the application is acted upon by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 214A-97, § 5(g), 4-21-1997) 
Secs. 113-79—113-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 113-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer which: 
(1)  Has been left by the owner or some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman, or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of 30 days after the time agreed upon; or within 30 days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer, repairman, or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within 30 days after the completion of necessary repairs; 
(2)  Is left unattended on a public street, road, highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(3)  Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone having made claim to the vehicle; 
(4)  Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without the owner having made claim to the vehicle; or 
(5)  Has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim to the vehicle. 
Motor vehicle or vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer. 
Owner means the owner, lessor, lessee, security interest holders and all lienholders as shown on the records of the state department of revenue. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-14(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. 
Sec. 113-112. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise, to store or deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, any abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-14(b)) 
Sec. 113-113. - Removal. 
(a)  Required. Any abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle shall be removed upon ten days' written notice to the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the motor vehicle is stored or deposited, or to the owner thereof if the identity of such owner of the motor vehicle can be ascertained through license plates or otherwise. If such motor vehicle is not removed after ten days' written notice, the police department shall remove or cause the removal and sale of such vehicle at the cost of the owner or occupant of the premises or the owner of such motor vehicle, if such owner can be ascertained. Sale shall be made to the highest of two bids obtained from dealers in such property. 
(b)  Notice to owner and state. 
(1)  Any person who removes a motor vehicle from public or private property at the request of someone other than the owner, or who stores any motor vehicle which has been left unattended, shall seek the identity of the owner of such vehicle and shall, within 15 days of the day such vehicle became an abandoned motor vehicle, give notice in writing to the state department of revenue and the state bureau of investigation, stating the manufacturer's vehicle identification number, the license number, the fact that such vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle and the present location of such vehicle, and requesting the name and address of all owners, lessors, lessees, security interest holders and lienholders of such vehicle. If a person removing or storing the vehicle has knowledge of facts which reasonably indicate that the vehicle is registered or titled in a certain state other than this state, he shall check the motor vehicle records of the other state in an attempt to ascertain the identity of the owner of the vehicle. 
(2)  Upon ascertaining the owner of such motor vehicle, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall, within three days, by certified or registered mail, notify the owner, lessors, lessees, security interest holders and lienholders of the location of such vehicle and of the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(3)  If the identity of the owner of such motor vehicle cannot be ascertained, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall place an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such vehicle was obtained or, if there is no newspaper in the county, shall post such advertisement at the county courthouse in such place where other public notices are posted. Such advertisement shall run in the newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks or shall remain posted at the courthouse for two consecutive weeks. The advertisement shall contain a complete description of the motor vehicle, its license and manufacturer's vehicle identification numbers, the location where such vehicle was initially left unattended by the owner, the present location of such vehicle, and the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-14(b)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2. 
Sec. 113-114. - Enclosed buildings. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any vehicle stored or kept completely within an enclosed building. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-14(c)) 
Secs. 113-115—113-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VEGETATION 

Sec. 113-151. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions. 
(a)  Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing on any lot or tract of land in the city, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the city are declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this article. 
(b)  Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this article. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county and to the original city lots. They shall not apply to undeveloped areas of unsubdivided land within the city. 
Sec. 113-152. - Height permitted. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible for its management, maintenance or upkeep, to permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a height in excess of 12 inches above the ground. 
Sec. 113-153. - Notice to abate. 
(a)  For a violation of this article, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove excess growth within seven days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, registered or certified mail or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. 
(b)  Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the U.S. mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made. 
Sec. 113-154. - Abatement by city; notice of abatement. 
(a)  Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified pursuant to the provisions of section 113-153, the city is authorized to have the contractor enter upon the property; and the contractor is authorized to enter the property, and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. The city shall issue a lot cleaning order to the contractor, who shall promptly perform the work and submit his bill to the city. The city shall inspect the work, and if satisfactory, shall approve the bill for payment and forward it to the city treasurer for payment. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment on or before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than 15 days nor later than 45 days after payment to the contractor. 
(c)  If payment under subsection (b) of this section shall not have been made on or before the date named, the city treasurer shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the municipal judge, notifying such owner to show cause before the judge at a time, place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue against the property for its approval amount. 
(d)  If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this article, the notice required of section 113-153 was given, the work was performed and the cost paid by the city and the city has not been reimbursed, execution shall issue for such amount, and shall be executed by the chief of police in the same manner as tax executions are executed. 
(e)  If the owner of the property is unknown or cannot be located, the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply; but in lieu thereof a notice shall be published once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern"; shall describe with reasonable particularity the property involved; shall provide a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation and shall notify all persons interested to show cause before the municipal judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount. In such event, subsection (a) of this section will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in rem. 
Sec. 113-155. - Remedies. 
The remedies provided in this division are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this division. Nothing in this division shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code, all ordinances, laws or regulations of the city or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance; and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
Sec. 113-156. - Award of contracts for clearing of lots by city. 
Prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, the city shall obtain bids from contractors or other qualified persons for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation not in excess of two inches in diameter, and for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation in excess of two inches but not in excess of four inches in diameter; and the mayor and council shall award a contract to the lowest and best bidder. Such contract to remain in effect during the ensuing fiscal year. 
Secs. 113-157—113-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 

Sec. 113-191. - Nuisance declared. 
A violation of any provision of this division is a nuisance. 
Sec. 113-192. - Keeping water in which mosquitoes may breed. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed unless such collection of water is so treated as to effectively prevent such breeding. 
(b)  The collection of water prohibited by subsection (a) of this section shall be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets or other similar water containers. 
Sec. 113-193. - Treatment of collections of water. 
The method of treatment of any collections of water that are specified in this section directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the health officer and may be one or more of the following: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way, or with any other material that will effectively prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, followed with thorough drying and cleaning of such containers. 
(3)  Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the health officer. 
(4)  Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven days. 
(5)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish. 
(6)  Filling and draining to the satisfaction of the health officer, his agent or accredited representative. 
(7)  Proper disposal by removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
Sec. 113-194. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding. 
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there; and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the health officer, his authorized agent or representative, shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
Sec. 113-195. - Failure to remedy conditions after notice. 
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes, within three days after due notice has been given to him, the health officer or his authorized agent is authorized to do so; and all necessary costs incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other offending person, as the case may be. 
Sec. 113-196. - Right of entry of health officer. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the health officer or his duly accredited agent under his authority, may at all reasonable times lawfully enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction. 
Chapter 117 - LAND USE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 290-06, § I, adopted April 17, 2006, amended the title of ch. 117 to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, ch. 117 was entitled, "Zoning." 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-6(10); streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; buildings and building regulations, ch. 101; environment, ch. 105; tree protection and preservation, § 105-201 et seq.; floods, ch. 109; nuisances and hazards, ch. 113. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2 

Sec. 117-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Land Use Ordinance of the City of Mountain Park." 
(Ord. No. 290-06, § I, 4-17-2006) 
Editor's note— Prior to reenactment by Ord. No. 290-06, Ord. No. 289-06, § I, adopted April 17, 2006, repealed § 117-1, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1982, § 6-5-1. 
Sec. 117-2. - Land use. 
(a)  All land within the corporate limits of the city shall be limited to single-family residential use except as otherwise permitted pursuant to this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, the words "single family" shall mean: 
(1)  A group of persons related to one another by blood or marriage and/or a group of persons unrelated by blood or marriage not exceeding four in number; and 
(2)  Residing together in the same household; and 
(3)  Having common household facilities. 
(b)  Upon application to and with consent of the mayor and council, a resident of the city may be licensed to engage in limited business or commercial activities within his home subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Business or commercial activities shall be incidental to the use of the structure for residential purposes. The term "incidental" shall mean that such activities shall be confined to 20 percent or less of the living space within the structure, and the remaining living space shall be in current and continuing occupation and use for residential purposes. 
(2)  Business or commercial activities shall be confined to the interior of the residential structure and no part of the same shall be conducted outside of the structure or in any manner visible or capable of being heard from the street or from the adjoining property. 
(3)  All parking incidental to the business or commercial activities shall be on premises. 
(4)  Business or commercial activities shall not emit noise, or odors, or result in the discharge of pollutants into the air and water or onto the land in the city. 
(c)  The following business or commercial activities are prohibited: 
(1)  Industrial, manufacturing and food-processing activities. 
(2)  Leasing, rental, assignment or subletting of residential buildings, structures or other premises within the corporate limits of the city to any person or persons on a per day, per weekend or per week basis; however, notwithstanding the length or term of such lease, rental or other similar agreement, the occupancy of such premises by more than two tenants within any 30-day period shall be deemed as prima facie evidence that such premises are being used to conduct prohibited business or commercial activities. 
(d)  All uses other than single-family residential shall be prohibited, except as expressly permitted by this ordinance. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-2; Ord. No. 289-06, § II, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 290-06, §§ II, III, 4-17-2006) 
Sec. 117-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 289-06, § III, adopted April 17, 2006, repealed § 117-3, which pertained to zoning generally and derived from Code 1982, § 6-5-3. 
Sec. 117-4. - Nonconforming uses or structures. 
Any use or structure lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this chapter, but not in conformity therewith, may continue but shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Reestablished after discontinuance for one year; 
(3)  Extended or altered except where such extension or alteration is itself in conformity with this chapter; 
(4)  Rebuilt after fire or damage exceeding its full value above the foundation for tax purposes, unless a complete application to rebuild a structure using the same footprint and having no greater non-conformity than the original structure is made within one year from the date of the loss of the original structure. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-4; Ord. No. 304-10, § I, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 117-5. - Variances. 
(a)  The mayor and council, after public notice and hearing, may, upon application by a property owner, grant variances from the restrictions of this chapter on nonconforming uses or structures. In considering an application for such a variance, the mayor and council shall not approve the same unless it is convinced that: 
(1)  Approval of the proposal is necessary to prevent undue hardship to the applicant; 
(2)  Approval of the proposal will not prejudice the rights or interests of adjoining and nearby property owners; and 
(3)  Approval of the proposal is consistent with the objectives of this chapter. 
(b)  The process for submitting an application for variance is outlined in the attachment titled, "City of Mountain Park Variance Procedure and Application." 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-5; Ord. No. 211-97, 12-16-1996) 
Editor's note— The attachment referenced above is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 117-6. - Building and lot size. 
(a)  All residential structures and buildings hereafter constructed shall have a minimum of 1,350 square feet of heated living space. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided, all residential structures and buildings hereafter constructed shall be located on a land area of not less than 12,500 square feet, possessing road frontage of not less than 100 feet. 
(c)  All residential structures and buildings hereafter constructed on property that requires or will use septic tanks shall be not less than 33,750 square feet, possessing road frontage of not less than 100 feet. 
(d)  All primary residential structures hereafter constructed shall occupy not more than 18 percent of the total land area of the subject property. 
(e)  The combined total of all accessory structures and impervious surfaces, as defined herein and excluding the primary residential structure, shall not occupy more than an additional 15 percent of the total land area of the subject property. The maximum cumulative total of all impervious development, including the primary residential structure, shall not exceed 33 percent of the total land area of the subject property. 
(f)  All residential or accessory structures hereafter constructed, or renovation of any existing structure, shall not exceed 35 feet in height. The height shall be determined by measuring from the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys and television or radio signal receiving antennae, down to a point equal to the average of the finished grade on all sides of the structure at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Modifications to the finished grade after the final building inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy, which cause the structure height to exceed 35 feet, shall be prohibited. 
(g)  Whenever a permit is requested for the construction of a single-family residence and the applicable minimum lot size is met by the property owner's ownership of two or more contiguous lots, the lots needed to meet the minimum lot size shall be combined prior to issuance of the building permit. Combination shall be accomplished by the recording of a deed and plat in the public deed records of the county and filing with the county property tax authorities. The combined lot shall not thereafter be subdivided in a manner that reduces the area of the lot on which the residence is located below the applicable minimum lot size. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-6; Ord. 210-A-96, 9-16-1996; Ord. No. 276-04, § 1, 12-20-2004; Ord. No. 289-06, § IV, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 290-06, § IV, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 325-16, § 1, 11-28-2016 ) 
Sec. 117-7. - Setbacks and side yards. 
(a)  All residential structures and buildings hereafter constructed shall be setback from the side property lines not less than 20 feet. No residential structures need be set back more than 20 feet. No residential structure need by [be] setback more than the average of the setbacks of the existing structures within 100 feet each side thereof, but in no event closer than 25 feet from the road. The minimum setback from the rear property line shall be not less than 25 feet. 
(b)  The minimum building setback requirements listed in subsection (a) of this section shall apply to all structures or buildings residential or accessory, which are permitted to be erected or constructed on a site. The distance shall be calculated from the nearest point of the structure or building, including all roof or deck overhangs, foundations, projecting elements (wall floor or roof assemblies). The minimum setback shall be measured from the structure to the nearest point on the property line or road right-of-way, but in no case shall the setback be less than 25 feet from the nearest edge of road pavement. The minimum required setbacks shall be as follows: 
Front ..... 25 feet 
Side ..... 20 feet 
Side Corner ..... 25 feet 
Rear ..... 25 feet 
(c)  The minimum building setback requirements listed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall apply to all primary residential and accessory structures, which are permitted to be built, erected or constructed on the subject property. The setback distances shall be calculated from the nearest point of the structure or building, including but not limited to, all roof or deck overhangs; foundations; projecting elements; wall, floor, or roof assemblies; or any other element of the building or structure. The minimum setback shall be measured from the building or structure to the nearest point of the property boundary line or road right-of-way, but in no case shall the setback be less than 25 feet from the nearest edge of the road pavement. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-8; Ord. No. 232-99, § 1, 11-22-1999; Ord. No. 276-04, § 2, 12-20-2004; Ord. No. 292-06, § III, 8-21-2006) 
Sec. 117-8. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  All residential structures shall have provisions for adequate off-street and out of right-of-way parking for vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the residential structure. A minimum of two passenger vehicle parking spaces shall be required for all residential structures. 
(b)  At no time shall on-street parking or parking in the right-of-way be permitted except when permission has been granted in conjunction with a temporary parking permit or a variance, and provided that in all cases sufficient road clearance is maintained to ensure unobstructed access along the right-of-way. 
(c)  Vehicles in violation of this section will be towed. Additional fines may be levied for each violation incidence, and all towing costs are the responsibility of the owner of the vehicle in violation. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-8; Ord. No. 125-A, 10-27-1998; Ord. No. 125A-98, 11-16-1998; Ord. No. 276-04, § 3, 12-20-2004; Ord. No. 294-07, § 3, 9-17-2007) 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 58-121 et seq. 
Sec. 117-9. - Privies. 
Privies or outhouses for the deposit of human excrement are declared to be a health hazard and a public nuisance and the maintenance or operation thereof is herewith forbidden. By March 1981, the use of all privies or outhouses shall cease and the same shall be dismantled and filled in and covered over. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-9) 
Sec. 117-10. - Collection and maintenance of garbage, trash, debris, derelict vehicles or equipment. 
No land within the corporate limits of the city, whether or not used for residential structures shall be used for the collection and deposit of garbage, trash, debris, derelict or currently unlicensed or uninspected vehicles or equipment. Violation of this section shall be deemed a health hazard and/or a public nuisance. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-10) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58; waste management, § 62-141 et seq.; nuisances and hazards, ch. 113. 
Sec. 117-11. - House numbers. 
(a)  All houses and buildings fronting on the various streets and alleys in the city shall be numbered under the supervision of the code compliance officer. 
(b)  Each owner or occupant of a house, or part thereof, shall apply to the city clerk for the proper number of his house or building. 
(c)  The city clerk shall keep a chart showing the proper street number of every lot in the city which shall be open to inspection by anyone interested. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every house and building in the city to have placed thereon or in a place where the house or building can be specifically identified, the street number of the house or building. The street number shall be clearly visible from the street to pedestrians and vehicles going in either direction. Any person failing to so number any house, building or other structure occupied by him, if after receiving written notice to do so from the city clerk, shall continue in his failure to so number such house, building or structure shall be fined $10.00 for each day during or on which, failure to so number continues. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-11) 
Sec. 117-12. - Structures. 
It is the intent of this chapter that there shall be but one main structure plus any permitted accessory structures on any lot used for residential purposes; also, that accessory structures shall not include living space. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-12) 
Sec. 117-13. - Enforcing officer. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the code compliance officer. This official shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary in carrying out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-13) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-121 et seq. 
Sec. 117-14. - Building permit required. 
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for the construction of any building or other structure, including accessory structures, or to store building materials, or erect temporary field offices or structures, or to commence the moving, alteration, or repair of any structure, including accessory structure, until the city has issued for such work a building permit. Application for a building permit may be made through the city clerk. The process for making application, the required supporting documentation and the approval process is defined by the attachment titled, Process for Obtaining a Building/Development Permit in the City of Mountain Park. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-11; Ord. No. 213-97, § IV, 1-21-1997) 
Editor's note— The attachment cited in section 117-14 and throughout the sections following section 117-14, is not set out in this codification, but is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 117-15. - Approval of plans and issuance of building permit. 
(a)  The city shall not approve any plans or issue a building permit for any excavation of construction until such plans have been reviewed in detail and found to be in complete conformity with the process and requirements as defined in the Process for Obtaining a Building/Development Permit in the City of Mountain Park. The application for new construction and all development permits shall include at least the following: 
(1)  Diagrams of the actual shape, proportions and dimension of the lot to be built upon at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet; 
a.  This boundary survey will also include distances to properly lines, all building setback lines, parking and driveway locations; 
b.  Existing and proposed contours at a two-foot interval; 
c.  Graphic scale and north arrow; 
(2)  Diagrams of the actual shape, proportions, location and dimension of all existing and proposed structures to be built at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet; 
(3)  Vicinity map showing site relative to nearest intersection; 
(4)  Plans must be signed and sealed by a plan preparer registered in the state of Georgia (i.e., land surveyor, engineer, landscape architect or other registered qualified plan preparer); 
(5)  Name, address and phone number of developer and owner; 
(6)  Size of project site; 
(7)  Statement from city and county tax officials that ad valorem and property taxes owed and due are paid; 
(8)  A current sewer or septic permit issued for the application property paid in full; 
(9)  A narrative defining the existing and intended use of all such buildings or other structures; and 
(10)  Diagrams of the location of erosion and sediment control practices, using uniform coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion Control in Georgia, chapter 6, with legend; 
a.  Including name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sediment control; 
b.  Certification by the plan preparer and owner that the site is not within 200 feet of state waters. If the site is within 200 feet of state waters as determined by the plan preparer or as determined by the city, the information in the Process for Obtaining a Building/Development Permit in the City of Mountain Park, plan review checklist B, will also be required. 
(b)  The building codes applicable to all construction within the city shall be those of the county, as amended from time to time. 
(c)  If the proposed excavation, construction, moving or alteration as set forth in the application, are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the building official or his/her designee shall issue a building permit accordingly. If an application for a building permit is not approved, the building official or his/her designee shall state in writing on the application the cause for such disapproval. Issuance of a building permit shall, in no case, be construed as waiving any provision of this chapter. 
(d)  Prior to issuing a building permit the applicants will have paid all fees as outlined in the attachment titled Process for Obtaining a Building Development Permit in the City of Mountain Park, as well as provided the required number of site plans and building plan as defined in the this attachment. 
(e)  Neither the approval of a submitted plan under the provision of this ordinance, nor compliance with provisions of this chapter will relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(f)  Any additions, renovations or remodeling to an existing structure will also require a building permit if: 
(1)  Proposed construction is equal to or greater than $500.00; or 
(2)  Proposed construction includes plumbing, mechanical or electrical work; 
and will be subject to the requirements defined in the attachment including approval from the county health department if obtaining a permit for construction on a septic lot. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-15; Ord. No. 213-97, § IV, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 263-03, § 1, 10-20-2003) 
Sec. 117-16. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(a)  No land or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved, or altered in its use shall be used until the officer building inspector or his/her designee shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that such land or structure or part thereof is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Within seven days after the owner or his agent has notified the building inspector or his/her designee that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the building inspector or his/her designee to make a final inspection thereof, and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the building or premises or part thereof is found to conform with the provisions of this chapter or, if such certificate is refused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-16; Ord. No. 266-03, § 1, 11-17-2003) 
Sec. 117-17. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The code compliance officer shall have the authority to take necessary actions to enforce this chapter including, but not limited to, issuance of stop work orders. The stop work order shall require that all work or construction activity be stopped. The stop work order shall state the conditions which do not conform with the requirements of this chapter, and the stop work order shall state the conditions upon which construction work may be resumed. 
(b)  Such stop work orders shall be served upon the person engaging in the nonconforming construction activity or upon the owner of the property where the construction work is occurring. Service of the stop work order may be by posting the stop work order on the site or by delivery of the stop work order in person. 
(c)  If the code compliance officer determines that nonconforming work or construction activity creates a hazard to health or life safety, or creates a hazard to the property or to adjacent property, the code compliance officer may declare that the condition is an emergency and may issue a stop work order verbally. After issuing a verbal stop work order, the code compliance officer shall issue a written stop work order describing the verbal stop work order within 24 hours. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter including, but not limited to, failure to obtain a permit or certificate of occupancy, continuing to work or construction activity without the proper inspections, failure to abide by a stop work order or failure to remedy the conditions under which a stop work order has been issued shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-11 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-17; Ord. No. 236-00, § 1, 5-5-2000; Ord. No. 263-03, § 2, 10-20-2003) 
Sec. 117-18. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined, upon conviction, not more than $300.00 and costs of court for each offense. Each day of such violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-17) 
Sec. 117-19. - Remedies. 
In case any building or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the code compliance officer or any other appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specially damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to correct or abate such violation or to prevent occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-18) 
Sec. 117-20. - Interpretation and purpose of chapter. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be considered minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the community. Where other ordinances or regulations which may be adopted impose greater restrictions than those specified in this chapter, compliance with such other ordinances or regulations is mandatory. This chapter shall not lower the restrictions of plats, deeds, or private contracts if such are greater than the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-19) 
Sec. 117-21. - Reductions in lot area. 
No lot shall be reduced in area so that yards and other open spaces total less than the minimum area required under this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-21) 
Sec. 117-22. - Corner visibility. 
(a)  No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, marquee, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of 3½ feet and 15 feet above street level shall be permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets. 
(b)  Accessory structures within 25 feet of the rear lot line of a corner lot shall be set back the minimum front yard depth required on the side street. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-22) 
Sec. 117-23. - Abatement of noise, smoke, gas, vibration, fumes, dust, fire and explosion hazard or nuisance. 
The mayor and council may require the conduct of any use, conforming or nonconforming, which results in fire, radio and television interference, or explosion hazard or nuisance to surrounding property to be modified or changed to abate such hazard to health, comfort and convenience. The mayor and council may, direct the code compliance officer to issue an abatement order, but such order may be directed only after a public hearing by the council, notice of which shall be delivered to the owners and/or occupants of the property on which the use is conducted. A hearing to consider issuance of an abatement order shall be held by the mayor and council either upon petition signed by any person affected by the hazard or nuisance, or upon the initiative of the mayor and council only upon reasonable evidence of hazard or nuisance and such order shall specify the date by which the hazard or nuisance shall be abated. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5-23) 
Sec. 117-24. - Walls and screening. 
(a)  All exposed concrete block and exposed plain concrete shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way and from adjacent properties. Screening shall be provided with fencing or with landscaping. In no event shall exposed concrete along the house foundation be greater than ten feet high, and retaining walls shall be no greater than 15 feet high. 
(b)  Fencing shall be a maximum of eight feet in height and shall be located a minimum of one foot from an interior property line and a minimum of five feet from the edge of any public pavement. In no event shall fences interfere with safe sight distances from roads or other driveways. Fencing shall be opaque wood with the attractive side of the fence facing toward the public and adjacent properties. Other materials may be approved by the city council as part of a public hearing. Chainlink or wire fencing is not allowed within front yards. Chainlink fencing in side or rear yards shall be black or brown factory coated. 
(c)  Landscape screening shall consist of evergreen species capable of completely screening within three years. At a minimum, plants shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Walls less than ten feet in height: provide evergreen species such as Nellie Stevens or Savannah Holly, six feet in height at planting, five feet on center, in a double staggered row. 
(2)  Walls ten to 15 feet in height: provide evergreen such as Cryptomeria or the hollies referenced in subsection (c)(1) of this section, seven feet in height at planting, five feet on center, in a double staggered row. In addition, provided evergreen or deciduous vines at ten feet on center. 
Other plants or screening materials may be approved by the city council, if so recommended by a reputable landscape architect or nurseryman. 
(Ord. No. 217-98, § 6-2-13, 11-16-1998; Ord. No. 306-11B, § II, 6-27-2011) 
Editor's note— Former § 101-38. 
Sec. 117-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 318-14, § 1, adopted August 25, 2014 , repealed § 117-25, which pertained to process for road abandonment and derived from Ord. No. 215-97, § 1(6-2-25), adopted May 19, 1997. 
Sec. 117-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means all other impervious improvements, which include, but are not limited to, driveways, parking areas, decks, porches, pools and gazebos. 
Chimney means any vertical structure rising above the roofline that contains a flue or passage through which smoke and gasses may escape from a fire or furnace. 
Or 
Chimney means any structure rising above the roof line that is designed solely for venting the exhaust gases created by gas-fired furnaces and appliances or through which smoke may escape from a fireplace, woodstove or similar device. 
Food processing means any method employed to bring abut a change or function of edible materials, including, but not limited to, cooking, baking, canning, freezing and preserving. 
Impervious means any impermeable or semi-impermeable surface that impedes the absorption of rainfall into the soil or causes rainfall run-off in a manner that creates accumulation and channeling of the water and creates soil erosion. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Primary structure means the main house or any part thereof located on the property. 
Subject property means the property under consideration, property for which a permit has been applied, or property that is facing legal action for building or zoning infractions. 
Zoned R-1 means single family residential structures connected to sanitary sewer. 
Zoned R-2 means single family residential structures connected to an approved septic system. 
(Ord. No. 276-04, § 3, 12-20-2004) 
Sec. 117-27. - Outside sales and yard sales. 
(a)  Outside sales are not permitted on any private lot, except as provided in this section. Yard sales (which shall include garage sales and estate sales) shall be permitted at any home within the city not more than three times per calendar year. Each such sale shall be for no more than three consecutive days, and shall be limited to Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays and to Mondays that fall on a legal holiday. All remaining property for sale must be removed from the exterior of the lot by 5:00 p.m. on the next following business day. Consignment sales are not permitted, nor is the marketing of goods owned by individuals other than the residents of the lot on which the sale is being conducted. 
(b)  The persons conducting the yard sale shall apply for and obtain a permit from the city clerk prior to the sale being conducted, and shall prominently display such permit at the property where the sale is being conducted during all sale hours. The issuance of the permit shall entitle the permit holder to post not more than five 18" × 24" directional signs on the right-of-ways of the city, provided that such signs shall not obstruct traffic flow or traffic visibility. The permit holder shall remove such signs by 5:00 p.m. on the next following business day after the expiration of the sale permit. The fee for such permit shall be set from time to time by the city council. 
[(c)]  The fee for the issuance of yard sale permits shall be $10.00. Such permit fee shall include the temporary parking permit fee provided for by section 58-128. 
(Ord. No. 307-11, §§ 1, 2, 7-25-2011) 
Sec. 117-28. - Mobile and manufactured homes prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. 
(2)  Mobile home means any structure built on a chassis and designed as a permanent residential dwelling, but which does not comply with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq., or which predates that act. 
(3)  Residential industrialized building means any dwelling unit designed and constructed in compliance with the Georgia State Minimum Standard One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in a manufacturing facility and cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Any such structure shall not contain a permanent metal chassis and shall be affixed to a permanent load-bearing foundation. The term shall not include manufactured homes as defined by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. 
(b)  No mobile home or manufactured home shall be permitted, located or installed on any property in the City of Mountain Park, either for residential purposes or for any other purpose or use. This prohibition does not apply to residential industrialized buildings, which may be built subject to the same requirements as site-built, single-family residential structures under the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 310-11, § 1, 11-28-2011) 
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES[1] 
The following franchise ordinances and resolutions have been passed by the city. As franchise provisions are classified as special or temporary for the purpose of codification, they are not set out in full in this Code. However, the city has directed that the following table be included in this Code for ease of reference: 

 
ORDINANCE 003-98  Adopted September 29, 1998 
An Ordinance to amend Ordinance No. 206 dated August 21, 1995, granting Atlanta Gas Light Company (hereafter Company) a franchise for the use of rights-of-way and other public property for the purpose of distributing gas within the City of Mountain Park, so as to modify the franchise fee calculation provisions; to repeal conflicting laws; to provide a effective date; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MOUNTAIN PARK, GEORGIA: 
SECTION 1. An ordinance dated August 21, 1995, granting Atlanta Gas Light Company a franchise for the use of rights-of-way and other public property for the purpose of distributing gas within the City of Mountain Park, is hereby amended by inserting the following: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are selected franchise ordinances and resolutions of the city. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines citations to state statutes and expression of numbers in text have been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Any right or franchise granted by the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(5); businesses, ch. 14; communications, ch. 18; taxation, ch. 54. 

Section 1. - Definitions: 
(a)  "Base Year" means the fiscal year ending September 30, 1998. 
(b)  "Base Year Franchise Fee Factor" means the total franchise fees paid during the Base Year divided by the Design Day Capacity as recorded by the Company on the last day of the Base Year. 
(c)  "Design Day Capacity" means the sum of the individual capacity of dekatherms (Dt) attributable to all firm customers located within the city limits of the City, as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. 
(d)  "Firm Customers" means all residential and business customers who purchase gas service that ordinarily is not subject to interruption or curtailment. 
(e)  "Fiscal Year" means the 12 months ending September 30, of each year. 
(f)  "Inflation Index" means the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or a successor index, for the period from September 30, 1997, to the beginning of the then current fiscal year. The percentage shall be reduced by any productivity factor adjustment for the same period determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission for the Company. 
Section 2. - Franchise Fee: 
The total dollar amount of franchise fees paid by the Company to the City shall be calculated as follows: The current Fiscal Year total franchise fee shall equal the product of the Design Day Capacity and the current franchise fee factor. The current franchise fee factor shall be equal to the product of the Base Year Franchise Fee Factor and one plus the Inflation Index expressed as a decimal to three significant digits. 
The following formula quantifies this payment: 
FFc = FFFby × (1 + (CPI - PFA)) × DDCc 
Where FFc equals total franchise fees due the city for the current Fiscal Year 
FFFby equals the Base Year Franchise Fee Factor 
CPI-PFA equals the Inflation Index based on the cumulative change in the Consumer Price Index less the productivity factor adjustment determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
DDCc equals the Design Day Capacity as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. 
FFFby equals Ffby/DDCby 
Where Ffby equals the total franchise fees paid in the Base Year 
And DDCby equals the Design Day Capacity of the Base Year. 
Section 3. - Responsibility for Payment of Franchise Fee. 
The Company as the holder of the franchise privilege hereunder is responsible for the payment of all franchise fees payable hereunder, and shall file such reports and returns as required by the franchise ordinance as modified by this Amendment. In addition, the Company shall report annually the names of all Gas marketers for which Company is transporting natural gas on the distribution system within the City. 
The franchise fee payments required hereunder shall be in lieu of any franchise fee license fee, occupation tax or other payment for use of the rights of way by the Company for the provision of gas service, but shall not prohibit imposition of a license fee or an occupation tax on gas marketers. 
Section 4. - Quarterly Payments. 
Effective for the Fiscal Year 1999, and for each Fiscal Year thereafter during the term of the franchise ordinance, the Company shall remit to the City quarterly franchise fee installments. The installments shall equal to one-fourth of the total annual franchise fee calculated in accordance with this ordinance. 
The quarterly payment is due and payable on or before the 30th day following the last day of each calendar quarter. 
Section 5. - Annual Return. 
The Company shall file a return with its first quarterly installment in each Fiscal Year showing the details of the calculation of the annual franchise fee. 
Section 6. - Delay of Inflation Adjustment. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this ordinance, any inflation adjustments shall be made to the franchise fee only when the Company changes its rates. 
Section 7. - Conflicts. 
In the event of a conflict between this ordinance and the original franchise dated August 21, 1995, this ordinance shall control. All terms, conditions and stipulations contained in such franchise ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that they do not conflict with this ordinance. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1982 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 