5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
1/246
CODE OF ORDINANCES OF HAHIRA, GEORGIA
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code.
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of The City of Hahira, Georgia,"
and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Hahira City Code."
(Code 1985, § 1-1)
Sec. 1-2. - Denitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless
inconsistent with the manifest intent of council or the context clearly requires otherwise.
Advice and consent. The term "advice and consent" of the city council means agreement of the majority of the entire council.
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.
City. The term "the city" shall mean the City of Hahira in the County of Lowndes and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise
provided.
Code. The term "Code" shall mean this Code of the City of Hahira, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of
time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege
or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or
Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the
duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the
privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time
prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
County. The term "county" or "the county" shall mean the County of Lowndes, State of Georgia.
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain
inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform
the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.
Gender. Terms importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.
Joint authority. All terms giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers, except when such terms are used to grant authority to the mayor and council.
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations,
receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or
employee.
Mayor and council. The city's governing body is the mayor and council, which may also be referred to as "the council" or "the city
council."
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
2/246
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month.
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of
Hahira" were added to such name or title.
Nontechnical and technical words. Terms and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language, but technical terms and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
construed and understood according to such meaning.
Number. Terms used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number.
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for
an oath; and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed."
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended.
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or
tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of terms as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can
be made applicable, are adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city.
Person. The term "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a
unit, as well as an individual.
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property.
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively.
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places.
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property.
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or adjacent open space, or any area available and/or
accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned.
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which,
whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such
person sleeps shall be deemed his residence.
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the city
clerk's office, which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as
determined by the city council.
Seal. The term "seal" shall mean the city seal.
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" shall mean the sheriff of Lowndes County, Georgia.
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for
the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways.
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
3/246
(a)
(b)
State. The term "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia.
Street. The term "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane,
viaduct or bridge and their approaches within the city.
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole
or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days.
Written or in writing. The terms "writing" and "in writing" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and
letters.
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year.
(Code 1985, § 1-2)
State law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words,
O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3.
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references.
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The
history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for
the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect.
(Code 1985, § 1-3)
State law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7.
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code.
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment
or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses,
sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the
Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
(Code 1985, § 1-4)
State law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3.
Sec. 1-5. - Eect of repeal or expiration of ordinance.
The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained in the ordinance, shall not affect any right
accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal
took effect or the ordinance expired.
When an ordinance that repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without
express words to that effect.
(Code 1985, § 1-9)
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not aected by Code.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
4/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the
following:
Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or
accruing before the effective date of this Code.
Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the
issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness.
Any contract or obligation assumed by the city.
Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee.
Any right or franchise granted by the city.
Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or
public way in the city.
Any appropriation ordinance.
Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term.
Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor.
Any zoning ordinance.
Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations.
Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city.
The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this
Code.
Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code.
Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city.
No such ordinance shall be construed to review any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a
subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.
(Code 1985, § 1-6)
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such
Code, shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code.
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed
chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be
excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or
omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code
and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council.
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the
section number of this Code.
If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of
the City of Hahira, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered, which section
reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired.
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
5/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
chapter number, as the case may be.
(Code 1985, § 1-10)
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code.
By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to
the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the
period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall
be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become
obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will
be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code
by their omission from reprinted pages.
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may
make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is
necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the
supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles.
Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to
accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers.
Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc.,
as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of
the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code).
Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into
the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included
in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to
insert or delete pages, or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of
the city to be misrepresented, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating
this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11.
(Code 1985, § 1-7)
State law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1.
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations.
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such a
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
6/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(c)
Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or
provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid;
Sentence such person to community service work; or
Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section.
The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders
for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The
procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in
O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq.
(Code 1985, § 1-5)
State law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty
for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and
traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments
for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of drivers
license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit
fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic
offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e).
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Municipalities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-30 et seq.; powers of municipalities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et
seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965,
O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to
counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; supplemental powers of
municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. - Administrative policy and procedures.
Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the charter and this Code, and such other
duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the mayor.
Department heads. All department heads shall:
Be immediately responsible to the city manager, mayor and council for the effective administration of their
respective department and all activities assigned thereto;
Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the city
manager, mayor and council, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public;
Submit quarterly and annual reports of the activities of their respective department to the city manager, mayor and
council;
Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all
information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the
city manager, mayor and council;
Have power, when authorized by the city manager, mayor and council, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel
regulations, all subordinates under them; and
Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments.
Departments. Each department shall cooperate with the city manager, mayor and council and every other department and
(1)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
7/246
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(3)
shall furnish, upon the direction of the city manager, mayor and council, any other department such service, labor and
materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit.
Records. All municipal records, except those which by order of a court of this state or by law are prohibited from being
open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by any citizen of the state during the hours of operation of
the administrative service hereinbelow prescribed.
Operation of administrative service. All units in the administrative service shall:
Be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays and shall be closed on Saturday, Sunday and
legal holidays designated by the council.
Make a daily deposit with the city clerk of any monies received directly from the public.
Pay out monies belonging to the city only in the manner prescribed in this Code.
(Code 1985, § 2-2)
State law reference— Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70; public and legal holidays, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1.
Sec. 2-2. - Oaths.
All officers and employees required by charter or some other provision of law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the
discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths:
"I, ____________, do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the constitution of the United States, the constitution of the State
of Georgia and the Charter and ordinances of the City of Hahira; and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties
of the office of ____________ during my continuance therein, so help me God."
(Code 1985, § 2-3)
Sec. 2-3. - Bonds.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the mayor and council may require any department head, city official or employee, before
entering upon the discharge of his duties, to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the mayor and council. Said bond
shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of said duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations
or unlawful expenditures in office. Said surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and
approved by the mayor and council. The premiums thereon shall be paid by the city.
(Code 1985, § 2-4)
Sec. 2-4. - Compensation.
Each officer and employee of the city shall receive such compensation as may be provided from time to time by resolution.
(Code 1985, § 2-5)
State law reference— Authority of governing body to fix compensation and benefits for employees and members of governing body,
O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4.
Secs. 2-5—2-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-31. - Chair.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
8/246
(a)
(b)
(a)
The mayor shall act as chair of the council and is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the
mayor shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the city council. The chair shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in
a fair manner. The chair may not introduce motions or second a motion except that the chair may introduce or second a motion to go
into executive session as authorized by section 1-11. The chair shall not vote except to break a tie.
Sec. 2-32. - Mayor pro tem.
The council shall select a mayor pro tem from the councilmembers at the beginning of each calendar year. The mayor pro
tem shall fulfill the duties of the chair if the chair is not in attendance.
If the chair and the mayor pro tem are absent and a quorum is present, the remaining councilmembers shall select a
councilmember to serve as temporary chair of the meeting until either the chair or mayor pro tem is present at the
meeting.
Sec. 2-33. - Open meetings.
All meetings of the city council shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all
times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions.
Sec. 2-34. - Organizational meeting.
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on or before the first Thursday in January. The meeting shall be called to order
by the mayor, and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members of the city council whose terms of office shall
begin the day and hour of taking the oath of office.
Sec. 2-35. - Regular meetings.
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at 7:30 p.m. on the first Thursday of each month. All regular meetings shall be held
in the courthouse. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the
general public at the regular meeting place of the council.
(Code 1985, § 2-22)
Sec. 2-36. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings.
A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the city by the chair for any reason. Other special
meetings may be called as provided in the Charter. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at
a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the
place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to
either the legal organ of the city or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member
of the city council.
Sec. 2-37. - Emergency sessions.
When emergency circumstances occur, the council may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such
meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the city or a newspaper with a general circulation at least
equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the city council as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected
to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice
given to the media.
Sec. 2-38. - Executive sessions.
Executive sessions of the city council may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
9/246
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the council is devoted in part to
matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any
such exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative
vote of the city council taken in a public meeting.
The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the councilmembers present, those voting for the executive
session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the city
clerk at the direction of the chair. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to
disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the council may
only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated or abandoned or
court proceedings have been initiated.
Sec. 2-39. - Quorum.
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the council. A quorum is a majority of all of the members of the council then
in office. It is the duty of the chair to enforce this rule. Any councilmember may raise a point of order directed to the chair if he believes
that a quorum is not present. If during the course of a meeting a councilmember leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting
cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the chair with the approval of the
councilmembers present.
Sec. 2-40. - Voting; majority.
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers present and voting at a meeting at which a
quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in these procedures, a majority shall mean more than half of the councilmembers present
excluding abstentions. Where a two-thirds majority is specified, a majority vote shall mean at least two-thirds of the councilmembers
present excluding abstentions. In the event of a tie vote, the chair shall vote to break the tie.
Sec. 2-41. - Abstentions.
A councilmember shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest that would prevent him from making a decision in a fair
and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the councilmember shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote.
Sec. 2-42. - Agenda.
The city clerk, with the advice of the chair and the councilmembers, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for
each meeting. An agenda work session shall be held by the city clerk to finalize the agenda. The chair and all
councilmembers may participate in the work session. Whenever a quorum of the council is present for an agenda work
session, the meeting shall be open to the public; and all notice and recordkeeping requirements applicable to an open
meeting must be met. The agenda shall be made available to the councilmembers at least one business day before every
council meeting.
Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. To be
considered, this request must be submitted in writing to the city clerk and received at least three business days before the
meeting.
The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the council. A new subject that requires
urgent attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a two-thirds vote of the council.
A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two
business days of the adjournment of any meeting.
Sec. 2-43. - Consent agenda.
A consent agenda may be prepared by the city clerk for the council to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any
items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and where no debate is expected may be placed on a
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
10/246
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
consent agenda.
At the appropriate time of the meeting, the chair shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a councilmember
objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the chair shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following
the reading of the consent agenda, the chair will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there
are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent.
Sec. 2-44. - Minutes.
The city clerk shall promptly record the minutes for each council meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record
of the council meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the council but in no case later
than immediately following the next regular meeting of the council. The minutes shall specify the names of
councilmembers present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the
councilmember who proposed each motion, the councilmember who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In
the case of a roll call vote, the name of each councilmember voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be
presumed that a councilmember has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed
information may be included in the minutes at the request of the council.
The council must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the council. A copy of the
minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the councilmembers at least one business day before the
following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the council at the beginning
of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by
majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chair and attested to by the city clerk.
Sec. 2-45. - Order of business.
All regular council meetings shall follow an established order of business. The order of business shall be set by the mayor and
changed from time to time.
Sec. 2-46. - Decorum.
All councilmembers must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to
the chair and not to individual councilmembers, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A
councilmember is not allowed to speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the chair. All comments made by a
councilmember shall address the motion that is being discussed.
The chair shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a councilmember believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a
point of order. A second is not required. The chair can rule on the question or he may allow the council to debate the issue
and decide the issue by majority vote.
Sec. 2-47. - Public participation.
Public participation in meetings of the city council shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members
of the public who wish to address the council must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the city
clerk at least three business days before the council meeting. These individuals will be allotted five minutes to make
their comments, and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority
vote of the council.
Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the council may allow public comment on an agenda item at
the time the item is being considered by the council. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being
debated. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may only speak once. These limits may be waived by
a majority vote of the council. Anyone wishing to speak at any council meeting must be recognized by the chair
before addressing the council.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
11/246
(3)
(4)
(a)
Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a council meeting and are exp
with the rules of decorum that are established for councilmembers. Individuals who violate any rules of the council may
order by the chair or on a point of order made by a councilmember. A majority vote of the council will rule on the point
individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chair.
Public hearings. The council may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any
subject of interest to the council. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the council or
at such other places and times as the council may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public
hearing.
Sec. 2-48. - Amendments to rules.
Any amendments to the rules of order must be submitted by a councilmember in writing to the city manager three business days
before a regular meeting of the council. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all
councilmembers. All amendments require a two-thirds vote of the council to be adopted.
Sec. 2-49. - Suspending the rules of order.
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable, and
requires a two-thirds vote of the council. Rules governing quorum, voting methods and requirements, the notification to councilmembers
of meetings, and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended.
Sec. 2-50. - Visual and sound recordings.
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings.
Secs. 2-51—2-70. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE
Sec. 2-71. - Rules of procedure.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, procedures for meetings of the city council shall follow an edition of Robert's Rules of Order,
Newly Revised, prescribed by the mayor.
(Code 1985, § 2-24)
Sec. 2-72. - Parliamentarian.
The city attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for council meetings.
Sec. 2-73. - Main motion.
In order for the council to take any official action on any subject, a councilmember must propose a main motion. A proposed main
motion will not be recognized by the chair until another councilmember agrees to second the motion. A second does not require the
councilmember seconding the motion to support the motion. A councilmember may withdraw a main motion that he has made at any
time before the council has voted on that motion.
Sec. 2-74. - Debate.
After the main motion is recognized by the chair, the council shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the
chair in a manner that is fair to all members of the council. Councilmembers may participate in the debate only when they
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
12/246
(b)
(c)
(1)
a.
b.
(2)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(3)
a.
b.
c.
(4)
a.
b.
are recognized by the chair.
During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the council take a
particular action on a motion. There are two classes of subsidiary motions: debatable subsidiary motions and undebatable
subsidiary motions. Debatable subsidiary motions consist of motions to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee,
and postpone to a time certain. Debatable subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated.
There are three undebatable subsidiary motions; limit debate, vote immediately, and lay on the table. They require a
second and cannot be debated.
Councilmembers may also introduce privileged motions. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can
be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and
motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on privileged
motions.
Sec. 2-75. - Voting; procedure.
Voting on debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions:
Debatable motions. In the case of debatable motions, the vote can be proposed in one of two ways:
If debate has been completed and no other councilmember wishes to speak, the chair can call for the vote; if
there are no objections then the chair can proceed with their vote;
If the chair calls for the vote and there is an objection, a member of the council may move to vote immediately
("move the previous question"). If this motion is seconded and approved by a two-thirds vote, debate will stop.
The chair will then read the proposed motion to the council and ask for the votes of the councilmembers.
Undebatable motions. In the case of undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is
recognized by the chair. The chair shall read the proposed motion to the council and then call for the vote.
Sec. 2-76. - Ranking of motions.
Each subsidiary and privileged motion is assigned a specific rank. A motion of higher precedence can interrupt a motion of
lower precedence. The higher motion must be decided before the council returns to consider the motion of lower
precedence.
A main motion has the lowest rank and does not take precedence over any other motion. A motion to adjourn has the
highest rank and will take precedence over all other subsidiary and privileged motions. The order of precedence of
motions shall be in accordance with this section. Motions at the bottom of the following list take precedence over motions
at the top of the list.
Main motion (lowest rank).
Subsidiary motions (debatable):
Postpone indefinitely.
Amend.
Refer to committee (commit).
Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely).
Subsidiary motions (undebatable):
Limit debate or extend limits.
Vote immediately (previous question).
Lay on the table (postpone temporarily).
Privileged motions (undebatable):
Question of privilege.
Recess.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
13/246
c.
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Adjourn (highest rank).
Sec. 2-77. - Subsidiary motions.
During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce motions that propose that the council take a particular action on a
main motion. These motions are called subsidiary motions, and they allow a council to reach a conclusion on the main motion. Subsidiary
motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. Three subsidiary motions—amend, limit debate and vote immediately
—also may apply to other subsidiary motions.
Postpone indefinitely. If a councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered by the council,
that councilmember may move to postpone the consideration of the main motions indefinitely. If the motion is
successful, consideration of the main motion stops and the main motion is tabled. A motion to postpone indefinitely
may be debated, but it cannot be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass.
Amend. If a councilmember believes that a main motion that is on the table should be changed in order to make it
more acceptable, he can move to amend the motion.
Amendments must be closely related to the original motion and must not change the nature of the motion that
they amend.
Motions to refer, amend, postpone to a time certain and the motion to recess can also be amended.
A motion cannot be amended more than two times.
Debate is allowed on a motion to amend only if the original motion is debatable.
A majority vote is required for the council to adopt an amendment.
If the amendment is adopted, the council shall consider the amended version of the motion.
Refer to a committee (commit). If a councilmember believes that further information is needed before the council can
act on a main motion, he may propose that the motion be referred to a specific committee or department for further
study. If an appropriate committee does not already exist, then a committee may be formed as a part of the motion.
A motion to refer should specify the date that the committee or department will report back to the council. This
motion is debatable and amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass.
Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). A motion to postpone to a certain time may be proposed if a
councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered until a future time. This motion shall set a
particular time for the main motion to be considered again. It is debatable and can be amended. If this motion is
passed, the chair will bring the original motion back to the council for consideration at the specified time. A majority
vote is required for the motion to pass.
Limit or extend limits of debate. A motion to limit debate places a time constraint on the length of debate. The details
of such a motion are to be decided by the councilmember who makes the motion. This motion can also be used to
extend the limits of debate if a limit on debate already exists. Debate is not allowed on this motion, and a two-thirds
vote is required.
Vote immediately (previous question). If a councilmember believes that the motion that is being considered should
be voted on, the councilmember may move to vote immediately. The motion is undebatable, and a vote of two-thirds
of the council is required for the motion to pass.
Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). A motion to lay on the table proposes, that the consideration of a main
motion be postponed until a later time in the meeting. The motion can be brought up for consideration only if a
motion to resume consideration is accepted by the council during the same meeting. The motion will die if it is not
taken up during the meeting. Debate is not allowed on this motion, and the motion is not amendable. A majority vote
is required for the motion to pass.
Sec. 2-78. - Privileged motions.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
14/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting. They do not address or relate to a main motion and can be introduced
whether or not there is a main motion under consideration. Privileged motions take precedence over all subsidiary motions. Debate is
not allowed on these motions.
Question of privilege. A formal question addressed to the chair concerning the rights of a councilmember or of the
council as a whole is referred to as a question of privilege. It does not require a second and cannot be debated or
amended. The chair is required to make a ruling on the question.
Recess. A motion to recess proposes that the meeting be suspended for a particular amount of time. The motion
must specify the length of the recess. The motion must also be seconded. Debate is not allowed on this motion, but
the motion can be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass.
Adjourn. In order for a meeting to come to a close, a councilmember must make a motion to adjourn. The motion to
adjourn has the highest rank of any motion, and as a result it can be introduced at any time. The motion requires a
second, but is not debatable or amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass.
Sec. 2-79. - Incidental motions.
Incidental motions allow councilmembers to exert their rights as a member of the council. Incidental motions can be introduced at
any time during a meeting.
Appeal. If a councilmember disagrees with a decision that is made by the chair, that councilmember may appeal the
decision. If the appeal is seconded, the appeal will be considered by the council. The chair has the opportunity to
explain the ruling that has been challenged. The council may then debate the appeal. The council shall decide by
majority vote if the chair's decision is to be upheld or overturned. An appeal is high in precedence and can only be
interrupted by a privileged motion or by a motion to lay on the table.
Parliamentary inquiry. If a councilmember has a question about the rules of order, he may ask the chair to give an
opinion on that question. This question should take the form of a parliamentary inquiry and should relate to the
current business of the council. This motion takes precedence over all motions except privileged motions. This
motion does not require a second and is not debatable or amendable.
Point of order (question of order). If a councilmember believes that a violation of the rules of parliamentary
procedure has occurred, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chair can make a ruling on the
question or can allow the council to debate and then rule on the question by majority vote. A point of order can only
be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to lay on the table.
Point of information (request for information). If a councilmember has a question about the facts of a particular issue
that is being considered, he may ask a point of information. This motion is addressed first to the chair and then to
the appropriate person. A second is not required and the motion is not debatable or amendable.
Sec. 2-80. - Supplementary main motions.
Three motions allow the council to act on a main motion that has either been passed or tabled by the council. These motions are
considered to be main motions but differ from usual main motions in the ways specified.
Reconsider. The motion to reconsider allows the council to debate whether or not to overturn a decision made at the
meeting that is in progress. It allows the council to consider new information that may affect the decision that has
already been made. Any councilmember may make a motion to reconsider, and any councilmember may second the
motion. The motion is debatable, but it cannot be amended. A majority vote of the council is required for the motion
to pass. If a motion to reconsider is passed, the original decision will be voided and the council will return to debate
and re-vote the original motion.
Rescind. A motion to rescind proposes that the council overturn a motion passed at a previous meeting. A motion to
rescind can be made by any councilmember. It is in order as long as the original motion has not been implemented.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
15/246
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
An announcement of the intention to rescind a motion may be made at the meeting where the decision was made, or
the councilmember seeking to rescind may place the matter on the agenda for the next meeting pursuant to section.
The motion to rescind will then be placed on the agenda for the next meeting. At the next meeting, the motion to
rescind will formally be made. If it is seconded, then the council shall debate and vote on rescission. A majority vote is
required for the motion to pass. If a motion to rescind is passed, the original decision will be voided.
Resume consideration. The motion to resume consideration allows the council to consider a motion that has been
temporarily postponed. This motion requires a second and is not debatable or amendable. It is a main motion but
ranks higher than any debatable motion. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass.
Secs. 2-81—2-100. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - LEGISLATION
Sec. 2-101. - Legislative authority generally.
The city council shall exercise the legislative functions of the city and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the
government of the city; however, such ordinance or resolution must not be in conflict with the Charter of the city, the constitution or the
laws of the state, or the constitution or the laws of the United States.
Sec. 2-102. - Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared,
approved, introduced and adopted in the manner provided in this division.
Sec. 2-103. - Preparation of ordinances.
Whenever possible, all ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney.
Sec. 2-104. - Required elements of ordinances.
All ordinances passed by the council shall contain the following items, which shall be set forth in the ordinance in the following order:
Ordinance number.
Title and purpose.
Enacting clause.
Body of ordinance by sections.
Severability clause.
Penalty clause.
Repealing clause.
Adoption date.
Effective date.
Authentication of city clerk.
Sec. 2-105. - Introduction of ordinances, resolutions and other matters.
Ordinances, resolution and other matters of subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a
member of the council, mayor, and/or city manager.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
16/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
Sec. 2-106. - Reading of ordinances.
Each ordinance shall be read at three separate meetings of the mayor and council before its passage; provided, that any ordinance
may be passed at the first reading by unanimous consent of the mayor and council.
Sec. 2-107. - Subject matter of ordinances.
No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title, and no ordinance, or section of such
ordinance, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed.
When practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code.
Sec. 2-108. - Adoption of ordinances, resolutions, contracts.
An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives an affirmative vote of a majority of the
whole council and shall take effect immediately unless otherwise stated in the ordinance, resolution or contract.
Secs. 2-109—2-140. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-141. - Personnel policies.
The mayor and council shall adopt personnel policies and rules governing city employees from time to time.
(Code 1985, § 2-71)
Secs. 2-142—2-160. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR
Sec. 2-161. - General authority.
The mayor shall require the faithful performance of all administrative duties.
(Code 1985, § 2-36)
Sec. 2-162. - Duties.
The mayor shall have the following duties:
Charter. To carry out his responsibilities under the city Charter;
Appointment of standing committees. To appoint at the first meeting each year, or as soon thereafter as expedient,
standing committees for that year; but, the mayor may at any time, alter the committees and make such changes as
the interest of the city may require;
Dismissal, suspension, and discipline of officers and employees. To dismiss, suspend or discipline for cause all
officers and employees under his control, provided that for the purposes of this section, the term "cause" shall be
construed to mean:
Negligence or inefficiency in performing the duties of the position held;
Unfitness to perform assigned duties;
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
17/246
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Insubordination;
Misconduct;
Conduct reflecting discredit on the department;
Failure to report for work without justifiable cause;
Chronic absenteeism; or
Political activity in violation of city regulations;
Preparation of annual report. To prepare and present to the council an annual report of the city's affairs including a
summary of reports of department heads, and such other reports as the council shall require; and
Executing legal documents. To sign and execute all contracts, deeds and bonds of the city duly authorized by the
mayor and council.
(Code 1985, § 2-37)
Sec. 2-163. - Investigations.
The mayor may investigate and examine or inquire into, either by himself or by any officer or person designated for the purpose by
him, the affairs or operation of any department, including the power to employ consultants and professional counsel when so authorized
by the council to aid in such investigations, examinations or inquiries.
(Code 1985, § 2-38)
Secs. 2-164—2-180. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY
Sec. 2-181. - Appointment; qualications.
The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall serve until a
successor is appointed and has qualified. No person shall be so appointed unless he is a member in good standing of the State Bar of
Georgia and has been actively engaged in the practice of law for at least three years preceding his appointment.
(Code 1985, § 2-72(a))
Sec. 2-182. - Oath.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city attorney shall take the oath prescribed by this chapter for city officers.
(Code 1985, § 2-72(b))
Sec. 2-183. - Powers; duties.
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in such capacity shall:
Advise the council or its committees or any city officer, when thereto requested, upon all legal questions arising in
the conduct of city business;
Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the council or any committee thereof, and keep this Code up-todate and properly indexed;
Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to him by the council, or any of its committees, or by
any city officer;
Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party, and approve, as to form, all bonds
required to be submitted to the city;
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
18/246
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
a.
b.
(10)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Prepare, when authorized by the council, all charges and complaints against, and appear in the recorder's court in the p
every person charged with a violation of this Code or of a city ordinance or of any regulations adopted under authority o
and see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city;
Defend any and all suits and actions at law or equity brought against the city, unless otherwise directed by the city
council;
Make immediate report to the mayor and council of the outcome of any litigation in which the city has an interest;
Make an annual report to the mayor and council of all pending litigation in which the city has an interest and the
status thereof;
Keep complete and accurate records of the following, which records shall forever remain the property of the city:
All suits in which the city had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties, the nature of the action, the
disposition of the case or its status, if pending, and the briefs of the counsel; and
All written opinions prepared by the city attorney and all certificates or abstracts of titles furnished by him to
the city, or any department or official thereof; and
Render such other legal services as may be required by the mayor or council.
(Code 1985, § 2-72(c))
Sec. 2-184. - Compensation.
The city attorney shall submit to the council a monthly bill for his services, itemizing the type of work performed for the city and the
number of hours engaged in each type of work during the month.
(Code 1985, § 2-72(d))
Secs. 2-185—2-200. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - CITY CLERK
Sec. 2-201. - Election.
The city council shall at its first regular meeting after election and qualification elect a city clerk.
(Code 1985, § 2-51)
Sec. 2-202. - Bond.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city clerk shall give a good and sufficient bond, payable to the city, such bond to be
fixed and approved by the city council.
(Code 1985, § 2-52)
Sec. 2-203. - Duties as city clerk.
The city clerk shall have the following duties in his capacity as city clerk:
To attend all meetings of the city council;
To keep correct and full minutes of the proceedings of the city council, together with all ordinances and resolutions
passed by it, in a properly indexed book or register kept for that purpose;
To receive all applications or petitions made to the city and to place them before the mayor and council at the
meeting of council next succeeding the receipt thereof;
To issue all licenses, and keep a record thereof, and all badges and permits authorized by the council;
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
19/246
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
To be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; and
To carefully preserve the records and documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of some
other office, and to maintain a proper index to all such records and documents so that ready access thereto and use
thereof may be had.
(Code 1985, § 2-53)
Sec. 2-204. - Duties as treasurer.
The city clerk shall have the following duties in his capacity as city treasurer:
To receive all money due the city council, including taxes, and pay out the same only upon orders passed by the
mayor and council;
To keep a book of accounts showing all money received on behalf of the city and the source and disposition thereof;
which book shall be open for inspection by the public and city councilmembers;
To maintain a uniform system of accounts and keep such other records and accounts as may be required by statute
or ordinance; and
To furnish the council with quarterly statements detailing all receipts and payments of funds for the quarter.
(Code 1985, § 2-54)
State law reference— Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 15-18-70; budgets and accounts, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.
Secs. 2-205—2-220. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - CITY MANAGER
Sec. 2-221. - Appointment; qualications.
The mayor, with the advice and consent of city council, shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term. Said city manager shall be
chosen by said mayor and council on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience
in, or knowledge of, the accepted practice in respect to the office of city manager.
Sec. 2-222. - Removal from oce.
The mayor and council may remove the city manager at any time by a majority vote, but such removal shall be done only after a
hearing on specified charges before said mayor and council.
Sec. 2-223. - Duties.
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and serve as the chief police advisor to the mayor and council. He
shall be responsible for the efficiency of each department of the city government. To that end, said city manager is hereby authorized
and directed to perform the following duties:
Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all officers and employees of the city,
except as otherwise provided by the city Charter or by law and except as he may authorize the head of a department
of office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in such department or office. Nothing herein contained shall
be construed as giving the city manager the right to appoint, suspend or remove the city auditor and the city
attorney, or either of them.
Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the mayor and council, together with a message describing the
important features of said budget and be responsible for the administration of said budget after adoption.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
20/246
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
Prepare and submit to the mayor and council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and adm
activities of the city for the preceding year.
Keep the mayor and council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such
recommendations, as he may deem desirable.
Recommend to the mayor and council a standard schedule of pay for each appointive office and position in the city
service, including minimum, intermediate, and maximum rates.
Recommend to the mayor and council from time to time adoption of such measures as he may deem necessary or
expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community or the improvement of administrative services.
Develop long-range and short-range plans for city operations.
Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his jurisdiction with the approval of the mayor
and council.
Attend all meetings of the mayor and council unless excused therefrom and take part in the discussion of all matters
coming before said mayor and council. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings
of the mayor and council.
Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget; let
contracts necessary for the operation or maintenance of city services in amounts as provided by the mayor and
council by ordinance; receive sealed bids for purchases or contracts in amounts as provided by said mayor and
council on the advantages or disadvantages of contract and bid proposals. No purchase shall be made, contract let,
or obligation incurred for any item or service which exceeds the current budget appropriation without a
supplemental appropriation by the mayor and council. No contract for new construction shall be let except by the
mayor and council except as may be provided by ordinance. The city manager may issue rules governing purchasing
procedures within the administrative organization as the mayor and council may approve.
See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced.
Investigate the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to
matters concerning the administration of the government of the city, and in regard to service maintained by the
public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the city are faithfully
observed.
Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties.
Perform such other duties as may be required by the mayor and council not inconsistent with the constitution, any
applicable general or local laws, the city Charter, or city ordinances. Such other powers and duties may be given to
the city manager only at a regular meeting of the mayor and council or at a special meeting where the mayor and
each councilmember shall have been given notice of said special meeting and the purpose thereof.
Neither the mayor or any councilmember shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or the removal from,
office by the city manager or any of his subordinates or, in any manner, take part in the appointment or removal of officers
and employees in the administrative services of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the mayor and council shall deal
with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall give
orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately.
Sec. 2-224. - Compensation.
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution.
Sec. 2-225. - Vacancies; acting city manager.
Any vacancy in the office of the city manager shall be filled within 90 days after the effective date of such vacancy. The mayor and
council shall have the power and authority to do all acts authorized for the city manager during such vacancy. The mayor and council
shall further have the right and power to appoint an acting city manager who shall have all the duties of the city manager and who may
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
21/246
(1)
(2)
act while the office of city manager is vacant.
Secs. 2-226—2-240. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - CITY ENGINEER
Sec. 2-241. - Appointment.
The city engineer shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall serve until a
successor is appointed and has qualified.
(Code 1985, § 2-73(a))
Sec. 2-242. - Oath.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city engineer shall take the oath prescribed by this chapter for city officers.
(Code 1985, § 2-73(b))
Sec. 2-243. - Duties.
The city engineer shall advise the council and city officials on all engineering matters referred to him and shall, from time to time as
required by the mayor or council, make reports regarding public improvement and repairs of streets, bridges and sidewalks, and shall
prepare such other reports as the mayor or council may request. He shall keep accurate maps, plats and records of all public works,
lands or property owned by the city, and shall perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him from time to time by the mayor or
council.
(Code 1985, § 2-73(c))
Secs. 2-244—2-260. - Reserved.
DIVISION 7. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Sec. 2-261. - Composition.
The department of public works shall consist of the director of public works, who shall be the head of the department, and all officers
and employees assigned thereto by the mayor or council.
(Code 1985, § 2-74(a))
Sec. 2-262. - Appointment of director.
The director of public works shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of city council, and shall have
control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to the department, subject to the control of the mayor.
(Code 1985, § 2-74(b))
Sec. 2-263. - Duties of director.
The director of public works shall have the following duties:
To provide for and supervise the care, maintenance, construction and extension of all streets, sidewalks, street
gutters and drains, alleys and public ways;
To have charge of and be responsible for the care, maintenance and operation of the city water distribution system,
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
22/246
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
the sanitary sewer system and disposal plant and the street lighting system;
To have charge of and supervision over all public property of the city, including all parks, parkways, playgrounds,
municipal cemeteries, buildings and utilities not assigned to some other department or officer;
To have charge of the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse;
To have charge of and be responsible for the condition of all motor vehicles and other equipment of the city, and of
all buildings or places in which the same are housed or kept;
To be the custodian of all tools, equipment and other personal property belonging to the city and not assigned to the
care of any other public officer of the city; and
To perform such additional duties as may be assigned to him from time to time by the mayor.
(Code 1985, § 2-74(c))
Secs. 2-264—2-300. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - CODE OF ETHICS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq.; code of ethics for members of boards,
commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-301. - Declaration of policy.
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that the members of its government authority be, and give the
appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in
the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such
conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority
in situations where a conflict may exist.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-1, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-302. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
City councilmember shall be any person who is an elected city official, including the mayor, of the city.
Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any councilmember of the city and any member
appointed to any board or commission of the city (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "member" or "members").
Government or city shall be construed to mean the City of Hahira, Georgia government.
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest, held by or accruing to a member of the governing
authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of
the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving:
Any person in the member's immediate family;
Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other
benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods and services in the normal course of business for which
(2)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
23/246
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate;
Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise
provided herein; or
Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-2, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-303. - Intent.
It is the intent of this section that members of the governing authority avoid any action whether or not specifically prohibited which
might result in, or create the appearance of the following:
Using public office for private gain;
Impeding government efficiency or economy; or
Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-3, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-304. - Financial interests of members.
Members of the governing authority may not:
Have direct or indirect financial interests that conflict substantially with their responsibilities and duties as
government servants; or
Engage in, directly or indirectly, financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained
from their office.
Aside from these restrictions, members are free to engage in lawful financial transactions to the same extent as private
citizens.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-4, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-305. - Use of public property.
A member of the governing authority shall not use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor
shall he direct employees to use such property for these purposes.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-5, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-306. - Use of condential information.
A member shall not directly or indirectly, make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private
interest, official information not made available to the general public.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-6, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-307. - Disclosure of information by members of the governing authority.
As custodians of taxpayer funds, all elected officials will disclose in a public forum any and all possible conflicts pertaining
to personal credit problems, ongoing or past legal issues and any business or civic relationships which could give the
appearance of influence in their decisions regarding expenditure of city funds, contractual negotiations and/or obligations.
Members shall not make false statements on which the governing authority, city staff or other agencies would reasonably
be expected to rely to establish policy or make important decisions. A member violates this rule if he knows the statement
or information is untrue, or the person has knowledge that would lead a reasonable person of ordinary prudence to
conclude that the statement is untrue.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
24/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-7, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-308. - Coercion by members.
A member of the governing authority shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another
person to provide any financial benefit to him or persons within his immediate family, or those with whom a member has business or
financial ties.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-8, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-309. - Voting in matters of personal interest.
A member shall disqualify himself from participating in any official act or vote, and any debate thereon, of the governing authority
which results or could result in a pecuniary benefit to the member or to a business or activity in which he has an interest, when such
benefit is not available to the public at large.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-9, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-310. - Unauthorized purchases.
A member shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such expenditure.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-10, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-311. - Meetings of the council.
Meetings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. and O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-11, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-312. - City attorneys used for private business.
A member of the governing authority shall not use the attorney or attorneys who are under retainer by the city for personal or
private business without paying just compensation.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-12, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-313. - Unauthorized use of public employees.
A member shall not use his superior position to request or require an employee to:
Do clerical work on behalf of his family, business, social, church or fraternal interests;
Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and
Work for him personally without offering just compensation.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-13, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-314. - Travel expenses.
A member shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention, or conference and then fail to
attend the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the pro rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 1-14, 8-4-2005)
Secs. 2-315—2-320. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
25/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
Sec. 2-321. - Ethics committee.
The ethics committee shall consist of three persons, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the council, and the third
member shall be appointed by the mayor and council. All members of the ethics committee shall serve a two-year term. The members of
the ethics committee shall serve without compensation. Each member of the committee shall have been a resident of the city for at least
one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a committee member. No
person shall serve as an ethics committee member if the person has, or has had within the preceding two-year period, any interest in any
contract, transaction, or official action of the city.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 2-1, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-322. - Receipt of complaints.
The term "complaint," as used in this division, means a written sworn statement filed with the ethics committee containing
specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of
discovery of the alleged misconduct.
Upon receipt of a written complaint, the ethics committee, along with the city attorney, shall review it to determine
whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the
disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The ethics committee shall be empowered to collect evidence and information
concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint.
Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the ethics committee shall be empowered to dismiss those complaints
which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not
deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent
government servant.
The ethics committee shall be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings
where provided for in the rules.
The ethics committee shall be empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, subpoenas, notices, applications for
reinstatement and any other written instruments necessary or desirable under these rules.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 2-2, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-323. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints.
The ethics committee as appointed in this division shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority
charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held
within 60 days after filing of the complaint. The ethics committee shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and
regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony, the right to representation by
counsel, and the right to call witnesses on behalf of the accused and to cross-examination of adverse witnesses. The decision of the
ethics committee shall be rendered to mayor and council within five days after completion of the hearing.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 2-2-1, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-324. - Penalty and member rights.
Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this article
shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city.
At any hearing held by the ethics committee, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall
have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by
counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in
extenuation.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
26/246
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 2-2-2, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-325. - Appeals.
Any member of the governing authority adversely affected by a final action by the city council based on the findings of the
ethics committee may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section.
An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of the
county within 30 days after any final action by the city council based on the decision of the ethics committee. The filing of
such application shall act as supersedeas. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there
was any evidence before the city council, which supported the decision of the council; provided, however, no action of the
city council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 2-2-3, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-326. - Additional regulations.
This article shall be cumulative to any other ordinance, resolution or act now existing.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 2-3, 8-4-2005)
Secs. 2-327—2-331. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Sec. 2-332. - Gifts, gratuities, special privileges.
Members of the governing authority shall not solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or
group which:
Has, or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city;
In exchange for the thing of value seeks to have a member exercise a matter of discretion in his favor;
In exchange for the thing of value seeks to have interests, which may be affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duty of the member.
This section shall not apply to campaign contributions, which shall be reported in accordance with state law.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 3-1, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-333. - Proprietorship of creations.
All plans, designs, reports, specifications, drawings, devices, inventions, and other items produced or created by members of the
governing authority during their time in office or through the use of city facilities or equipment or at the request of the city shall be and
become the sole property of the city.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 3-2, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-334. - Condential information.
Members of the governing authority shall not disclose confidential information gained by reason of their official position, nor shall
they otherwise use such information for their personal gain or benefit.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 3-3, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-335. - Conict of interest.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
27/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this division applies shall
knowingly engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible
with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance
of his official duties.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 3-4, 8-4-2005)
Sec. 2-336. - Political activity.
Members of the governing authority shall not utilize any city equipment or vehicles in support of any political campaign.
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 3-5, 8-4-2005)
Secs. 2-337—2-340. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE
FOOTNOTE(S):
State constitution reference— Levy of taxes to pay bonds, sinking fund, art. IX, § 5, para. 6.
State Law reference— Bonds, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-38-1 et seq., O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.; audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-341. - Acceptance of credit card payments.
All sums due the city including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees,
permit fees and registration fees, may be paid by the use of credit cards.
The city finance director, with the approval of the city manager, shall establish the procedures for acceptance of
credit card payments for amounts due the city. The city manager with approval of the mayor is authorized to enter
into agreements with credit card issuers to facilitate the acceptance of credit card payments by the city.
A credit card agreement may provide for the acceptance of the credit card payments from the credit card company at
a discount from the face amount of the payment or for the withholding of administrative fees from the face amount
of the payment. Such discounted fee is granted in exchange for the improved governmental cash flow, reduction of
administrative expenses and increased public convenience as a result of credit card payments.
Any agreement with a credit card issuer for the acceptance or payments via credit shall contain a provision that the
agreement may be canceled at any time by the city.
No person making payment by credit card to the city is relieved from liability for the underlying obligation except to
the extent that the city actually receives final payment of the obligation in cash or its equivalent. If final payment is
not made by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, the underlying
obligation for the money due is not extinguished. All applicable penalties, interest and collection fees on the unpaid
amount shall be due from the person making the payment by credit card.
Such penalties, interest and fees on an unpaid amount shall accrue from the date the unpaid obligation was first due
under the applicable statute or ordinance. The city shall follow the collection procedures for the unpaid amount that
would have otherwise been applicable had the credit card payment not been attempted.
(Ord. No. 04-10, § 1(2-91), 11-4-2004)
Secs. 2-342—2-360. - Reserved.
(3)
(3)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
28/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
1.
2.
3.
b.
(5)
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.
Sec. 2-361. - Fiscal year.
The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31.
(Code 1985, § 2-106)
State law reference— Establishment of fiscal year, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3.
Sec. 2-362. - Adoption of budget.
The city budget shall be introduced, approved, amended and adopted by ordinance passed by not less than a majority of the full
membership of the city council. The procedure shall be as follows:
Introduction; approval. The city budget shall be introduced in writing by the mayor and council and shall be initially
approved by September 30 of the fiscal year. Upon initial approval by the city council, the council shall fix the time
and place for the holding of a public hearing.
Public advertisement. The city budget shall be advertised after approval. The advertisement shall set forth the date,
the time and the place of the hearing. It shall be published at least ten days prior to the date fixed therefor in one or
more newspapers of general circulation in the city.
Public hearing. The city budget shall not be adopted until a public hearing has been held thereon, and taxpayers and
all persons having an interest therein shall have been given an opportunity to present objections. Such hearing shall
be held not less than 21 days after the initial approval of the budget at the time and place specified in the
advertisement thereof, and may be adjourned from time to time until the hearing is closed. The budget, as
advertised, shall be read at the public hearing in full, or it may be read only by its title if at least one week prior to the
date of the hearing a complete copy of the budget shall have been posted in the city hall and shall have been made
available to each person requesting the same during the previous week and during the public hearing.
Amendments.
The city council may amend the budget during or after the public hearing, except that no proposed amendment
shall be effective without such a hearing if it shall:
Add a new item of appropriation in an amount in excess of one percent of the total amount of
appropriations as stated in the initially approved budget;
Increase or decrease any item of appropriation by more than ten percent; or
Increase the amount needed to be raised by taxes by more than five percent.
Notice of hearing on any amendment shall be advertised at least three days before the date set therefor. Any
such amendment must be read in full at the hearing and before adoption.
Adoption. The city budget shall be adopted by October 31 of the fiscal year. Upon adoption, the budget shall
constitute an appropriation for the purposes stated therein and an authorization of the amount to be raised by
taxation for the purposes of the city.
(Code 1985, § 2-107)
State law reference— Preparation and adoption of budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5 et seq.
Sec. 2-363. - Budget message.
(4)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
29/246
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
When introduced to the city council for approval, the city budget shall be accompanied by a budget message which shall explain the
budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. The budget message shall outline the proposed financial policies of the
city for the ensuing fiscal year; describe the important features of the budget; indicate any major changes from the current year in
financial policies, expenditures and revenues, together with the reasons for each change; summarize the city's debt position; and include
such other material as will provide a complete synopsis of the financial condition of the city.
(Code 1985, § 2-108)
Sec. 2-364. - Form; content.
The city budget shall, at a minimum, provide for the appropriate legal level of control in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5. This
does not preclude the governing authority from preparing a budget with a more detailed level of control for internal purposes.
The city budget shall include stated objectives and services to be provided, in a clear general summary of each
department budget.
Each departmental budget shall include totals for each of the following categories:
Salaries and Wages.
Supplies.
Contract Services.
Capital Outlays.
The general budget shall include designated sections for revenues, debt service and capital expenditures.
The total proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of anticipated revenue.
(Code 1985, § 4-304; Ord. No. 04-05, § 1(2-109), 10-17-2004)
Sec. 2-365. - Capital program.
A five-year capital program may be submitted to the city council at the same time that the budget and budget message are
introduced for approval. Such capital program shall include:
A clear general summary of its contents;
A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken for the five fiscal years next ensuing, with
appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements;
Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and
The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired.
The information in this section may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or
in process of construction or acquisition.
(Code 1985, § 2-110)
Sec. 2-366. - Transfer of appropriations.
The city clerk, city manager or accounting clerk may at any time during the fiscal year transfer part or all of any unencumbered
appropriation balance among programs within a department or office with the approval of the mayor. Also, the city council may by
ordinance transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or office to another, except that no
appropriation for debt service or capital improvements may be reduced or transferred during any fiscal year, and under no
circumstances may the expenditures exceed the total of the budget.
(Code 1985, § 2-111; Ord. No. 04-02, § 1(2-111), 3-9-2004)
Sec. 2-367. - Emergency appropriations.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
30/246
(1)
Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, the city council may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a
budget, for a purpose which was not foreseen at the time of the adoption thereof, or for which adequate provision was not made
therein. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property or the public peace,
and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues or surplus. If there is no surplus, then temporary borrowing in notes may
be made; provided, that any such borrowed amounts are included as an appropriation in the next succeeding year's budget.
(Code 1985, § 2-112)
Sec. 2-368. - Lapse of appropriations.
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the next succeeding year to the
extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose
for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned. The purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if
three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation.
(Code 1985, § 2-113)
Secs. 2-369—2-390. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING, SALES AND CONTRACTS
Sec. 2-391. - Purchasing generally.
Operating under the oversight of the mayor and city council and the supervision of the director of financial services, all purchases for
the city shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the city financial management plan, any other requirements established by
the mayor and city council, and any requirements contained in the laws of the state. If there is any conflict in such requirements, the laws
of the state shall control.
Sec. 2-392. - Contracts for public works.
All contracts to build or repair any public building, bridge, causeway, road or other public work shall be let and contracted for in the
manner prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 36-10-1 et seq.
Sec. 2-393. - Bidding procedures.
All purchases which are required to be made by competitive bidding shall be made in accordance with formal competitive bidding
procedures as set forth in the city financial management plan and the laws of the state. Upon any conflict in the procedures in the city
financial management plan and the laws of the state, the procedures set out in the laws of the state shall control.
Sec. 2-394. - Sale of surplus personal property.
The director of financial services shall have the authority to sell personal property of the city which has become unsuitable for use;
provided, however, that surplus, unusable or obsolete supplies and equipment shall be sold only upon the adoption of a resolution by
the mayor and city council specifying the manner in which such sale shall be conducted.
Sec. 2-395. - Sale of small parcels of surplus real property.
The city shall have the authority to sell and convey parcels of small or narrow strips of land, so shaped or so small as to be incapable
of being used independently as zoned or under applicable subdivision or other development ordinances or land use plans, or as streets,
whether owned in fee or used by easement, to abutting property owners upon the following terms and conditions:
Such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the purchaser's abutting property.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
31/246
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
The property has been declared by the mayor and city council to be surplus real property.
Each owner of property which abuts the surplus property has been notified, at least 14 calendar days prior to such
conveyance, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the surplus property is being offered for sale and is
given the opportunity to purchase such property under the terms and conditions set out in this section.
The sale has been authorized by resolution of the mayor and city council.
Title to the surplus real property shall be conveyed by quit claim deed or limited warrant deed as the mayor and city
council shall determine.
The purchase price shall be payable in cash at closing, which closing shall occur within 30 days of the approval of the
sale by the mayor and city council.
The purchaser shall be responsible for payment of all costs associated with the purchase of the surplus property,
including, but not limited to, any attorney's fees, surveyor's fees and recording fees in connection therewith.
Sec. 2-396. - City contracts.
Execution. Unless otherwise specified by a majority of the entire mayor and city council, the mayor, or in his absence the
mayor pro tem, shall execute all contracts to be entered into by the city. The clerk or, in his absence any deputy clerk, may
attest the signature of the mayor or mayor pro tem on any such contract.
Authorization. All contracts entered into by the mayor and city council shall be authorized as required by this chapter.
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. - Drinking in public.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any malt beverage, wine or distilled spirits in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
other public way or place in the city, or within any public building.
(Code 1985, § 4-6)
Secs. 6-2—6-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGES
Sec. 6-31. - License required.
Each brewer, wholesale dealer and retail dealer of malt beverages, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq., who does
business within this city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this Code.
(Code 1985, § 4-1(a))
Sec. 6-32. - Fee.
The annual business license fee for malt beverage brewers, retail dealers and wholesale dealers shall be as set from time to time by
the council.
(Code 1985, § 4-1(b))
Sec. 6-33. - Publication of notice of application for license.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
32/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(a)
(b)
(c)
No application for a license for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages within this city shall be acted upon by the city council until
after notice shall have been run in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for at least ten days prior to the regular meeting at which
such application is to be presented and considered. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant and the location of the proposed
business, and shall be run at the applicant's expense.
(Code 1985, § 4-1(c))
Sec. 6-34. - Factors for council consideration.
The full council, in passing upon an initial application for a malt beverage license at the final meeting thereon, shall be guided by the
following factors as to whether to grant or deny such application:
The proximity of other establishments selling malt beverages or other alcoholic beverages to the proposed location;
The character of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location;
The proximity of churches, schools and playgrounds to the proposed location;
Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons;
Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom;
The feelings and attitudes of the citizens residing in the area adjacent to the proposed location;
The information set forth in the application;
Whether any malt beverage or other alcoholic beverage license previously issued for such location was ever revoked
for cause by the city council; and
Whether the applicant has ever sold malt beverage or other alcoholic beverages illegally in the city.
(Code 1985, § 4-1(d))
Sec. 6-35. - Change of location.
A license issued under the provisions of this article shall permit the sale or manufacture of malt beverages only on the premises
described in the application.
(Code 1985, § 4-1(e))
Sec. 6-36. - Sanitary conditions.
All premises used for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the
ordinances of this city and the laws of this state.
(Code 1985, § 4-1(f))
Sec. 6-37. - Hours of sale.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail, in or upon any licensed premises, any malt
beverage or other alcoholic beverages for transport away from such premises except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
12:00 midnight.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, in or upon any licensed premises, any malt beverages or other alcoholic
beverages of any kind, for consumption on the premises by the drink, except within a zone located within the city limits
within a distance of 500 yards from a point located at the center of the intersection of the overpass of State Road No. 122
over Interstate Highway No. I-75.
No application for a license to sell malt beverages or other alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be granted for a proposed
location which is within 300 feet of any church building or alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state, the
county, or the city, or of any public playground; or within 600 feet of any school building, educational building, school
grounds, or college campus. For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
33/246
on the ground, and shall be between the property line of the proposed location and the property line of any school or
school house, church, college campus or public playground, or any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the
state, the county, or the city.
(Code 1985, § 4-1(g))
Secs. 6-38—6-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - WINE
Sec. 6-71. - License required.
Each person engaged in the business of retailing wine shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified
in this Code.
(Code 1985, § 4-2(a))
Sec. 6-72. - Fee.
The annual business license fee for each place of retail wine distribution in the city shall be as set from time to time by the council.
(Code 1985, § 4-2(b))
Sec. 6-73. - Publication of notice of application for license.
No application for a license for the sale at retail of wine within this city shall be acted upon by the city council until after notice shall
have been run in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for at least ten days prior to the regular meeting at which such application
is to be presented and considered. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant and the location of the proposed business, and
shall be run at the applicant's expense.
(Code 1985, § 4-2(c))
Sec. 6-74. - Factors for council consideration.
In deciding whether to grant or deny the application for a license to sell wine at retail, the mayor and council shall be guided by the
same considerations as those applied in granting or denying a license for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages in section 6-34.
(Code 1985, § 4-2(d))
Sec. 6-75. - Change of location.
A license issued under the provisions of this article shall permit the sale at retail of wine only on the premises described in the
application.
(Code 1985, § 4-2(e))
Sec. 6-76. - Sanitary conditions.
All premises used for the retail sale of wine shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of this city
and the laws of this state.
(Code 1985, § 4-2(f))
Sec. 6-77. - Hours of sale.
It shall be unlawful to sell wine at retail except during those hours authorized for the retail sale of malt beverages in section 6-37.
(Code 1985, § 4-2(g))
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
34/246
State law reference— Municipal and county wine licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40.
Secs. 6-78—6-110. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - DISTILLED SPIRITS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits,
O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49; levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80.
Sec. 6-111. - License required.
Each manufacturer, wholesale distributor and retail distributor of distilled spirits, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, whose
place of business is located within the corporate limits of this city, shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner
specified in this Code.
(Code 1985, § 4-3(a))
Sec. 6-112. - Fee.
The annual business license fee for each distilled spirits manufacturer and distributor whose business is located in the city shall be as
set from time to time by the council.
(Code 1985, § 4-3(b))
Sec. 6-113. - Publication of notice of application for license.
No application for a license for the sale or manufacture of distilled spirits within this city shall be acted upon by the city council until
after notice shall have been run in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for at least ten days prior to the regular meeting at which
such application is to be presented and considered. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant and the location of the proposed
business, and shall be run at the applicant's expense.
(Code 1985, § 4-3(c))
Sec. 6-114. - Factors for council consideration.
In deciding whether to grant or deny the application for a license to manufacture or sell distilled spirits, the mayor and council shall
be guided by the same considerations as those applied in granting or denying a license for the manufacture or sale of malt beverages in
section 6-34.
(Code 1985, § 4-3(d))
Sec. 6-115. - Location of sales.
A license issued under the provisions of this article shall permit the sale or manufacture of distilled spirits only on the premises
described in the application.
(Code 1985, § 4-3(e))
Sec. 6-116. - Sanitary conditions.
All premises used for the sale or manufacture of distilled spirits shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the
ordinances of this city and the laws of this state.
(Code 1985, § 4-3(f))
(5)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
35/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Sec. 6-117. - Hours of sale.
It shall be unlawful to sell distilled spirits except during those hours authorized for the sale of malt beverages in section 6-37.
(Code 1985, § 4-3(g))
Sec. 6-118. - Furnishing to certain persons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, or cause to be furnished, or to permit any person in his employ to furnish, distilled
spirits to any minor, to any person who is noticeably intoxicated or to any habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to
such person.
(Code 1985, § 4-3(h))
Secs. 6-119—6-150. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - EXCISE TAXES
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80.
Sec. 6-151. - Malt beverage excise tax.
Levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of malt beverages within the city an excise tax. The amount and due date
thereof and the persons liable therefor shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq.
Report; delinquency. Payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of malt beverages sold for
the preceding calendar month by size and type of container. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from
the due date shall be delinquent.
Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city,
and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the
delinquent taxpayer.
(Code 1985, § 4-4)
Sec. 6-152. - Distilled spirits and wine excise tax.
Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of distilled spirits and wine an excise tax in the sum of $0.22 per
liter and in similar proportion for bottles and containers of various sizes, as provided by law.
Against whom levied. Such tax shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in distilled spirits or wine in the city.
Due date; report; delinquency. Such tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar
month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and the payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the
exact quantities of distilled spirits or wine sold for the preceding calendar month by size of container. Any tax remaining
unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from the due date shall be delinquent.
Enforcement. Such tax may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any
failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent
taxpayer.
(Code 1985, § 4-5)
State law reference— Local distilled spirits excise tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80.
Secs. 6-153—6-180. - Reserved.
(6)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
36/246
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
ARTICLE VI. - SECURITY CAMERAS
Sec. 6-181. - Required for retail sales of alcoholic beverages.
Any retail business establishment licensed by the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages, beer or malt beverages by the
package for off-premises consumption is required to install security cameras of a type and number approved by the chief of police. In
addition, the location of all such cameras shall be approved or determined by the chief of police or his designee.
(Ord. No. 5-93, § 1, 10-7-1993)
Sec. 6-182. - Required capabilities of equipment.
Cameras meeting the requirements of this article must be capable of producing a retrievable image on film or tape that
can be enlarged through projection or other means. Cameras meeting the requirements of this article shall be maintained
in proper working order at all times and shall be subject to random inspection by the chief of police or his designee.
If the system camera used is a still frame camera, it must contain the following equipment capabilities:
Automatic still frame.
Capable of being concealed.
Remote activation.
Quiet activation.
Must be 35 mm.
Produce good quality photographs.
Must use color film.
Must have automatic focus.
Easily accessible for maintenance checks, film loading, etc.
Capable of showing signs or signals of activation covertly.
Film used must be 400 asa or higher and in color, 24 frames.
Must have wide-angle capacity.
Such other functions as may be specified by the chief of police.
If the system camera is a still video system, it must be capable of the following:
All components must be compatible to produce sharp, detailed, still-frame video images in color.
The recorder shall be of a time-lapse video, still-frame type.
The video printer shall print color photographs within 24 hours of activation.
Remote activation.
Quiet activation.
Color photographs.
Such other functions as may be specified by the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 5-93, § 2, 10-7-1993)
Sec. 6-183. - Maintenance responsibilities of establishments.
Retail establishments required to install the camera security system shall be responsible for the maintenance and daily check of said
systems and to ensure that said system is functioning at all times when employees are present. It shall also be the responsibility of the
establishment to have on hand at all times the correct film type and batteries for the continuous proper operation of all security cameras
as required in section 6-182.
(Ord. No. 5-93, § 3, 10-7-1993)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
37/246
(a)
(b)
Sec. 6-184. - Cooperation with police department.
In the event of any criminal activity occurring in any establishment containing a security camera, the film shall be given to
the city police department for developing and processing in the event a still-frame camera is used. Under such
circumstances, the film shall become the property of the city police department and shall be retained by it for its use in
investigation of said criminal activity and prosecution of any person committing such criminal activity.
In the event of any criminal activity occurring in any establishment containing a security camera which is a still-video
system, the film or tape shall be given to the city police department for developing and processing. Under such
circumstances, the film or tape shall become the property of the city police department and shall be retained by it for its
use in investigation of said criminal activity and prosecution of any person committing such criminal activity.
(Ord. No. 5-93, § 4, 10-7-1993)
Sec. 6-185. - Exemption.
Any establishment licensed to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages, beer or malt beverages by the package for off-premises
consumption having two or more employees on duty at all times in the area where cash registers are located during the hours of
operation are hereby exempt from compliance with this article.
(Ord. No. 5-93, § 5, 10-7-1993)
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. - Billiard rooms, pool rooms and game rooms.
Billiard rooms, poolrooms and game rooms are prohibited in the city.
(Code 1985, § 8-37)
State law reference— Local prohibition of billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-15.
Sec. 10-2. - Video games or similar amusements.
Not more than two video games or similar amusements shall be permitted in any business establishment.
(Code 1985, § 8-37)
Secs. 10-3—10-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-
17; giving of massages in place used for lewdness, prostitution or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; nudity and related acts on
premises where alcoholic beverages are sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas,
O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1.
Sec. 10-31. - Findings; public purpose.
(7)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
38/246
(1)
(2)
The mayor and council finds that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to enact
regulations to reduce the possible adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. However, the mayor and council also find that
the outright prohibition of such establishments could improperly infringe upon protected forms of expression. Therefore, the purpose of
this article is to reasonably regulate adult entertainment establishments in a manner that serves the legitimate governmental interest of
reducing criminal activity and protecting property values without unreasonably infringing upon the protected rights of adult
entertainment establishments and their patrons.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 1, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-32. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Adult entertainment means performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such
performances are characterized by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas.
Adult entertainment establishment means a nightclub, cabaret or other establishment which features adult entertainment. Any
commercial establishment, which has as its primary purpose or business the offer for sale of any book, publication, or film which depicts
nudity, or sexual conduct or engages in services such as bathhouses, massage parlors, wrestling parlors or like activity including a
nightclub, cabaret, lounge or other establishment which features adult entertainment.
Church means a building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with
such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
Good moral character means a person who has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in
the past five years.
Licensed day care center means a day care center licensed by the state and/or city that provides care, training, education, custody,
treatment or supervision for children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to an
owner or operator of the facility.
Minor means any person under 18 years of age.
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment.
Owner means, if a sole proprietorship, the proprietor; if a partnership, all partners (general and limited); if a corporation, all officers,
directors and persons holding at least ten percent of the outstanding shares.
Residential means, pertaining to the use of land, premises such as homes, townhomes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes,
condominiums or apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for nontransient occupancy and which are designed primarily
for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein.
School means a facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education including any playgrounds,
stadiums, or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. This shall include, but not be limited to, public and private
schools used for primary, secondary, or post-secondary education.
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or public region; buttock; or female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.
Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 2, 12-3-1992)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
39/246
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(c)
(d)
Sec. 10-33. - License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any
premises within the city, an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment license to do so. The issuance of such
license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone, or make legal any activity or conduct that is illegal or unlawful under the laws of the
state or the United States. The annual license fee for an adult entertainment establishment shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 3, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-34. - On-premises operator required.
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator shall be
principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during operating hours.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 4, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-35. - Employee permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed by an adult entertainment establishment without a permit issued under the terms
of this article. For the purposes of this section, the term "employee" includes an "independent contractor."
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 5, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-36. - Admission of minors unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to allow a person younger than 18 years of age to enter an adult entertainment establishment.
It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the establishment at
all times during the establishment's operating hours. It shall be the duty of the attendants to not allow any person under
the age of 18 years to enter the establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of
18 unless such attendant asked for and was furnished:
A valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's driver's license; or
A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state department of public safety reflecting that such person is
18 years of age or older.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 6, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-37. - Location; development standards.
Adult entertainment establishments shall only be located within an adult commercial (C-A) zoning district.
No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 750 feet of any of the following:
Any parcel of land which is zoned for residential uses or purposes.
Any parcel of land upon which a church, school, licensed day care center, governmental building simultaneously
owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood
playground is located.
Any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment is located.
For purposes of this section, measurement of distances shall be from property line to property line along the shortest
possible straight line, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel (i.e., "as the crow flies"). The term
"parcel of land" shall mean any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used
or to be used as a unit, and duly recorded in the county.
The minimum lot area for an adult entertainment establishment shall be one acre with a minimum 150 feet of road
frontage on a public right-of-way.
Buildings and structures established in connection with an adult entertainment establishment shall be set back at least 40
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
40/246
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
feet from any property line.
A minimum of one parking space shall be provided for every 100 square feet of gross building area, or for every three
customer seats, whichever is greater.
Merchandise or activities of the establishment shall not be visible from any point outside the establishment.
Signage shall be limited to one freestanding sign not to exceed 50 square feet of copy area (total of all sides), one wall sign
not to exceed 50 square feet. Maximum sign height shall not exceed ten feet from ground level to highest point of the
sign. Minimum sign setbacks shall be eight feet from any property line or street right-of-way line.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 7, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-38. - Adult entertainment establishment employees.
Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall not be less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of
good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, or drug-related or
alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee, shall not thereafter be
employed by any adult entertainment establishment licensed under this article for a period of five years from the date of
such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an
adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty. The term "while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee"
shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed
premises.
Before any person may be employed by an adult entertainment establishment, he shall file an application for an adult
entertainment establishment employee permit with the city manager and receive approval. An investigation fee of $50.00
shall accompany the application. Each applicant shall provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the
state crime information center, authorizing the release of the applicant's criminal records to the city police department.
The city shall have 15 days to investigate information contained in the application. If the prospective employee is found to
be of good moral character, the city manager shall approve the permit and the prospective employee may begin working
on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, make appeal
to the mayor and city council.
No patron, dancer, or other employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult
entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. For purposes of this
section, the term "employee" shall include an "independent contractor."
The employee permit of any employee who violates laws and regulations of the state, or any provision of this article or any
other ordinance or regulation of the city, shall be subject to suspension or revocation.
For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered employees and shall be permitted as such,
regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 8, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-39. - Application for license.
Any person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or
carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk, or designated representative. The
application must be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment and include the names of the operator
and each owner as defined in this article. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, established from
time to time by resolution of the city, to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article.
The license application does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult
entertainment establishment.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 9, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-40. - Application contents.
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information and documentation:
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
41/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
a.
b.
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
The proposed establishment's name, street address (and mailing address if different), and telephone number.
The name and street address (and mailing address if different) of the owner. The name, street
address (and mailing address if different), and state driver's license number of the intended
operator.
A general description of services and entertainment to be provided.
The legal description of the parcel of land on which the establishment is to be located.
The business, occupation and employment history of each owner and operator for five years immediately preceding
the date of application.
If any owner or operator has had an adult entertainment establishment license or similar type of license denied,
revoked or suspended, then the violations that led to the denial, suspension or revocation as well as the dates and
disposition of such, including any fine or sentence imposed, and whether or not the terms of the disposition have
been completed.
If any owner or operator has been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past five years, a
complete description of such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition,
including fines or sentences imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed.
If the establishment does or proposes to do business under a trade name, then a copy of the trade name as properly
recorded.
If the establishment is a state corporation, then a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all
amendments thereto; and the most recent annual report.
If the establishment is a foreign corporation, then a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business
in the state, together with all amendments thereto; and the most recent annual report.
If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the state, then a certified copy of the
certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the city manager.
If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the
qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto.
A plat by a registered engineer or surveyor, licensed by the state, certifying the location of the proposed premises is
not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 10-37, respecting location and development standards.
The application shall contain a statement under oath that:
The persons signing the application have personal knowledge of the information contained in the application
and that the information contained therein is true and correct; and
The persons signing the application have read the provisions of this article.
The application shall be signed by the operator and each owner.
The operator and each owner shall provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the state crime
information center, authorizing the release of their criminal records to the city police department.
The written consent of a registered agent as required by section 10-49(a).
Subsections (8)—(12) of this section shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that
documents previously furnished with the original application or previous renewals thereof, remain correct and
current.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 10, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-41. - Owner and operator to appear.
The operator and at least one owner, as defined in this article, shall personally appear at the public hearing for consideration of the
application, scheduled pursuant to section 10-42.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 11, 12-3-1992)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
42/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(d)
(e)
Sec. 10-42. - Application; investigation.
Within 15 days of receipt of the application, the city manager or his designee shall review the application and send a copy
to all affected departments of the county to determine compliance with county laws and regulations, and to the city police
department to investigate the character and reputation of each owner and operator. Each notified department shall
submit a report within 15 days to the city manager. If no report is received, it shall be concluded that there is no objection.
The city manager shall prepare and cause to be published, a notice of public hearing for each pending application. Such
notice shall include the date, time, and place of the public hearing; the location or street number of the proposed adult
entertainment establishment, and the name of each owner and operator. The applicant shall pay all publication costs. The
notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and shall appear once a week for two
consecutive weeks immediately preceding the public hearing. The city manager, or his designee, shall post a "notice of
public hearing sign" on the subject property during this advertisement period.
The city may approve the license at the public hearing upon finding that:
The required fee has been paid.
The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article.
No owner or operator knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application.
Each owner and operator has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application.
Each owner and operator is of good moral character as defined in this article.
No owner or operator has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit
denied, suspended or revoked for cause involving moral character by this city or any other unit of government
located in or out of this state prior to the date of application.
The building, structure, equipment, or location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment will comply with
all applicable city zoning and development standards.
Each owner and operator is at least 21 years of age.
No owner or operator is a city employee, an elected or appointed city official, or a spouse of an elected or appointed
city official.
No owner or operator has within five years of the date of application, committed or knowingly allowed another to
commit the crime of public indecency, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-6, upon the premises of an adult entertainment
establishment or similar business.
The location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment is not inconsistent with the provisions of section 10-
37 respecting location and development standards.
The approval of such license will not cause a violation of this or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state, or
the United States.
The registered agent's written consent has been provided.
If the license is approved, it shall be issued jointly in the name of the establishment and each owner and operator.
The issuance of an adult entertainment establishment license shall not authorize any other conduct or activity regulated
by other city ordinances including, but not limited to, the alcoholic beverage ordinance.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 12, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-43. - License renewal.
Licenses for adult entertainment establishment may be renewed on a calendar year basis; provided, that licensees continue to meet
the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be established from time
to time by resolution of the mayor and council. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to January 1
of the year for which such permit is requested. The form for renewal applications shall be furnished by the city manager.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 13, 12-3-1992)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
43/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(c)
(d)
Sec. 10-44. - Licenses nontransferable.
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other
person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a
voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the
licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or
otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license. In such case,
upon notification to the city, the license shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment
license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold,
transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 14, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-45. - Adult entertainment establishments; change of location or name.
No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee,
established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city, and approval has been obtained from the
city council. Such approval shall not be given unless all applicable requirements and regulations have been met.
No licensee shall operate, conduct, manager, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any
name other than the name of the business, and his name as specified on the license.
Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment
establishment is located shall require inspection and compliance with the provisions and regulations of this article.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 15, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-46. - Revocation and appeal.
The city manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license under the
conditions set forth in this section. In the event the city manager seeks to suspend or revoke a license, the city manager
shall give written notification to the licensee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violations.
The city manager may suspend or revoke a license in the event of any of the following:
A licensee gave false or misleading information in the application or renewal process.
A licensee knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises, or the licensee did
not make a reasonable effort to prevent such occurrences.
A licensee violated or knowingly allowed violation of this article, any other ordinance of the city, or any criminal law of
the state to occur on the premises; or the licensee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such violation.
A licensee has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related, or sex-related crime by the state or city regarding
any offense which was committed on the premises, or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article.
A licensee failed to pay any fee, license fee, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any
other ordinance of the city.
In the event that the city manager determines that a license violation has occurred, such license shall be suspended for 30
days for the first violation. For a second violation, the license shall be suspended for 60 days. For a third and all
subsequent violation, the license shall be suspended for 90 days. Any license that has been suspended three or more
times in any consecutive 12-month period, shall be revoked. In addition, any licensee found to be in violation of sections
10-36(a) and 10-38(c) shall be subject to immediate license revocation; provided, however, that the licensee shall be
allowed to continue business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (e) of this
section hereafter. No licensee or any other applicant may apply for a license for the same premises during any period of
suspension or revocation.
In the event of license suspension or revocation by the city manager, the licensee may appeal the decision of the city
manager to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager within ten days from the
effective date of written notice received by the licensee in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. The notice of
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
44/246
(e)
(1)
(2)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(1)
(2)
(a)
appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing, setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all
arguments in support thereof. The city manager may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the
licensee upon appeal to the city council. The city manager's decision shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An
appeal shall stay the city manager's decision until the appeal is heard or withdrawn. The city manager shall place the
appeal on the agenda of the next regular mayor and council meeting occurring not less than five, nor more than 30 days
after receipt of the appeal.
When an appeal is placed on the mayor and council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions:
Set a hearing date before the mayor and council and instruct the city manager to give such notice of hearing as may
be required by law; or
Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city
employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The city manager shall assume responsibility for
such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall
be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article.
In either event, the hearing shall be held within 30 days of the mayor and council's action, unless a continuance of such date
is agreed to by the licensee and the city manager.
At any hearing, the hearing officer (or the mayor and council if a hearing officer is not appointed) shall receive oral and
written testimony regarding the appeal. Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the hearing officer or mayor
and council, which shall be consistent with rules applied in administrative proceedings, and shall ensure that each party
may present evidence, cross examine witnesses, and be represented by legal counsel.
If the hearing is held before the mayor and council, the council may sustain, overrule, or modify the action of the city
manager. Appeals from the decision of the mayor and council shall be to the county superior court, and filed within 30
days of the mayor and council's decision. The decision of the mayor and council shall otherwise be final.
If the hearing is held before a hearing officer, the hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not exceeding 15 days
from the termination date of such hearing, submit a written report to the mayor and council. Such report shall contain a
brief summary of the evidence considered, and state the findings, conclusions and recommendation. The report shall
recommend that the mayor and council sustain, overrule, or modify the action of the city manager. The report shall be
filed with the city manager, and shall be considered public record. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified
mail to the appellant on the same day it is filed with the city manager. An additional copy shall be furnished to the city
police department. The city manager shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular mayor and
council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed. The city manager shall also notify the appellant of
the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period.
The mayor and council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed
recommendation. The mayor and council shall base its determination on the hearing officer's report and other evidence in
the record. No additional evidence or arguments shall be permitted at the council meeting. If the council does not adopt
the hearing officer's recommendation, it may:
Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a de novo hearing, or for the taking of additional
evidence on specific points, and in either of such cases the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; or
Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer, with or without taking additional
evidence.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 16, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-47. - Criminal penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation operating an adult entertainment establishment within the city without having obtained a
license as provided in this article, shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an
amount of not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00. Each day the adult entertainment establishment is operated
without a license, it shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
45/246
(b)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating this article and, upon conv
be fined in an amount not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00. Each violation thereof shall constitute a separate offens
be punishable as such.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 17, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-48. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance.
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the
same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action
hereunder, commence actions or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in a manner provided by law. It shall take
such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult
entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment
establishment contrary to the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 18, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-49. - Notices; registered agent; jurisdiction.
All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any
process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the licensee, may be
served. This person shall act as registered agent for the operator and each owner collectively. This person must be a
resident of the county. The operator may be appointed as the registered agent if he is a resident of the county. The
licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city manager as part of
the license application. By appointing such registered agent, and as a condition of the issuance of a license pursuant to the
terms of this article, the licensee agrees that any legal action brought by the city against the adult entertainment
establishment or the licensee (which includes the operator or any owner) to enforce the provisions of the article, may be
filed in any court of competent jurisdiction in the county.
Any notice required or permitted to be given by the city manager or any office, division, department or other agency under
this article to any licensee, operator or owner of an adult entertainment establishment, may be given by either:
Personal delivery; or
By certified United States mail, addressed to licensee's registered agent at the most recent address specified in the
agent's written consent form received by the city manager, or any notice of address change which has been received
by the city manager.
If personally delivered, the notice's effective date shall be the date of delivery. If mailed, the notice's effective date shall be
two days after the notice is placed in the mail.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 19, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-50. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment approval.
All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all
applicable ordinances and regulations of the city, county, and state.
The county health department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to
determine compliance with all applicable health rules and regulations and report any violation to the city manager.
The city fire department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine
compliance with all applicable fire regulations and report any violations to the city manager.
The building inspector or his designee shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to
determine compliance with all applicable building and other technical codes of the city.
The city police department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to
determine compliance with all provisions of this article or other applicable laws and report any violations to the city
manager.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
46/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 20, 12-3-1992)
Sec. 10-51. - Miscellaneous provisions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise
declared to be obscene or illegal by any applicable code, regulation, or statute which violates any jurisdictional prohibition
upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only
be allowed if they are not obscene and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. This
subsection shall supersede and limit all other provisions of this article.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this
enactment are severable. If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section hereof shall be declared unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs and sections of this article.
This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this
article are hereby repealed. This article shall become part of the official Code of the city.
(Ord. No. 6-92, § 21, 12-3-1992)
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, §
II, ¶ III(a)(3).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Ord. of 3-6-2008(1), amended Art. I, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 14-1—14-3, pertained to in
general. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.
Sec. 14-1. - Denitions.
Wild or exotic animal means any animal of a species prohibited by Title 50, Code of Federal Regulations, or otherwise controlled by
the State of Georgia. It shall include any animal which is wild, fierce, dangerous, noxious or naturally inclined to do harm. "Wild animals,"
however domesticated, shall also include but not be limited to:
Bears (Ursidea): All bears, including grizzly bears, brown bears, black bears, etc.
Cat family (Felidea): All except commonly accepted domestic cats, including lions, pumas, panthers, mountain lions, leopards, jaguars,
ocelots, margays, tigers, wild cats, etc.
Crocodillians: All alligators, caimans, crocodiles, gavials, etc.
Dog family (Canidea): All except domesticated dogs, including wolf, fox, coyote, dingo, wolf hybrids, etc.
Porcupine (Erethizontidae): All porcupines.
Raccoons (Procynniddae): All raccoons and civets.
Skunks.
Snakes: All venomous and constricting snakes.
Venomous fish and piranha.
(8)
(9)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
47/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
Venomous lizards.
Weasels (Mustelidea): All, including weasels, martens, mink, wolverine, ferrets, badgers, otters, ermine, mongoose, etc.
(Ord. of 3-6-2008(1))
Sec. 14-2. - Dangerous, vicious, wild or exotic animals.
Except as provided in section 14-3, it shall be unlawful for any owner to have any dangerous, vicious, wild or exotic animal
of any kind within the city.
The police officers of the city shall be authorized to use such force as is necessary to prevent any such dangerous or
vicious animal from causing harm to any person or property.
Any unregistered dangerous, vicious, wild or exotic animal found within the city limits shall result in a fine to the owner of
$250.00 upon discovery of such animal. Each additional day during which the animal remains in the city shall constitute a
separate violation of this article.
State law reference— Injuries or damage done by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6 et seq.
(Ord. of 3-6-2008(1))
Sec. 14-3. - Pre-existing ownership or possession of exotic animals.
Any owner having pre-existing ownership or possession of any exotic animal shall be permitted to continue to possess
said animal(s) within the city provided that within 30 calendar days of the effective date of this article, the owner registers
said animal(s) as provided in section 14-4
Failure to commence the permit/registration process for a pre-existing exotic animal within 30 calendar days of the
effective date of this article shall be governed by section 14-2
(Ord. of 3-6-2008(1))
Sec. 14-4. - Permit/registration process for pre-existing exotic animals.
Payment of the nonrefundable permit fee of $25.00 per exotic animal shall constitute the beginning of the
permit/registration process. Any other cost incurred during this permit/registration process shall be the responsibility of
the owner or possessor of the exotic animal. All permit fees shall be waived for owners or possessors of pre-existing exotic
animals, provided the owner or possessor (1) commences the permit/registration process within 30 calendar days of the
effective date of this article and (2) completes the list of restrictions associated with the permit/registration process no
later than 90 days from the beginning of the permit/registration process, unless extended by the police chief.
Applicants shall submit a permit application on a form to be provided by the city police department. Applicants beginning
the permit/registration process for an exotic animal shall be given a list of restrictions that must be in place before a
permit will be issued.
Restrictions for the issuance of a permit for an exotic animal shall include, but not be limited to the following:
Proof of insurance coverage with a minimum of $300,000.00 per claim to compensate any person for personal injury
or property damage caused by the exotic animal, or in lieu of insurance, a surety bond posted with the city manager
in the same amount, conditioned upon payment of such damages.
At the direction of City of Hahira police chief, installation of permanent signage at all points of entry to the property
in question to identify the presence of the exotic animal to any law enforcement or emergency personnel having
valid reason to enter the property.
Required signage shall consist of a minimum size of three square feet and shall at a minimum identify the following
in reflective letters of a contrasting color as to be easily read on the background of the sign:
The word "WARNING" in all capitals at least four inches high;
The common name of the exotic animal;
The location on the property of the exotic animal; and
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
48/246
d.
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(e)
The potential danger posed by the exotic animal (biting, clawing, venom, constriction, kicking, etc.)
Implantation by a city-approved veterinarian of a microchip under the skin of the exotic animal to aid in
identification, or approval by a city approved veterinarian of a previously implanted microchip. The veterinarian can
be chosen by the owner or possessor of the exotic animal if so approved by the city police chief, or can be referred to
the owner or possessor by the police chief upon request.
Obtaining from a city approved veterinarian a health certificate detailing the health and condition of the exotic
animal.
Written emergency response plan, approved by the police chief, in the event of any escape of the exotic animal,
including a paragraph detailing owner or possessor's understanding and agreement that if the escaped exotic animal
poses any immediate danger whatsoever to life, limb, or property (other than property of the exotic animal owner),
then it may be destroyed at that time by law enforcement officers, emergency responders, or any citizen having the
means to do so. This emergency response plan shall be signed by the owner and notarized.
All exotic animals shall be housed in facilities designed with the characteristics and potential dangers of the particular
exotic animal in mind.
Issuance of a permit.
When the exotic animal owner or possessor has completed the list of restrictions, but no later than 90 days from the
beginning of the permit/registration process, unless extended by the police chief, the owner shall contact and
arrange for an initial inspection by police chief or his designated representative, which shall not unreasonably delay
this initial inspection.
When the police chief or his representative has conducted his initial inspection and found the list of restrictions to
have been completed in a satisfactory manner, it shall issue the permit to the owner or possessor of the exotic
animal.
The initial term of this permit shall be one year.
This permit shall be renewable every year for the lesser of the life of the exotic animal or the length of its residency in
the city, upon payment of the $25.00 permit renewal fee and satisfactory completion of a follow-up inspection by
police chief of the facility housing the exotic animal.
This permit shall be presented for renewal prior to the expiration of the current term; otherwise, the permit is
considered expired.
Any owner or possessor of an exotic animal and an expired permit for that exotic animal shall be in violation of this
article, and the owner or possessor shall face the possibility of immediate seizure of the exotic animal and the
imposition of a fine of $250.00 per day for each day the exotic animal is in the custody of the city, plus any additional
costs to the county that may arise in connection with seizure of the exotic animal.
A permit holder shall correct within seven calendar days any defects that may arise in connection with that permit or face
seizure of the exotic animal and a fine of $250.00 per day for each day the exotic animal is in the custody of the city, plus
any additional costs to the city that may arise in connection with seizure of the exotic animal.
City of Hahira
Exotic Animal Permit Checklist
_____ 1. Completion of Exotic Animal Permit/Registration Form
_____ 2. Proof of $300,000.00 Insurance Policy Coverage/Surety Bond
_____ 3. Certication from Veterinarian of Microchip Implant
_____ 4. Health Certicate from Veterinarian Certifying Condition
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
49/246
_____ 5. Submission of Emergency Response Plan
_____ 6. Certication of Home Inspection
(Ord. of 3-6-2008(1))
Secs. 14-5—14-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT
Sec. 14-31. - Authorized.
It shall be the duty of every police officer or animal control officer to seize all animals running at large in violation of the provisions of
this article and to impound such animals in the city pound or other suitable place. Upon receiving any such animal, the county
poundkeeper shall enter upon the records of the pound (in a book to be kept by him for such purpose) the date of impounding, a
description of the animal impounded and a record as to whether or not such animal has been licensed and tagged.
(Code 1985, § 5-4(a))
Sec. 14-32. - Notice to owner.
Not later than five days after the impounding of any animal as provided in section 14-31, the owner shall be notified or, if the owner
of the animal is unknown, written notice shall be posted for five days at two or more conspicuous places in the city, which notice shall
describe the animal and indicate the place and time of taking.
(Code 1985, § 5-4(b))
Sec. 14-33. - Redemption of animals.
The owners of any animal impounded by the county poundkeeper may redeem the same by paying all the costs, charges and
penalties assessed, if any, that have accrued up to the time of making the redemption, and when the same are paid to said poundkeeper,
it shall be his duty to release the animal form said pound and deliver it to the owner thereof.
(Code 1985, § 5-4(c))
Sec. 14-34. - Disposition of unclaimed or infected animals.
If at the expiration of five days from the date of notice to the owner or the posting of notice any animal impounded as herein
provided shall not have been redeemed either by the owner or by some other person, such animal may be disposed of in a humane
manner. Any animal which appears to be suffering from rabies or affected with hydrophobia, mange or any other infectious or
dangerous disease shall not be released but may be destroyed as soon as such infection or disease is discovered.
(Code 1985, § 5-4(d))
Secs. 14-35—14-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - DOGS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Permitting dogs in heat to run at large prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6.
(10)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
50/246
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 14-71. - Rabies control tag required.
It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep any dog in the city unless that dog, at all times and at all places, is wearing a tag indicating
that the dog has been inoculated against rabies as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6, control of rabies, and the rabies control rules and
regulations of the county board of health (Rule II).
(Code 1985, § 5-21)
State law reference— Rabies tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6.
Sec. 14-72. - Annoyance or nuisance; at-large dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog within the city which, by loud and frequent or habitual barking,
yelping or howling, or by constant threat of attacking and biting persons passing to and fro upon the streets, shall cause
continual annoyance to the neighborhood.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog to permit such dog to run at large.
(Code 1985, § 5-22(c), (d))
Sec. 14-73. - Rabies check.
In every case where a dog actually bites a person in the city, the owner of such dog shall immediately chain or confine it so
it shall not have access to persons or animals, and shall give immediate notice to the director of the county health
department, in order that said dog may be inspected for rabies by the director or his authorized representative, pursuant
to statutes of the state on that subject and the rules of the county board of health.
In all such cases, and in all cases where evidence of rabies appears, the director or his authorized representative may, in
his discretion, take charge of such dog for the purpose of full inspection as required by statutes of the state and the rules
of the county board of health.
(Code 1985, § 5-23)
State law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq.; bites by animals,
O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4.
Sec. 14-74. - Female dogs in heat.
It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow a female dog, when in breeding season, to go upon or have access to the streets of the
city.
(Code 1985, § 5-24)
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6.
Sec. 14-75. - Impounding.
Any dog not wearing a license tag as prescribed in this article; any vicious dog not confined, chained or muzzled as herein
provided; any dog running at large; any female dog while in breeding season running or having access to the public
streets; any dog not wearing the rabies inoculation tag required by the state statutes; and any dog which causes
annoyance in accordance with stipulations prescribed in section 14-72(a) shall be subject to be taken up by any police
officer of the city, the director of the county health department or his authorized representative or an authorized
representative of the city who shall have the dog confined in the dog pound.
The city shall operate either independently or in cooperation with others; or shall contract with the county health
department for the operation of suitable place to be known as the dog pound for the impounding of dogs picked up under
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
51/246
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
the terms of this article.
(Code 1985, § 5-25)
State law reference— Rabies tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; municipal contracts for government services and facilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2.
Sec. 14-76. - Destruction of animal in attempt to impound.
In the event any dog subject to being taken up pursuant to the provisions of this article cannot be captured without actual
danger to the officer attempting capture, any member of the police department, rabies control officer or authorized
representative is authorized and directed to shoot such dog when the shooting can be done without endangering persons
or other property.
Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring any police officer to attempt to capture a dog plainly showing the existence
of rabies, but such a dog may be shot by any police officer, rabies control inspector or his authorized representative, on
sight, using due care not to injure persons or other property.
(Code 1985, § 5-26)
State law reference— Authorized killing of dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5.
Sec. 14-77. - Fees; nes.
The keeper of the dog pound shall not release any dog impounded until the owner has paid all pound fees, all fines
assessed by the recorder of the city for violations of this article for which such dog was impounded and until the owner
has secured a license tag and a rabies tag as provided in this article.
Any dog impounded pursuant to this article which is not suspected of rabies may be reclaimed from the pound upon the
payment to the city's authorized representative such fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the
office of the city clerk.
(Code 1985, § 5-27)
Secs. 14-78—14-100. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOGS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2.
Sec. 14-101. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Animal control officer means the officer the city contracts from the county animal control office to enforce and house any dogs found
to be at large, or in violation of city and/or state laws.
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority:
Inflicts a sever injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property any time after adoption of
the ordinance from which this division is derived; or
Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified
as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification.
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning,
possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the city.
(11)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
52/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that without provocation bites a human being on public or private property at any time
after adoption of this division.
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owners property
securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children
and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is
enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in
such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection
from the elements for the dog.
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county
or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of an
animal control officer provided for in this article.
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic
surgery or a physical injury that results in death.
Sec. 14-102. - Investigation of report of dangerous dog.
Upon receiving a report that a dog has acted in a dangerous, or potentially dangerous manner, the police department shall
investigate the allegations and make a determination as to the truthfulness of said allegations. After concluding the investigation, the
police department shall:
Decide the classification of the dog as dangerous or potentially dangerous is not required;
Classify the dog as potentially dangerous; or
Classify the dog as dangerous.
In the event that the police department classifies the dog under investigation as "dangerous" or "potentially dangerous," the
police department must notify the owners by certified mail. The notice shall include a summary of the reason for which the
animal has been classified and provide the owners with a form to request a hearing to contest the classification within 15
days of the notice date. If no hearing is requested, the dog's classification goes into effect on the 15th day. An owner who
requests a hearing shall be provided a hearing before the council within 30 days. The owners must be notified of the hearing
date, time, and location by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted such that owners have the opportunity to present
their testimony, cross examine witnesses, and present evidence. The council shall receive such other evidence and hear such
other testimony as is reasonably necessary to make a determination to either sustain, returned to its owner upon the
owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of the costs to the city for confiscating and
boarding the dog. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within four days of the date the
dog was confiscated, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. The costs for confiscating,
boarding, and disposal of said dog shall remain the responsibility of the owner of the dog.
Sec. 14-103. - Limits of city liability.
It is the intent of this article that the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or
death of a person caused by such dog. Under no circumstances shall the city or any of its employees or officials which enforce or fail to
enforce the provisions of this article be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been
identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, or by a dog that has been reported to the proper authorities as being a
dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, or by a dog that a animal control officer has failed to identify as a dangerous dog or
potentially dangerous dog, or by a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog but has not
been kept or restrained in the manner described in this article, or by a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog whose owner has not
maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in this article.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
53/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(d)
(e)
Sec. 14-104. - Violations of this division.
The owner of a dangerous dog who violates this article or whose dog is subject to confiscation under this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this article, for the
second conviction a fine of not less than $250.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not
less than $500.00 shall be imposed.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who violates this article or whose potentially dangerous dog is subject to
confiscation under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for
a conviction under this article, for a second conviction a fine of not less than $150.00 shall be imposed and for a third or
subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $300.00 shall be imposed.
In addition to the penalties for violations as set out in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the dangerous dog involved
shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer and placed in quarantine for
the property length of time as determined by the animal control officer, and thereafter, the dangerous dog shall be
destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
No owner of a dangerous dog shall be held liable under this division for injuries inflicted by said owners dog to any human
being while both the dog and victim are on the dog owner's property.
A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer's official duties shall
not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this article. A dog shall not be a dangerous
dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this article a person sustained if the injury inflicted by the dog
who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had
in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting
to commit a crime.
Sec. 14-105. - Requirements for possessing dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the city a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a
certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. This certificate shall be in addition to any
standard dog license and fees or other requirements of this article.
Subject to the additional requirements of subsection (c) of this section for dangerous dogs, the council shall issue a
certificate of registration to the owner of such dog if the owner presents to the council otherwise or rinds sufficient
evidence of:
A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; and
A surety bond in the amount of $250,000.00 or more issued by the insurer authorized to transact business in this
state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous
dog.
In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the dog
control officer evidence of:
A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $250,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in
this state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the
dangerous dog; or
A surety bond in the amount of $250,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in
this state payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog.
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the police department within 24 hours if the dog
is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or
donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control officer and city police chief with the name, address and
telephone number of the new owner of the dog.
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the chief of police if the owner is moving from the
city. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves from this city to another jurisdiction within
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
54/246
(f)
(g)
(h)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
the state shall register the dangerous dog and potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after
becoming a resident.
Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the city does not warrant or
guarantee that the requirements specified in subsections (b) and (c) of this section are maintained by the owner of a
dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial
certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate.
Any police officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this document.
The city does hereby levy and charge against the owner of any dangerous dog for the purposes of registration pursuant to
this document, and in addition to any other license fees required generally for dogs within the city, the sum set forth in the
schedule of fees and charges as a fee to register the dog as a dangerous dog pursuant to the ordinances of the city. All
certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of any renewal, the police department shall
require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or
potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply
with all of the provisions of this article which might apply to this situation.
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. - Self-inspection by plumbers and utility contractors.
The city is exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d) relating to the self-inspection of certain water and sewer lines, and
such provisions shall not be applicable in the city.
(Ord. of 6-6-1996(2))
Secs. 18-2—18-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 18-31. - Adopted.
Enumeration. The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the state department of community
affairs, shall be enforced by the city:
Standard Building Code;
Standard Mechanical Code;
Standard Gas Code;
Standard Plumbing Code;
National Electrical Code;
Standard Fire Prevention Code;
CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code; and
(12)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
55/246
(8)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings.
Appendices. The following appendixes of the codes adopted in subsection (a) of this section are hereby adopted by
reference as though they were copied fully in this subsection (b):
Standard Building Code: Appendix;
Standard Mechanical Code: Appendix;
Standard Gas Code: Appendix;
Standard Plumbing Code: Appendix;
Standard Fire Prevention Code: Appendix;
National Electrical Code: Appendix; and
CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code: Appendix.
Additional codes. The latest edition of the following codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of
community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully:
Standard Housing Code, including Chapter 1, Administration and Appendix;
Standard Swimming Pool Code, including Chapter 1, Administration;
Standard Excavation and Grading Code, including Chapter 1, Administration;
Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, including Chapter 1, Administration;
Standard Existing Building Code, including Chapter 1, Administrative and Appendix; and
Standard Amusement Device Code, including Chapter 1, Administrative and Appendix.
(Code 1985, §§ 6-4—6-10; Ord. of 6-6-1996(1), § 1)
State law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-
1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25.
Sec. 18-32. - Adoption of state codes by city.
The city does hereby adopt, for enforcement, the latest edition of the following state minimum standard codes as adopted and
amended by the state department of community affairs:
International Building Code;
National Electrical Code;
International Fuel Gas Code;
International Mechanical Code;
International Plumbing Code;
International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings;
International Energy Conservation Code;
International Fire Code;
International Existing Building Code; and
International Property Maintenance Code
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 4-7-2005)
Sec. 18-33. - Denitions.
When used in this article, the following capitalized terms shall have the following meanings unless the context indicates otherwise:
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
56/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
Board means the construction board of adjustments and appeals established pursuant to division 6 of this article.
Construction codes means (i) the state minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)9(i)(I) through (9)(B)(i)(VIII), as
adopted, amended and revised by the department of community affairs, and (ii) such of the state minimum standard codes enumerated
in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)9(i)(IX) through (9)(B)(i)(XIV) as adopted, amended and revised by the department of community affairs and as
have been further adopted by the governing authorities. Appendices to the construction codes shall not be considered to be included
within the definition of construction codes and enforced hereunder except when: (1) any provision of an appendix is specifically
referenced in the code text; (2) an appendix to a code is specifically included in an administrative ordinance adopted by the governing
authorities; or (3) an appendix to a code is specially adopted by the department of natural resources with the approval of the board of
community affairs.
Department means the joint department of inspections established pursuant the intergovernmental agreement.
Director of inspections means the director of the department, who shall be the building official as that term may be used in uniform
standard building codes adopted by the governing authorities.
Governing authorities means the City of Valdosta and the City of Hahira, Georgia.
Intergovernmental agreement means the intergovernmental agency agreement (building inspections) dated January 1, 2000,
between The City of Valdosta, Georgia, and the City of Hahira, Georgia, and any amended, modified, restated or successor agreement
thereto. In the event of any conflict between the terms of such agreement and this article, the terms and provisions of this article shall
control.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 1.1, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-34. - References.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, references in this article to a section or subsection shall mean the specified section or
subsection of this article. Words of any gender or the neuter used in the singular shall be deemed to include the plural and the plural to
include the singular when the context so requires.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 1.2, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-35. - Compliance with article provisions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the construction or erection of any building, whether commercial, business or
residential unless such construction is accomplished in strict compliance with the various construction codes adopted by this article.
(Code 1985, § 6-3(b))
Sec. 18-36. - Enforcement of article provisions.
When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in the various construction codes adopted by this article, the
designated city official shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the enforcement of such codes.
(Ord. of 6-6-1996(1), § 3)
Sec. 18-37. - Penalty for violation.
Any person violating any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be punished as provided
in section 1-11 of this Code.
A conviction of any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall automatically suspend the
business license of the offending contractor. The license may be reinstated by an application to the mayor and council
upon a showing of good cause.
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith,
or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure,
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
57/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(a)
electrical, gas mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a
building, electrical, gas mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and
permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense
for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is
committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished within the limits and as
provided by the applicable local law, codes or ordinance of the governing authority within which the offense was
committed and state law.
Sec. 18-38. - Permit and inspection fees.
Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall
be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk.
Sec. 18-39. - Doubling of permit fees.
Where work for which a permit is required by any technical or construction code adopted by this article is started or proceeded with
prior to obtaining such permit, any applicable fees for such permit shall be doubled.
Sec. 18-40. - Public utilities.
No public utility may furnish temporary electrical, water or gas connection, for construction purposes, unless the
contractor has been issued a construction permit by the chief building official.
No public utility may furnish permanent electrical, water or gas connections until the contractor has been issued a
certificate of occupancy by the chief building official.
No public utility may furnish power to a mobile home site until the owner has been issued either a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy by the chief building official.
Sec. 18-41. - Water supply and sewage disposal facilities.
Building permits will not be issued until plans for water supply and sewage disposal have been approved by the county
board of health.
Certificates of occupancy will not be issued until the completed water supply and sewage disposal facilities have been
approved by the board of health.
State law reference— Regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas; conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-
5.1.
Secs. 18-42—18-60. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PURPOSE AND SCOPE
Sec. 18-61. - Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the construction codes.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 2.1, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-62. - Code remedial.
Generally. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial
interests and purposes thereof which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability,
sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
58/246
(b)
(c)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or
premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems,
which may be referred to as service systems.
Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except
as it relates to the purposes stated therein.
Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of
construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or
plan or their adequacy. Neither the members or officers of the board, the governing authorities nor any of their respective
employees shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such
building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or
permitting.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 2.2, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-63. - Scope.
Applicability.
Generally. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials,
methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a
general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.
Building. The provisions of the Standard Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of
community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location,
maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to
such buildings or structures, except in one and two family dwellings. Also included is the latest edition of the Existing
Building Code and the Standard Housing Code adopted by the governing authorities.
Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of
community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement,
equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto.
Gas. The provisions of the Standard Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community
affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in
this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet
connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and
related accessories, except in one and two family dwellings.
Mechanical. The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of
community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement,
equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning
and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one and two family dwellings.
Plumbing. The provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of
community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation (including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances) when connected to a water or sewerage system.
Fire prevention. The provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, as adopted and amended by the state
department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy,
location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings
or structures.
Energy. The provisions of the CABO Model Energy Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of
community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air
leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and
equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction.
CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling. The provisions of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, as adopted
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
59/246
(10)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances
connected or attached to such buildings or structures.
The Unsafe Building Abatement Code. The provisions of this code provide code enforcement personnel with the
necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished.
Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state
agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective
date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall
it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law.
Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of
the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard
shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be
enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory.
Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all
parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the
construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, of his
designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and
plumbing systems.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 2.3, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-64. - Building department.
Generally. Pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement, the governing authorities have established the department
headed by the director of inspections and have established the qualifications for the director of inspections and other
code enforcement personnel, which qualifications may be changed from time to time by a mutual amendment the
intergovernmental agreement.
Restrictions on employees. No officer or employee of the City of Valdosta assigned to the department shall be financially
interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building,
structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer
or employee shall not engage in any other work that is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the
department.
Records. The director of inspections shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The
records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act.
Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the board, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting
for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and
is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because
of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the
applicable governing authority until the final termination of the proceedings.
Reports. The director of inspections shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during
the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the board during said year.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 2.4, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-65. - Existing buildings.
Generally. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this article shall be permitted to
continue without change, except as applicable codes specifically relate to existing structures or as the director of
inspections deems necessary for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.
Alterations. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas,
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
60/246
(c)
(a)
(b)
mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to
comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work
conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The director of inspections shall determine
the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new
construction.
Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building,
electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as
required by the director of inspections.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 2.5, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-66. - Special historic buildings.
The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or
moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or
either of the governing authorities as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the director of inspections to be
safe and in the public interest of health; safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement,
restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 2.6, 10-6-2005)
Secs. 18-67—18-90. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF INSPECTIONS
Sec. 18-91. - Generally.
The director of inspections is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The director of
inspections is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes that are consistent with the intent and purpose of
the construction codes.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 3.1, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-92. - Right of entry.
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the
director of inspections has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any
condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the director of inspections may enter such building, structure or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the director of inspections by the
construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and
request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the director of inspections
shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
When the director of inspections shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to
secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or
premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the
director of inspections for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 3.2, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-93. - Stop work orders.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
61/246
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Upon notice from the director of inspections, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is
being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such
notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state
the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the director of inspections shall not be required to give a
written notice prior to stopping the work.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 3.3, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-94. - Revocation of permits.
Misrepresentation of application. The director of inspections may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions
of the construction codes, in the event there has been any false statement or misrepresentation of material fact in the
application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
Violation of code provisions. The director of inspections may revoke a permit upon determination by the director of
inspections that the construction erection, alteration, repair, building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of the construction codes.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 3.4, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-95. - Discontinuance of service for violations.
The director of inspections may request the appropriate department head to withhold services, such as water, garbage
collection, sewer services or any other service of similar nature rendered by the governing authority in which the property
lies, from any property on which any structure, house or building is being erected or maintained in violation of the
construction codes, or in violation of any other law or ordinance of the governing authority pertaining to health, safety or
morals.
The director of inspections shall notify the person in charge or in possession of such property, or the owner thereof, of the
violations and shall fix a reasonable time for the correction of such violations. If the violations continue after the expiration
of such given time, the director of inspections is authorized to request the appropriate department head to disconnect the
water and sewer lines and discontinue all services as long as such violations continue. Any person interfering with the
director of inspections or the agents or employees of the governing authority in disconnecting the water line or in the
performance of their duties shall be guilty of an offense under this article and punished as provided in section 1-11 of this
Code. In emergency situations that constitute an immediate hazard to life or property, advance notice to the person in
charge or in possession of such property, or the owner thereof, shall not be required if impracticable, but such individual
or entity shall be notified in writing as soon as practicable thereafter.
The director of inspections may also request, in writing, all public utility corporations and cooperatives to discontinue or
refuse services to a property located within the territorial limits of a governing authority and maintained in violation of the
governing authority's laws or ordinances, and such public utility corporations and cooperatives, after the time fixed by the
director of inspections, shall not render any services to such property.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 3.5, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-96. - Unsafe buildings or systems.
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate
egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a
hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems
are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the
Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 3.6, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-97. - Requirements not covered by code.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
62/246
(a)
(b)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical,
gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the construction
codes, shall be determined by the director of inspections.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 3.7, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-98. - Alternate materials and methods.
The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not
specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the director of inspections. The director of inspections
shall approve any such alternate, provided the director of inspections finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the
equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The
director of inspections shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the
alternate.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 3.8, 10-6-2005)
Secs. 18-99—18-120. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS
Sec. 18-121. - Application.
Required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or
change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any
electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to
cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the director of inspections and obtain the required permit
for the work.
Exceptions. Permits shall not be required for the following:
Building.
One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided
the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11.15 m ).
Fences not over six feet (1,829mm) high and which do not require a permanent foundation.
Oil derricks.
Retaining walls which are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to
the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or III-A liquids.
Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio
of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one.
Panting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.
Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.
Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy, as applicable in Section 101.2, which are
less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (19,000 L) fluid are installed entirely above
ground.
Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems.
Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family dwellings.
Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R-3, as applicable in Section 101.2, and Group U
occupancies.
Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1,753 mm) in height.
2
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
63/246
m.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(3)
a.
b.
(4)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
(5)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Agricultural buildings, which shall include buildings designed for bona fide agricultural uses such as
maintaining, housing or storing agricultural equipment, products or livestock but shall not include buildings
designed for residential or recreational uses such as buildings with sleeping quarters, cooking facilities or living
areas.
Electrical.
Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of
approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles;
Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this code shall not apply to electrical equipment
used for radio television transmissions, but does apply to equipment and wiring for power supply, the
installations of towers and antennas.
Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required
for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus.
Gas.
Any portable heating appliance;
Any replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
Mechanical.
Any portable heating appliance;
Any portable ventilation equipment;
Any portable cooling unit;
Any system, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the construction
codes;
Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe;
Any portable evaporative cooler;
Any self-contained refrigeration system containing 10lb. (4.53 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors
of one horsepower (746 W) or less.
Plumbing. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed
trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace
the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and
inspection made as provided in this code. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or
fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the
replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or
install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application
for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the
application, separate permits shall be required.
Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the reviewed construction documents, and
any changes made during construction that are not in an amended set of construction documents.
Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the director of inspections without a permit,
provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes.
Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the director of inspections on
a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The
application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the
proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or
structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the director of inspections.
Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
64/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for
periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the director of inspections for the application, provided the
extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 4.1, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-122. - Drawings and specications.
Requirements. When required by the director of inspections, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn
to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application
for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall be prepared by a qualified professional as defined in subsection (c) of
this section and shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is
essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall
not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific
information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the
person responsible for the design.
Additional data. The director of inspections may require details, computations, stress diagrams, other data necessary to
describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data
required by the director of inspections to be prepared by a design professional shall be affixed with the design
professional's official seal.
Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this
state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications
and accompanying data, for the following:
All Group A, E, and I occupancies.
Buildings and structures three stories or more height.
Buildings and structures 5,000 sq. ft. (465 m ) or more in area.
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law
exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered.
Exception: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a
certification than an architect or engineer is not required.
Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance
integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for
electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient
detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls.
Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or
structure on the site or lot. The director of inspections may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified
surveyor.
Hazardous occupancies. The director of inspections may require the following:
General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of
all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads,
chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and
adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum
quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored.
Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all
hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, cooridors, exits, firerated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous
materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class
or the hazardous materials stored.
2
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
65/246
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 4.2, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-123. - Examination of documents.
Plan review. The director of inspections shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the
accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by
such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the
construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances.
Affidavits. The director of inspections may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the
plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans
conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing
the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction
codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The director of inspections may without any examination or
inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the
director of inspections, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure,
electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the director of
inspections relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all
provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 4.3, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-124. - Issuance.
Action. The director of inspections shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay.
If the director of inspections is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents
filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall
issue a permit to the applicant.
Refusal. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to
the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the director of inspections shall not
issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal
shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal.
Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance
of such permit, the director of inspections may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder
of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work
will be granted or that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes.
Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the director of inspections for the construction of any building, or for
the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays,
balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or
premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at
the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate
said building; and it shall be the duty of the director of inspections to see that the street lines are not encroached upon
except as provided for in Chapter 22 of the Standard Building Code.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 4.4, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-125. - Contractor responsibilities.
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning
licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
66/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
state license before he is permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before
receiving a permit for work to be performed.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 4.5, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-126. - Conditions.
Intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel,
alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the director of
inspections from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes.
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after
its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time
the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the
permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by
the director of inspections.
Issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be
covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the director of inspections, are
hazardous or complex, the director of inspections shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or
prepared the drawings or computations supervise such work. In addition, such architect or engineer shall be responsible
for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion
make and file with the director of inspections written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the
reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not
available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the
director of inspections.
Plans. When the director of inspections issues a permit, he shall emboss, in writing or by stamp, one set of plans
"Reviewed Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the director of inspections and the
other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be open to inspection by the director of
inspections or his authorized representative.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 4.6, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-127. - Fees.
Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing authority have been paid, nor shall
an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the
building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid.
Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent
of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees.
Accounting. The director of inspections shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other
money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount
thereof.
Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations
requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the
fee schedules as set by the governing authorities.
Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the director of inspections, the valuation of building, alteration, structure,
electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied,
unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the director of inspections. Permit valuations
shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials
and labor.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 4.7, 10-6-2005)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
67/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(3)
a.
b.
c.
Sec. 18-128. - Inspections.
Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the director of inspections may examine or cause to be examined
any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to
enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical,
gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit
was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction
codes.
Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the director of inspections he shall make, or cause to be
made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every
such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes.
Inspection service. The director of inspections may make, or cause to be made the inspections required by subsection (f)
of this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he
is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall
not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service.
Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The director of inspections shall inspect or cause to
be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be
made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy or completion.
Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card
in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to
permit the director of inspections or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card
shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the
director of inspections.
Required inspections. The director of inspections, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the
following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or
shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the applicable
construction code:
Building.
Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected.
Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, all concealing
wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete.
Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy.
Electrical.
Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and
before any backfill is put in place.
Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the
installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and
properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy.
Plumbing.
Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any
backfill is put in place.
Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste
and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or membranes.
Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
68/246
(4)
a.
b.
c.
(5)
a.
b.
c.
(6)
a.
b.
c.
(g)
(h)
(i)
(a)
(1)
(2)
connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy.
Mechanical.
Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping
installed, and before any backfill is put in place.
Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting,
and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly
connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy.
Gas.
Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and
before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected.
Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all
portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures
or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test.
Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing
systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the
requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is
in accordance with reviewed plans.
Energy.
Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place, and to verify that perimeter
insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required.
Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of
exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been
sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage.
Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy to verify installation and
R-value of ceiling and floor insulation and to verify correct SEER ratings on appliances.
Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system
beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the director of
inspections. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the
construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections.
Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural
frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first
obtaining a release from the director of inspections.
Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent
shall notify the director of inspections after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release
from the director of inspections has been received.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 4.8, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-129. - Certicates.
Certificate of occupancy.
Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a
building until after the director of inspections has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be
issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for
compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the director of
inspections.
Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
69/246
(3)
(4)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed
plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the director of inspections shall issue a certificate of
occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law,
and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes.
Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building,
which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building.
Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by
applying to the director of inspections and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance
with the intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the director of inspections, two sets of detailed drawings, or a
general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building
conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a
certificate of occupancy shall be issued.
Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for
certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not, grant
authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Service utilities.
Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to
any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by
the director of inspections and a certificate of occupancy.
Temporary connection. The director of inspections may authorize the temporary connection of the building or
system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use
under a temporary certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 4.9, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-130. - Posting oor loads.
Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose that will cause the floors thereof to be
loaded beyond their safe capacity. The director of inspections may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile,
commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be
exceeded.
Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of
group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent
architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from
the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The
computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the department.
Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor
loads, as reviewed by the director of inspections on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be
supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such
plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 4.10, 10-6-2005)
Secs. 18-131—18-150. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - TESTS
Sec. 18-151. - Required; expense.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
70/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
The director of inspections may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of
the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 5.1, 10-6-2005)
Secs. 18-152—18-170. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS
Sec. 18-171. - Creation.
There is hereby established the construction board of adjustment and appeals (the "board"), which shall consist of seven members
plus two nonvoting ex officio members as provided herein, all of whom shall be residents of the county. The city will utilize the sevenmember construction board of adjustment and appeals established by the City of Valdosta and the county. The city will abide by the
decisions of the board.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 6.1, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-172. - Method of appointment and terms.
The county board of commissioners shall appoint three members, one of whom shall be from the plumbing industry, one
of whom shall be a professional engineer, and one of whom shall be from the mechanical construction industry. The
mayor and council of the City of Valdosta shall appoint three members, one of whom shall be licensed architect, one of
whom shall be a licensed electrician, and one of whom shall be a licensed home builder. The final member shall be a
licensed general contractor appointed by the governing authorities on an alternating basis, with the initial appointment to
be made by the mayor and council of the City of Valdosta. In addition, one elected official from each governing authority
shall be appointed as a nonvoting ex officio member.
The board shall be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience of the construction codes as indicated above.
An effort will be made by the governing authorities to obtain input from the various associations regarding appointments.
With the exception of the nonvoting ex officio members who are elected officials of the governing authorities, none of the
board members shall hold any other public office of the city or county or be employees of the city or the county.
In making their initial appointments, the city and the county shall designate one of their appointees to serve a term to
expire June 30, 2005, one to serve a term to expire June 30, 2004, and one to serve a term to expire June 20, 2003. The
initial general contractor appointee shall serve a term to expire June 30, 2005.
Thereafter, each member shall be appointed to serve a term of three years with the term of each member to expire June
30 of the applicable year.
All members shall serve at the pleasure of the authority appointing such member. Any member may be removed with or
without cause by the authority appointing such member and a new member appointed to take his place for the remainder
of the removed member's unexpired term.
In the event any member resigns from the board, the governing authority which appointed him shall appoint a new
member to take his place for the remainder of the resigning member's unexpired term.
The board members shall receive no compensation for their service except that they shall be reimbursed for out-of-pocket
expenditures made in connection with their duties.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 6.2, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-173. - Ocers of the board.
A chairman, vice-chairman and secretary shall be elected by the members at the first quarterly meeting of the board. Thereafter, at
the first quarterly meeting of each year, a new chairman, vice-chairman and secretary shall be elected by the members.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
71/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(1)
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 6.3, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-174. - Regular meetings.
The board shall hold, at a minimum, quarterly meetings, on a date and at a place and time specified by the chairman.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 6.4, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-175. - Special meetings.
Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairman, the director of inspections or any two members of the board.
Reasonable advance notice of the place, time and date thereof shall be given to all members of the board. The time, date and place of the
meetings will be determined by the individual calling such meetings.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 6.5, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-176. - Records.
The department shall provide secretarial services to the board and shall make a detailed record of all proceedings which shall set
forth the reasons for all decisions and the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and failure of a member
to vote. These records shall be submitted to the board for their approval and kept on file in the department as a public record.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 6.6, 10-6-2005)
Sec.18-177. - Quorum and vote required of board; attendance.
Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum, and the vote of a majority present shall be required to enable the board to
act. To encourage attendance, if any member shall miss three consecutive meetings, he shall automatically be deemed removed and a
new member appointed to take his place for the remainder of the removed member's unexpired term.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 6.7, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-178. - Conicts of interest.
If a board member has any interest in any matter which may result in a gain or loss to that board member or to his immediate family,
by blood or by marriage, such member shall not participate in the consideration, discussion, questioning and voting on that particular
matter before the board, nor shall the member take any action which may influence the vote of any other member. If the chairman has a
conflict of interest, the vice-chairman shall preside over the meeting during consideration of that particular matter.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 6.8, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-179. - Duties and powers.
The purpose of the board shall be to:
Review and decide specific appeals made by individuals concerning the interpretation or administration of the
construction codes;
Review and decide upon waiver requests; and
Advise the governing authorities, the department and any other affected department on issues and matters of
concern as to procedures of the board or interpretation or construction of the construction codes.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 6.9, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-180. - Appeals and variances; hearings.
Appeals.
The holder of a permit, owner of a building, structure or service system or his duly authorized agent may appeal a
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
72/246
a.
b.
c.
d.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(3)
(b)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(2)
(3)
(c)
(1)
decision of the director of inspections to the board regarding any of the following:
The rejection or refusal to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials
to be used in the installation or alteration of the building, structure or service system.
Whether or not the provisions of the construction codes apply to this specific case.
Whether or not an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case.
Whether or not the true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder
have been misconstrued and incorrectly interpreted.
All appeals must be in writing and filed within 20 days of the decision of the director of inspections; provided,
however, that in the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the director of inspections
is unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous and/or poses a fire hazard, the director of inspections may, in his order, limit the
time for such notice of appeal to a shorter period. The notice of appeal shall be on such forms as may be approved
by the board from time to time and shall, at a minimum, contain the following information:
The nature of the complaint;
The code or ordinance section purported to be misinterpreted or misconstrued;
Why the decision, if applicable, represents an undue hardship on the appellant;
The appellant's interpretation or suggestion to resolve the complaint within the relevant ordinance or code
section. The board shall have no authority to reduce the requirements of any of the construction codes.
The board may establish a fee from time to time which shall accompany such notice of appeal.
Variances.
The board may, upon written petition and after a hearing, vary the application of any provision of the construction
codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would be manifest injustice and create a
hardship and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the construction code or public interest. In all cases, a
finding of all of the following shall be necessary to grant a variance:
That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system
involved and which are not applicable to others.
That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant.
That the granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by
the construction codes to other buildings, structures or service system.
That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will made possible the reasonable use of the building,
structure or service system; and
That the grant of the variance will be consistent with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes
and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(a)(7), the board shall not have the authority to grant
any variance or waiver which relieves any building, structure or use or the proposed plans from compliance with
state minimum fire standards.
The board may establish a fee from time to time which shall accompany each variance application.
In granting a variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance
required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may, in its discretion, prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a
variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes.
Hearings.
Hearings shall be called as provided for in section 18-175 and may be held in conjunction with any regular or special
meeting of the board. At or following each hearing, the board shall endeavor to reach a decision without
unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote on the decision. Each
decision shall be promptly filed in the department and shall be open to public inspection. A copy of the decision shall
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
73/246
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
be sent by mail or otherwise to the applicant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the department for two
weeks after filing. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the director of
inspections or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the director of inspections shall
immediately take action in accordance with such decision.
Each decision of the board shall be final, subject to such remedies as any appellant or aggrieved party might have at
law or in equity.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 6.10, 10-6-2005)
Sec. 18-181. - Rules and regulations.
The board shall establish rules and procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 6.11, 10-6-2005)
Secs. 18-182—18-210. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3.
Sec. 18-211. - Purpose of article.
It is the purpose of this article to:
Require the use of ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction or when replacing plumbing fixtures
during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings;
Require the certification of plumbing fixtures regarding flow rates and serviceability standards;
Promote compliance with state laws for the purpose of conserving water;
Maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies; and
Reduce wastewater flows.
Sec. 18-212. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Commercial building means any type of building other than residential.
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation
or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or
obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building.
Plumbing fixtures means any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators.
Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or
motel.
Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste.
Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste.
(Ord. No. 2-91, § 1, 11-14-1991)
(13)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
74/246
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Sec. 18-213. - Standards for xtures.
No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state plumbing code, whichever
is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during
remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 18-215. The effective date of this requirement for residential
buildings shall be April 1, 1992, and for commercial buildings the effective date shall be July 1, 1992.
All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to in this section shall not exceed the following maximum water use rates:
Toilets: 1.6 gallons per flush.
Urinals: 1.0 gallon per flush.
Showerheads: 2.5 gallons per minute, at 60 psi gauge pressure.
Kitchen faucets: 2.5 gallons per minute.
Bathroom and lavatory faucets: 2.0 gallons per minute.
The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not
be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (1) of this section.
Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing
type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (1) of this section.
The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with
ANSI/ASME A112.18.1M-1989 Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not
exceed those given in subsection (1) of this section.
All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for low consumption water
closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME
A112.19.6-1990 Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended.
(Ord. No. 2-91, § 2, 11-14-1991)
Sec. 18-214. - Product certication.
The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards in section 18-213 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described in
this section and providing, upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the city
building official. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow
rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as
prescribed in section 8 of such standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or
plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for
retail.
Sec. 18-215. - Exceptions.
Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the building official. New construction and the repair or
renovation of an existing building may be exempt from the standards of section 18-213 for the following:
Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc.
Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for the physically handicapped.
Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in a correctional institution which may
require more water for proper operation.
Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the
lower flows or for specialized purposes that cannot be accommodated by existing technology.
(Ord. No. 2-91, § 5, 11-14-1991)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
75/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
Sec. 18-216. - Enforcement; penalty for violation of article.
Citations for violations of this article may be issued by the building official or his authorized representative. Any person violating this
article shall be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, such person found guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished
as provided in section 1-11 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2-91, § 6, 11-14-1991)
Secs. 18-217—18-250. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
Sec. 18-251. - Purpose of article.
The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for the siting of all wireless, cellular, television, and radio telecommunications
towers and antennas. The goals of this article are:
To enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to deliver such services to the community
effectively and efficiently;
To locate telecommunications towers and antennas in areas where adverse impacts on the community are
minimized and to promote harmonious co-existence of telecommunications towers with other land uses;
To encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and to minimize the total number of towers within
residential areas;
To encourage the innovative use of alternative tower structures such as church steeples, outdoor advertising signs,
electric transmission towers, etc., where technologically feasible;
To encourage the design and construction of towers and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts and promote
visual quality; and
To encourage the joint use or collocation of new and existing tower sites among service providers.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. I, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-252. - Denitions.
The term "erected" includes the terms "constructed," "located" or "relocated. The terms "map" or "zoning map" mean the
Official Zoning Map of the City of Hahira, Georgia. The term "parcel" incluudes the term "plot" or "lot. The term "person"
includes the terms "individuals," "firms," "partnerships," "corporations," "associations," "governmental bodies," and all
other legal entities. The term "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary. The terms "used" or "occupied" include
the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
Except as specifically designated herein, all words used in this article shall be defined in "The New Illustrated Book of
Development Definitions" (1993, Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above referenced text shall be construed to
have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence or
section in which they occur. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Alternative tower structure means clock tower, bell tower, water tower, church steeple, light/power pole, electric transmission tower,
manmade tree (without accessory buildings/structures), and similar natural or manmade alternative-design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, radio, or television communications through the
sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
City council means the mayor and city council.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
76/246
(a)
Collocation means the placement of antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower or alternative tower structure.
Comprehensive plan means the Greater Lowndes Comprehensive Plan, as prepared, adopted and amended pursuant to state law.
Director of inspections means the director of the city inspections department or other jointly-provided inspections department with
local municipalities as established by interlocal agreement.
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
Geographic antenna placement area means the general vicinity within which the placement of an antenna is necessary to meet the
engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting need.
Governing authority means the city council.
Group location means a predetermined site approved through the special exception process that contains more than one tower
structure.
Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the
tower structure or appurtenance.
Inspections department means the city department of inspections or other jointly-provided inspections department with local
municipalities as established by interlocal agreement. Said department is managed by a director of inspections.
Planning commission means the Greater Lowndes Planning Commission.
Preexisting towers or antennas means structures as set forth in section 18-253(e).
Scenic views means those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the
comprehensive plan or determined as such by the planning commission.
Special exception means special use permit and review process as prescribed in the zoning ordinance.
Tall structure means any manmade structure exceeding 25 feet in height, and in the context of this article, used to support an
antenna or other telecommunications device.
Tower means any structure, including base and foundation components, that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose
of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio
and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telecommunication towers, manmade trees (with
accessory buildings/structures) and other similar structures.
Tower/antenna owner means the owner of the physical tower structure and/or lessee of such tower.
Visual quality means the appropriate design arrangement and location of tower and/or antenna structures in relation to the built or
natural environment to avoid abrupt or severe differences.
Zoning administrator means the zoning administrator for the city as designated by the city council.
Zoning ordinance means the officially adopted zoning ordinance for the city.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. II, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-253. - Application of article provisions.
Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the regulations of this article, the requirements contained herein are declared
to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of this article. The zoning administrator shall be the
official interpreter of this article where official interpretations are needed, required or requested.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
77/246
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
Height thresholds. Except as set forth in subsection (d) of this section, the requirements of this article shall govern the locatio
telecommunications towers and/or antennas that exceed a height of 50 feet within the city.
Governmental exemption. The provisions of this article shall not apply to governmental facilities and structures.
Amateur radio, receive-only antennas. This article shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna, that is 75
feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator from the
operator's residence, or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna. Also, this article shall not govern any device
designed for over-the-air reception-only of television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or
direct broadcast satellite service whose tower and/or antenna is 75 feet or less in height.
Preexisting towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective
date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be required to meet the provisions of this article, other
than the requirements of sections 18-266 and 18-267. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this article as
"preexisting towers" or "preexisting antennas." If an additional antenna is collocated upon a preexisting tower after the
adoption of this article, then fencing and landscaping requirements of sections 18-263 and 18-264 shall be met as part of
the permitting process.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. III, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-254. - Principal or accessory use.
A tower and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary structure, and is
considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structure. An existing use
or structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower. For purposes of determining whether
the installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning district requirements including, but not limited to, setback, buffer and other
requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or tower may be located in a leased area
within such lot or parcel. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this article
shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 400, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-255. - Preapplication meeting.
Prior to applying for a building permit or special exception approval, the applicant is required to participate in a preapplication
meeting with local development review staff. The purpose of this meeting shall be for fact finding and determining the correct or most
feasible course of action for review and potential approval of the project. This preapplication meeting shall be scheduled at least two
weeks in advance.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 401, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-256. - Inventory of existing sites.
To facilitate the collocation review of antennas, each applicant seeking to locate a new tower, alternative tower structure
or antenna, or modify any such existing structure, shall have provided to the zoning administrator and the inspections
department, and to the planning commission as part of the special exception review, an updated inventory of its existing
towers or alternative tower structures. Applicants seeking to erect an amateur radio tower or antenna, or receive-only
antenna as described in section 18-253(d), shall be exempt from this provision. This required inventory information shall
be maintained by the inspections department and the zoning administrator in the form of a digital database that is
geographically referenced and encoded as part of the city's geographic information system (GIS). It is the responsibility of
the applicant to ensure that this inventory data is accurate and kept up to date.
The inventory shall include all such structures that are within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; within the
unincorporated county that is within five miles of city limits; or within one-quarter mile outside the border of the county
that is also within five miles of city limits. This inventory shall include specific information about the location (latitude and
longitude coordinates), height, design, tower type and general suitability for antenna collocation of each tower, and other
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
78/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
pertinent information as may be required by the director of inspections or zoning administrator. The director of
inspections or zoning administrator may share such information with other applicants under the terms of this article, or
other organizations seeking to locate towers or antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; provided,
however, that the director of inspections or zoning administrator is not, by sharing such information, in any way
representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 402, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-257. - Collocation of antennas required.
Applicants for the erection of a tower or placement of an antenna shall be required to collocate upon an existing tower or alternative
tower structure. An exception to collocation shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable
for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area utilizing the tower inventory maintained by the inspections
department, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 18-259.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 403, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-258. - Collocation; design requirements.
In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all towers, except amateur radio towers, shall be designed to accommodate
the collocation of other telecommunication antennas according to the following:
For towers up to 150 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least
two providers;
For towers 150 feet in height or greater, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at
least three providers; and
For towers that are exempted from co-location, they cannot locate within a five-mile radius of an existing tower or
antenna structure governed by this article, or they must locate in an area that has been set aside for group location.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 404, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-259. - Collocation; availability of suitable existing structures.
No new tower, except amateur radio towers, shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director
of inspections, zoning administrator, and city council that no existing tower or existing alternative tower structure can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified
industry experts. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna shall
consist of one or more of the following:
That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within the geographic antenna placement
area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
That existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
That existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and
related equipment.
That the applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing
towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing tower or structures would cause interference with the applicant's
proposed antenna.
That the cost or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure, or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are
presumed to be unreasonable.
That the applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and
structures unsuitable.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
79/246
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 405, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-260. - Collocation; alternative options.
If it is adequately demonstrated that antenna collocation as required above, is not possible for a given geographic antenna
placement area, the following options are allowed pursuant to the special exception process. However, all such options shall comply with
all applicable requirements of this article as well as all other applicable codes and ordinances.
Constructing a new tower, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with said tower or antenna provided however, that all structures shall meet the setback, screening and
buffer requirements contained herein, and are located a minimum distance of 110 percent of the height of the tower
from any residentially zoned property.
Installation of an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water
tower, or other freestanding nonresidential structure) that is 50 feet in height or greater, if the additional antenna
height adds no more than 20 feet to the height of the existing structure, subject to the special review provisions of
section 18-265
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 406, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-261. - Aesthetics.
The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the design and construction of all towers and the installation of all antennas
governed by this article:
Towers/antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards of
the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
At all tower sites, the design of all buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening,
and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and building environment.
For antennas installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
ground equipment shall be of a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive.
Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
No signage or other identifying markings of a commercial nature shall be permitted upon any tower.
Towers shall not be located where they will negatively affect historic structures or districts, or scenic view corridors.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 407, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-262. - Setbacks.
The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers:
Towers/antennas shall be setback a minimum distance equal to one-third of the height of the tower from its base to
any public right-of-way or property line of the lot or parcel containing the tower.
Guy wires and accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum accessory use location and setback
requirements prescribed in the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 408, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-263. - Security fencing/anticlimbing devices.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
80/246
(1)
(2)
All towers and supporting equipment governed by this article shall be enclosed by fencing not less than seven feet in height and shall
also be equipped with appropriate anticlimbing devices. Fencing shall be of chainlink, wood or other alternative as approved through the
special exception process.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 409, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-264. - Landscaping.
The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all towers governed by this article:
Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a landscaped area of plant materials which effectively screens the view of
the tower compound. Landscaped areas shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and located outside the fenced
perimeter of the compound. Landscaped areas shall satisfy the minimum design and planting requirements for
buffers established in the zoning ordinance. Where applicable, specific landscape plans shall be submitted and
approved as part of the special exception process.
Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
Where natural vegetation around the perimeter of the site would provide an adequate visual screen, an undisturbed
buffer may be utilized.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 410, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-265. - Review of tower and antenna erection.
Review of tower and antenna erection may be made by Valdosta Regional Airport Authority and Moody AFB. If upon receipt of an
application for the erection of any tower or alternative tower structure governed by this article and it is deemed by the director of
inspections or zoning administrator that the proposed structure may interfere with the use of the aircraft traffic pattern around Moody
AFB, or interfere with the operation of existing or proposed airport facilities, a copy of the application shall also be submitted to Moody
AFB for review and recommendation.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 411, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-266. - Federal requirements.
All towers must meet or exceed current standards and the regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal
government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the owners of the towers
and antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations
within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more or less stringent compliance schedule is
mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing
authority shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 412, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-267. - Building codes; safety standards.
To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee of a tower or alternative tower structure shall
ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for
towers that are published by the Electronics Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the director of
inspections concludes that a tower fails to comply with all applicable codes and standards, or constitutes a danger to persons or
property, then upon receipt of written notice to the owner, permittee or lessee of the tower, said party shall have 15 days to bring the
tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner, permittee or lessee fails to bring the tower into compliance within the 15 days,
the governing authority may remove the tower at the owner, permittee or lessee's expense. Prior to the removal of any tower, the
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
81/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
(1)
(2)
inspections department may consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee for repair of substandard
towers, and may grant a reasonable extension of the above referenced compliance period. Any such removal by the governing authority
shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 413, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-268. - Change of ownership notication.
Upon the transfer of ownership of any tower, alternative tower structure, or lot upon which a structure has been erected, the tower
permittee shall notify the inspections department of the transaction in writing within 30 days.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. IV, § 414, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-269. - Variances and appeals.
Variances. In such instance, the city council may approve such variances from the terms of this article as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this article will, in an individual
case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this article shall by observed, public safety and welfare secured,
and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted in such individual cases of undue hardship upon a finding by
the city council that the denial of the variance presents a significant detriment to the telecommunications service provider
making application, and that the denial of the variance is unsubstantially related to the public welfare.
Public hearing required. The city council may take action on a requested variance at a public hearing held in conjunction
with the special exception approval, where applicable, or else take action at a public hearing that has been advertised in
the same manner as a special exception.
Appeals. Applicants or persons aggrieved by the zoning administrator's interpretation of the provisions of this article, may
appeal such interpretation to the city council in the same manner as prescribed for appeals in the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. V, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-270. - Administrative approvals.
Generally.
The director of inspections and zoning administrator may administratively approve the placement of additional
antennas upon towers or alternative tower structures as set forth in subsection (b) of this section.
Each applicant requesting an administrative approval under this article shall submit a scaled site plan, scaled
elevation view and supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate
licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including topography, tower height
requirements, setbacks, access driveways or easements, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and any other
information deemed by the director of inspections or zoning administrator to be necessary to assess compliance
with this article and compatibility with surrounding uses. Amateur radio antennas shall meet the requirements of the
city's adopted building codes. Certain documentation requirements of this section may be waived by the director of
inspections and zoning administrator for amateur radio antenna applications.
If a request for administrative approval is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council to be
acted upon at a public hearing during a regularly scheduled meeting.
Uses allowed by administrative approval. The following uses may be approved by the inspections department and zoning
administrator after conducting an administrative review, and special review provisions of section 18-265, where applicable:
Installation of an antenna on any alternative tower structure, and further including the placement of additional
buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as such addition does not
add more than 20 feet to the height of the existing structure.
Installation of an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including a pre-existing tower, and further including the
placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as
the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
82/246
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. VI, §§ 600, 601, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-271. - Abandoned towers and antennas; removal.
Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period exceeding 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the
owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the structure and return the site back to its original condition within 90 days of receipt of
notice from the inspections department notifying the owner of such abandonment. Foundation components shall be removed to a
minimum depth of 24 inches below original grade. If said tower or antenna is not removed within said 90 days, the governing authority
may, in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8—41-2-17, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or
more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease utilizing the tower.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. VII, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-272. - Conict with other laws.
Whenever the regulations of this article require a greater width, depth or size of yard or impose other more restrictive standards
than are required in or under any other statute or covenants, the requirements of this article shall govern. Whenever the provisions of
any other statute or covenants require more restrictive standards than those of this article, the provisions of such statutes or covenants
shall govern.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. VIII, § 800, 4-6-2000)
Sec. 18-273. - Repeal of conicting resolutions and ordinances.
All resolutions and ordinances or portions thereof in conflict with this article are hereby repealed.
(Ord. No. 1-2000, art. VIII, § 802, 4-6-2000)
Chapter 22 - BUSINESS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public
Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(5); evidence of state license as prerequisite to local business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6;
exemption from taxation of agricultural products and livestock raised in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - AUCTIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Auctioneers, O.C.G.A. § 43-6-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 22-31. - Exemptions.
Nothing in this article shall be held to apply to auction sales conducted by trustees or referees in bankruptcy, executors,
administrators, receivers or other public officers acting under judicial process, nor to the sale of real property at auction.
(Code 1985, § 8-36(f))
(14)
(15)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
83/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
Sec. 22-32. - Sales.
No auction sale shall be held except as set forth in the application and affidavit, and no other articles shall be sold except those
included in the sworn inventory unless a new affidavit shall be filed listing additional goods to be sold. No other person shall be allowed
to conduct the auction sale except such person listed in the affidavit unless a new affidavit is filed setting forth such other person who
may be employed to conduct such auction and cry off such goods.
(Code 1985, § 8-36(d))
Sec. 22-33. - Cappers; boosters; by-bidders.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act or to employ another in any auction sale as a by-bidder or what is sometimes known as a
"capper" or "booster," or to make or to accept any false or misleading bid, or to pretend to buy or sell any article sold or offered for sale
at such auction.
(Code 1985, § 8-36(e))
Secs. 22-34—22-50. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE
Sec. 22-51. - Required.
Each person who desires to conduct an auction within this city shall be required to obtain a license therefor from the city clerk in the
manner specified in this article.
(Code 1985, § 8-36(a))
Sec. 22-52. - Fee.
The business license fee for each auction licensed under this article shall be as provided in the annual license ordinance.
(Code 1985, § 8-36(b))
Sec. 22-53. - Application.
Application for a license under this article shall be made as provided in this chapter, except that such application shall contain the
following additional information:
A statement setting forth when, where and for how long the auction sale will be conducted;
A certified copy of the state auctioneer's license of the person who is to conduct the auction; and
A full and true inventory of all the articles to be sold at the auction sale, together with an affidavit that all information
contained in the application is true and that the inventory contains a true listing of all the articles to be sold at said
auction.
(Code 1985, § 8-36(c))
Secs. 22-54—22-80. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - CHARITABLE SOLICITORS
Sec. 22-81. - Registration.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
84/246
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Required. Any person who wishes to solicit donations or contributions for, or to sell any insignia or novelty on the streets of t
behalf of, or under the sponsorship of, any charitable, religious, social, patriotic or civic club or organization shall be required
such solicitation or sale with the chief of police at least 48 hours in advance of such event and to obtain a permit therefor.
Form. The registration required by this section shall be in writing, shall be signed by the chief officer of the club or
organization and shall contain the following information:
The name and object of the charitable, religious, social, patriotic or civic club or organization conducting or
sponsoring the solicitation or sale to which the registration relates;
The day or days on which the solicitation or sale will take place;
The object for which the funds to be derived from the solicitation or sale will be utilized; and
The name and address of the chief officer of the club or organization conducting or sponsoring the solicitation or
sale.
Exemption. This section shall not apply to any locally established organization or church operated exclusively for
charitable or religious purposes if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies
of any such organization or church.
Duty to exhibit. Charitable solicitors shall be required to exhibit their permits at the request of any citizen.
Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to execute a registration which contains any false statement, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to solicit donations or contributions or sell any insignia or novelty on the streets of the city
purportedly in behalf of, or under the sponsorship of, any charitable, religious, social, patriotic or civic club or organization
which does not in fact exist.
(Code 1985, § 8-33)
State law reference— Professional fund raisers and professional solicitors, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.
Secs. 22-82—22-110. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNBROKERS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 22-111. - Weapons.
No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge or purchase any revolver, pistol, blackjack or sawed-off shotgun, and no pawnbroker shall
display in his window or shop any such weapons for sale.
(Code 1985, § 8-35(f))
Sec. 22-112. - Minors.
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a
minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist him in his business.
(Code 1985, § 8-35(g))
Sec. 22-113. - Stolen goods.
(16)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
85/246
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him, or which is sought to be pledged with
him, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a
lost article.
(Code 1985, § 8-35(h))
Secs. 22-114—22-130. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE
Sec. 22-131. - Required.
Each pawnbroker doing business within this city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in
this division.
(Code 1985, § 8-34(a))
Sec. 22-132. - Fee.
The annual business license fee for each pawnbroker doing business in this city shall be as provided in the annual license ordinance.
(Code 1985, § 8-34(b))
Sec. 22-133. - Review of application.
No action on any application for a pawnbroker's license shall be taken by the city council until the chief of police has reviewed such
application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the city clerk in the manner specified in this article.
(Code 1985, § 8-34(c))
Sec. 22-134. - Limitation on issuance.
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or of burglary
or robbery.
(Code 1985, § 8-34(d))
Sec. 22-135. - Records.
Each pawnbroker licensed hereunder shall furnish to the police chief each week a list of every article pledged with him or sold to him
during the previous week, giving a full and accurate description of the article, from whom it was received and the hour of the day
received.
(Code 1985, § 8-34(e))
Secs. 22-136—22-170. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLERS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 22-171. - Denitions.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
86/246
(1)
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Itinerant merchant means any person, firm or corporation (whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of
the city or not) who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in
the furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, boat or
public room in any hotel, lodging house, apartment or shop within the city for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and
merchandise, either privately or at public auction.
Peddler means any person (whether a resident of this city or not) traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of
conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares,
merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden produce, farm products or provisions who offers and exposes the same for sale, or
who, without travelling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other
vehicle or conveyance.
(Code 1985, § 8-32(b))
Sec. 22-172. - Exemptions.
This article shall not be applicable to traveling salesmen or nonresident merchants as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354, nor to
newsboys, nor to bona fide merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business, nor to bona fide charitable, religious
or philanthropic organizations.
(Code 1985, § 8-32(c))
Sec. 22-173. - Noise; speaking devices.
No licensee under this article, nor anyone in his behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound
device, including any loud-speaking radio or amplifying system, upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or
upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard
upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise
which such licensee proposes to sell, unless a permit for such sound amplification has been obtained from the mayor or the chief of
police.
(Code 1985, § 8-32(h))
Secs. 22-174—22-190. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE
Sec. 22-191. - Required.
Each peddler and itinerant merchant, as such terms are defined in this section, who does business within this city shall be required
to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this division.
(Code 1985, § 8-32(a))
Sec. 22-192. - Application.
Application for a license under this article shall be made as provided in this chapter, except that such application shall contain the
following additional information:
The fingerprints of the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business, or in
lieu thereof at least three letters of recommendation from reliable property owners in the county, certifying as to the
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
87/246
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
applicant's good character and business responsibility, or other evidence which establishes the good character and
business responsibility of such person or persons to the satisfaction of the mayor and council;
The places in the city where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business, and the length of time during which it
is proposed that said business shall be conducted;
The places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant within the six months
next preceding the date of said application conducted a transient business, stating the nature thereof and giving the
post office and street address of any building or office in which such business was conducted;
A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by
the applicant in the city; the invoice value and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise; where the goods or
property to be sold are manufactured or produced; and where such goods or products are located at the time said
application is filed;
A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract
customers, and, if required by the city clerk, copies of all of said advertising, whether by handbills, circulars,
newspaper advertising or otherwise, shall be attached to said application as exhibits thereto; and
Whether or not the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business have been
convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the
punishment assessed therefor.
(Code 1985, § 8-32(d))
Sec. 22-193. - Service of process.
Before any license as herein provided shall be issued for engaging in business as peddler or itinerant merchant in this city, the
applicant for such license shall file with the city clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the city clerk as his true and lawful agent
with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of said applicant in respect to any matters
connected with or arising out of the business transacted under said license and the bond given as required by this section, or for the
performance of the conditions of said bond, or for any breach thereof, which instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that said
applicant for said license consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon said agent, and when so made
shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served upon the person applying for the license under this article, according to the
law of this or any other state, and waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner of service.
Immediately upon service of process upon the city clerk, as herein provided, the city clerk shall send to the licensee at his last known
address, by registered mail, a copy of said process.
(Code 1985, § 8-32(e))
Sec. 22-194. - Fee.
The business license fee for each peddler and itinerant merchant doing business in the city shall be as provided in the annual license
ordinance.
(Code 1985, § 8-32(f))
Sec. 22-195. - Duty to exhibit.
All persons obtaining a license under the provisions of this division shall be required to exhibit such license at the request of any
citizen.
(Code 1985, § 8-32(g))
Secs. 22-196—22-230. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - USED CAR DEALERS
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
88/246
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Used Motor Vehicle Dealers' and Used Motor Vehicle Parts Dealers' Registration Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 22-231. - Records.
Each used car dealer or used motor vehicle dealer licensed under this article shall keep a record of all motor vehicles offered for sale,
exchange or disposal to the public, which record shall show the make of said motor vehicle, the year of its manufacture, its serial number
and its engine number, and which record shall always be kept available for the chief of police or any patrolman or police officer within
the city and open to his inspection at any time. It shall be the further duty of every such person to immediately report to the chief of
police the presence in his place of business of any motor vehicle on which the serial or engine number has been defaced or altered.
(Code 1985, § 8-35(e))
Sec. 22-232. - Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make inspections from time to time for the purpose of seeing that the records required
herein are being kept.
(Code 1985, § 8-35(f))
Sec. 22-233. - Exceptions.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to apply to any individual making an isolated sale of his own vehicle.
(Code 1985, § 8-35(g))
State law reference— Used car dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-1 et seq.; municipal licensing and regulation, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-14; records,
O.C.G.A. § 43-47-13.
Secs. 22-234—22-250. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE
Sec. 22-251. - Required.
Any used car dealer or used motor vehicle dealer, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-47-2, who does business within this city
shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this division.
(Code 1985, § 8-35(a))
Sec. 22-252. - Fee.
The annual business license fee for each used car dealer or used motor vehicle dealer doing business in the city shall be as provided
in the annual license ordinance.
(Code 1985, § 8-35(b))
Sec. 22-253. - Review of application.
No action on any application for a license under this division shall be taken by the city council until the chief of police has reviewed
such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the city clerk in the manner specified in this article.
(17)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
89/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(Code 1985, § 8-35(c))
Sec. 22-254. - Restriction on issuance.
No license under this article shall be issued to any applicant who has not been licensed, or made provisions or application to become
licensed, by the state board of registration of used car dealers.
(Code 1985, § 8-35(d))
Chapter 26 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county,
O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 26-1. - Basic service rates and charges.
The city will follow the FCC Rate and Regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company
and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the
franchise.
In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of
interested parties.
The city manager or his designee is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification
forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC Rate Regulations in order to enable the
city to regulate basic service rates and charges.
(Ord. No. 4093, §§ 1—3, 9-2-1993)
Secs. 26-2—26-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FRANCHISE
Sec. 26-31. - Denitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this
section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number
include the plural number.
Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications
Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as may be further amended from time
to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act
otherwise becomes inapplicable, "Cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term
no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable.
Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act.
City means the City of Hahira.
City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto.
(18)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
90/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a
franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the
streets to provide telecommunications services.
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a
system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable or telecommunications services, or both, to inhabitants within
the franchise area.
May is permissive.
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity,
whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city.
Shall is mandatory, not merely directive.
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards,
driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city.
Telecommunications services means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial cable,
optical fiber, or satellite or microwave transmission, of one or more audio, voice or data signals. Telecommunications services includes
both cable services and non-cable telecommunications services.
(Ord. No. 1-99, § 1.1, 6-3-1994)
Sec. 26-32. - Delegation.
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and re-delegate, and to revoke any such delegation or
re-delegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this ordinance to any body, organization or official. Any such
delegation, re-delegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this ordinance or to require
the consent of any applicant for a franchise or franchisee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards,
with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the
subject of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1-99, § 3.2, 6-3-1994)
Sec. 26-33. - Retroactive application.
This ordinance shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for cable services and other telecommunications services existing on
the effective date of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1-99, § II, 6-3-1994)
Sec. 26-34. - Granting authority.
No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a franchise granted in accordance with the
provisions of this article, and no person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications service other
than cable services without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article.
The city council may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves
the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof.
The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such
terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and
the franchisee.
Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional
franchises as it deems appropriate and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services.
A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city and for or less than all telecommunications services,
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
91/246
(f)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
(3)
a.
b.
c.
and for telecommunications services for all or less than all purposes.
The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, governing cable television franchises and renewals thereof.
(Ord. No. 1-99, § 2.1, 6-3-1994)
Sec. 26-35. - Franchise applications.
Submission form. Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions
as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law.
Contents. Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the
proposed franchise and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate:
Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security
number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and
registrations) used by applicant;
A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant including, but not limited to,
the following, and to whatever extent required by the city:
The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant;
The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of
the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity;
The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning
or controlling the applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a
statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity including, but not limited to,
telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the
areas served thereby;
A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public
accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other
acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the
applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding
source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital
shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications or cable system
in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has
available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable or
telecommunications system in the city;
A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers,
rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a
sources and uses of funds statement; and
A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system or telecommunication franchise(s) awarded
to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the
total cost of completion of such franchised cable or telecommunication system(s); and the amount of
applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof;
A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
A description of the cable services and any other telecommunications services proposed to be provided;
A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of
all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced;
A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against
subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
92/246
d.
e.
f.
(4)
(5)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
service charges, and any other telecommunications service charges;
A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards
proposed by the applicant;
A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between
the applicant and any subscriber to cable or telecommunications services; and
A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or
informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or
corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the
franchise;
A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for
the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and
Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such
application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law.
Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without
payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not
be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will
not be refunded.
Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect
costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall
include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses.
Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application.
Notwithstanding any other requirement of this subsection, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a
nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the
City of Hahira.
(Ord. No. 1-99, § 2.2, 6-3-1994)
Sec. 26-36. - Responsibilities of applicants.
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules,
regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 1-99, § 2.3, 6-3-1994)
Sec. 26-37. - Public availability of applications.
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments
thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours.
(Ord. No. 1-99, § 2.4, 6-3-1994)
Sec. 26-38. - Evaluation criteria.
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the city council may consider such factors as it deems
appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation:
The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and
telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city;
The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant;
The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the
franchise;
The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
93/246
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
be provided, including the type of telecommunications services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those
services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise;
The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all
purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and
Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the
city and the public.
(Ord. No. 1-99, § 2.5, 6-3-1994)
Sec. 26-39. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications.
The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems
necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be
granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In
considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory
bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more
reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications.
If the city council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider one or
more applications, the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and
setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any Persons having any interest therein or objections thereto
may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s)
in accordance with applicable law.
The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such
applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise.
Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the franchise, and may
specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from
whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may
not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all
requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires,
request new or additional proposals.
(Ord. No. 1-99, § 2.6, 6-3-1994)
Sec. 26-40. - Terms and conditions of franchise.
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance
granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall
address the following subjects:
The term of the franchise;
The franchise area and the cable services and other telecommunications services and purposes of such other
telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of the franchise;
The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or
services, or both;
The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled;
The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the
performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise;
The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee;
Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee;
The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
94/246
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
inspection rights with respect thereto;
Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods;
Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules
and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations;
Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the franchisee by the city;
Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city;
Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with
terms and conditions of the franchise;
Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws,
regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the
Federal Communications Commission;
Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from
damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of
improvements related to the franchise;
Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in
connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and
Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest.
(Ord. No. 1-99, § 2.7, 6-3-1994)
Chapter 30 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 30-31. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which
military forces are primarily responsible; to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy
emergencies, disasters or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil
disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert
danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, or other causes. These
functions include, without limitation:
Firefighting services;
Police services;
Medical and health services;
Rescue; engineering;
Warning services;
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
95/246
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
Communications;
Defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons;
Evacuation of persons from stricken areas;
Emergency welfare services;
Emergency transportation;
Plant protection;
Temporary restoration of public utility services; and
Other functions related to civilian protection;
together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions.
Sec. 30-32. - Unlawful acts during emergencies.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency:
To wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management corps in the enforcement of any
lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this
article.
To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a
nature as to give assistance to the enemy, imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this city, or prevent, hinder
or delay the defense or protection thereof.
To wear or carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the emergency management
agency.
Sec. 30-33. - Penalties for violation of article.
Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11.
Secs. 30-34—30-50. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY AUTHORITY OF MAYOR
Sec. 30-51. - Conditions authorizing declaration of emergency.
The mayor shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when, in his opinion, one or more of the following conditions exist:
There is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions.
Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of city streets or areas difficult or impossible.
Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists.
There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city.
Sec. 30-52. - Powers after declaration.
After declaration of an emergency under section 30-51, the mayor, as chief executive, shall have the right to exercise any or all of the
following powers:
To use employees of the city to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of its citizenry.
To close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
96/246
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
To impose emergency curfew regulations.
To close business establishments within the affected area.
To close any or all city-owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public.
To do all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city.
Sec. 30-53. - Eective period of emergency powers.
No emergency power as set forth in section 30-52 may be effective for more than 72 hours after the declaration of an emergency by
the mayor. However, upon declaration of a second or further emergencies to exist, the emergency powers as set forth in such section
may be exercised during such further emergency period or periods, but never for more than 72 hours in one declared emergency period.
Sec. 30-54. - Duration.
No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular, special or called meeting of the mayor and city council.
Sec. 30-55. - Specied area.
The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared
to exist.
Secs. 30-56—30-80. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
Sec. 30-81. - Participation.
It is the desire and intent of the mayor and city council that the city be a part of the county emergency management agency.
Sec. 30-82. - Director; appointment.
The chairman of the county commission, with concurrence of the mayors of cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment,
by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county.
Sec. 30-83. - Duties of director.
When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties:
Represent the mayor and city council on matters pertaining to emergency management;
Assist city officials in organizing city departments;
Develop, in conjunction with city and county departments the county plan for emergency functions set forth in
section 30-84; such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency
operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities therein for approval,
and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval;
Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency
management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency;
Submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily
activity, etc.;
Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center;
Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, under the
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
97/246
(a)
(b)
supervision of the county governing officials.
_____
Sec. 30-84. - Composition; functions.
The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing city and county departments. The
emergency functions are assigned as follows:
Department/agency Functions
(1) County board of commissioners and
city mayors
Direction and control
(2) County clerk Administrative services, resources management
(3) County sheri's department and city police
departments
Police services, search and recover, communications
(4) County re department and city re
departments
Fire control, hazardous material control, rescue
(5) County superintendent of schools and
municipal superintendents of schools
Transportation services
(6) County road and bridges department and city street
departments
Engineering
(7) City water, light and gas commission and county
sewerage and water authority
Utilities, petroleum, solid fuel
(8) County department of family and children services Social services
(9) County health department Health and medical services
(10) County chamber of commerce Emergency public information
(11) County emergency management agency Evacuation, radiological protection, training, damage
assessment, public property assistance, specic
hazards, state military support
(12) County chapter American Red Cross Sheltering and temporary housing, food services
Heads of city departments listed above are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency
operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency
management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
98/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
Sec. 30-85. - Powers during an emergency or disaster.
Upon a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives
and property of the citizens of city, the mayor separately, or jointly with the chairman of the county commissioners, or in their absences
their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for
such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers:
Enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control
over all emergency management resources;
Seize or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public;
Sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain
a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies;
Perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to
promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county.
Sec. 30-86. - Volunteers.
All persons other than officers and employees of the city volunteering in service pursuant to the defense under this division shall
serve without compensation. While engaged in such service they shall have the same immunities as officers and employees of the city
performing similar duties.
Sec. 30-87. - Penalties for violation of division.
Any person violating any provision of this division, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this division, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11.
Chapter 34 - COURT
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Duty of superintendent to fix location of polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-265; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-
1 et seq.
Sec. 34-1. - Qualications of judge.
The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. No person shall be so
appointed unless he is a resident of the judicial circuit in which the court is located, is a member in good standing of the State Bar of
Georgia and has been actively engaged in the practice of law (either as an attorney or as a judge) for at least five years preceding his
appointment.
(Code 1985, § 13-1)
State law reference— Appointment of judge in certain cities, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2; judicial circuits, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-1 et seq.
Sec. 34-2. - Clerk of court.
The clerk of court of the municipal court shall be appointed by the chief of police.
The duties of the court clerk shall consist generally of seeing that the courtroom is in proper condition for sessions of
court, of assisting in keeping order while the court is in session and of doing such other acts of assistance as may be
required of him by the judge of the court and the chief of police.
(Code 1985, § 13-2)
(19)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
99/246
Sec. 34-3. - Record of cases.
A record of all cases heard in the municipal court for violations of this Code or other municipal ordinances shall be kept in a suitable
bound volume by the court clerk. Such record shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final
disposition of the case and the date of final disposition.
(Code 1985, § 13-3)
Sec. 34-4. - Service of summons.
Any person charged with violating any city ordinance shall receive notice by service of a summons as provided in this section. Such
summons may be issued by the court clerk, the building inspector or any police officer of the city. The summons shall be directed to the
accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, the time and place, as far as practicable, of the offense charged and the day, hour
and place of trial, requiring the accused to appear before the judge of the municipal court to answer the accusation made. Service of the
summons shall be made by a police officer of the city either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his most notorious
place of abode, except that in the case of a summons issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles,
such summons may be directed to an unknown person as owner of an automobile designated in the summons and may be served upon
such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile.
(Code 1985, § 13-4)
State law reference— Process, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-4.
Sec. 34-5. - Subpoenas.
The court clerk shall issue subpoenas for the appearance of all witnesses necessary for the prosecution or for the defense in any
case pending before the municipal court. All subpoenas shall be served in the same manner as a summons.
(Code 1985, § 13-5)
State law reference— Subpoenas, O.C.G.A. § 24-10-20 et seq.
Sec. 34-6. - Failure to obey summons or subpoena.
Any person who fails to appear at the time and place set out in any summons or subpoena served upon him shall be guilty of
contempt of court and upon conviction thereof shall pay a fine of not more than $1,000.00.
(Code 1985, § 13-6)
State law reference— Enforcement of subpoenas, O.C.G.A. § 24-10-25.
Sec. 34-7. - Arrest; bond.
When a police officer has arrested any person for violation of any provision of this Code or any municipal ordinance and a trial
cannot be had immediately, the officer may take a cash bond not exceeding the maximum fine for the offense (or a bond with a good
security) for the appearance of such person before the judge of the municipal court. If such person fails or refuses to give a bond, the
officer may confine him in the county jail until a trial can be held.
(Code 1985, § 13-7)
State law reference— Cash bonds, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-10.
Sec. 34-8. - Forfeiture of bond.
Upon the failure of a person to appear in the municipal court at the time and place fixed by the summons, the judge of said court
shall enter a judgment of forfeiture on any cash bond, or, in the case of a security bond, shall pass a rule requiring the principal and
surety on such bond to show cause on the date named therein (which date shall not be less than ten days from the passage of such
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
100/246
ruling) why they should not be required to pay the amount of said bond. If no sufficient cause is shown, the judge shall enter judgment
against the principal and surety for the amount of the forfeited bond and shall direct the city clerk to issue execution thereon.
(Code 1985, § 13-8)
State law reference— Forfeiture of appearance bonds generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-4; forfeiture of cash bonds, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-10;
executions and judicial sales, O.C.G.A. § 9-13-1 et seq.
Sec. 34-9. - Court costs.
The costs which shall be charged against a defendant in the municipal court in the event of his conviction shall not exceed $1,000.00,
which sum shall be paid into the city treasury.
(Code 1985, § 13-9)
State law reference— Costs, O.C.G.A. § 17-11-1 et seq.
Sec. 34-10. - Malicious prosecution.
Whenever the municipal judge, after a fair and full trial, is satisfied that any case was frivolously or maliciously prosecuted, he shall
assess the prosecution with the court costs and such punitive damages as he deems appropriate.
(Code 1985, § 13-10)
State law reference— Imposition of costs and jail fees upon prosecution, O.C.G.A. § 17-11-4; false arrest, false imprisonment and
malicious prosecution, O.C.G.A. § 51-7-1 et seq.
Sec. 34-11. - Collection of nes.
When directed by the judge of the municipal court, the court clerk shall issue executions for fines imposed by said court (including
the costs) which executions may be levied upon any goods or chattels, lands or tenements of the person so fined.
(Code 1985, § 13-11)
State law reference— Executions and judicial sales, O.C.G.A. § 9-13-1 et seq.
Sec. 34-12. - Appeal.
Appeals from decisions of the municipal court shall be taken to the superior court or state court of the county in the manner
provided for appeals from the court of probate.
(Code 1985, § 13-12)
State law reference— Appeal from probate court to superior court, O.C.G.A. § 5-3-2.
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - AIR QUALITY CONTROL
FOOTNOTE(S):
State constitution reference— Power of city to provide air quality control and fire protection services, art. IX, § 2, para. 3.
(20)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
101/246
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
State Law reference— Restrictions on operation, installation, maintenance, etc., of electronic security systems by local governments,
O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 911 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq.
Sec. 38-31. - Penalties for violation of article.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine, to be imposed at the discretion of the judge of the
municipal court.
(Code 1985, § 3-1)
State law reference— Injunctions, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-65; penalties under Air Quality Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-22 et seq.
Sec. 38-32. - Enforcement of article provisions.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the fire chief and the police chief and such subordinate officers of the fire
department and police department as are necessary to effectuate the requirements set forth herein.
(Code 1985, § 3-2)
Sec. 38-33. - Emissions of gases, vapors, odors.
No person shall cause, suffer or allow any emissions of gases, vapors or odors beyond the property line from which such
emissions occur to be in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as is or is likely to be injurious to the
public welfare; to the health of human, plant or animal life; or to property; or which interfere with the enjoyment of life
and property.
Detectable odors emitted from the following sources of emission are hereby declared to be objectionable per se:
Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture;
Asphalt manufacture or refining;
Blood processing;
Bag cleaning;
Celluloid manufacture;
Coal tar products manufacture;
Compost heaps;
Crematory;
Creosote treatment or manufacture;
Disinfectants manufacture;
Distillation of bones, coal or wood;
Dyestuff manufacture;
Fat rendering;
Fertilizer manufacture and bone grinding;
Glue or gelatine manufacture;
Incinerator or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal or refuse;
Oiled rubber or leather goods manufacture;
Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture;
Paper and pulp manufacture;
Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture;
Sauerkraut manufacture;
Shoe-blackening manufacture;
(20)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
102/246
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Soap manufacture;
Stockyards;
Sulphuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture;
Tanning, curing or storage of hides or skins;
Tar distillation or manufacture;
Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture; and
Any other air contaminant discharged into the open air of a character and in a quantity which is detrimental to or
endangers the public health.
(Code 1985, § 3-3)
Sec. 38-34. - Open burning.
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn, or cause to be burned, garbage, heavy oils, asphalt materials, items containing
natural or synthetic rubber or any material other than plant growth. This means once trees have been milled into lumber
it is no longer classified as plant growth. Any burning of these materials will be violation of chapter 391-3-1 of the state
department of natural resources environmental protection division regulations under the Air Quality Act (EPD).
Any plant growth that is burned in the city must be no higher or larger than a pile that is six feet by six feet wide and four
feet high. And no burn pile can be closer than 50 feet from any structure. Any outside burning shall be conducted between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. The city or the city fire department will not issue any burn permits, or assume any
responsibility for any outside burning. All outside burning will be conducted with a burn permit obtained by the property
owner; all permits will be issued by the state forestry commission.
(Code 1985, § 3-4; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1(3-4), 5-6-2004)
Secs. 38-35—38-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL
Sec. 38-71. - General prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or
any noise that unreasonably or unnecessarily annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of
others in the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against:
Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business.
Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county or state at night when public welfare and
convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day.
The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses that are noncommercial in
character.
(Code 1985, §§ 10-21, 10-24)
Sec. 38-72. - Enumeration.
The acts contained in this article, among others, shall constitute a violation of this article; but such enumeration shall not be deemed
to be exclusive.
Sec. 38-73. - Horns; signaling devices.
The following shall be a violation of this article:
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
103/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public pla
except as a danger warning.
The creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of
any such device for an unreasonable period of time.
The use of any signaling device, except a police whistle or one operated by hand or electricity.
The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust.
The use of any signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason.
(Code 1985, § 10-25)
Sec. 38-74. - Radios, phonographs, other machines or devices that produce or reproduce sound.
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room,
vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener shall be a violation of this article. The
operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner
as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section.
(Code 1985, § 10-25)
Sec. 38-75. - Loudspeakers; ampliers; other devices for production or reproduction of sound for advertising.
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets
for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure without a special permit
from the city clerk or city council shall be a violation of this article. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the
announcer, in person, and without the aid of any mechanical device.
(Code 1985, § 10-25)
Sec. 38-76. - Yelling; shouting; hooting; whistling; singing.
Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at
any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity shall be a violation of this article.
Sec. 38-77. - Animals and birds.
The keeping of any animal or bird that will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or
frequent noise shall be a violation of this article.
(Code 1985, § 10-25)
Sec. 38-78. - Steam whistle.
The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop
work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authorities shall be a violation of this article.
Sec. 38-79. - Exhausts.
The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor
vehicle except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises shall be a violation of this article.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
104/246
(Code 1985, § 10-25)
Sec. 38-80. - Defect in vehicle or load.
The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling or other noise shall be a violation of this article.
Sec. 38-81. - Loading; unloading; opening boxes.
The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of
bales, boxes, crates and containers shall be a violation of this article.
Sec. 38-82. - Construction or repairing of buildings.
The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair, of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. on weekdays, except on urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the city
building official shall be a violation of this article. Such permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the
emergency continues and may be renewed by the mayor and council for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If
the city council determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any
building or the excavation of streets and highways from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would
result to any party in interest, the council may grant permission for such work to be done from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., upon application
made at the time the permit for the work is applied for or during the progress of the work.
(Code 1985, § 10-25)
Sec. 38-83. - Schools; courts; churches; hospitals.
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while they are in
session or adjacent to any hospital, and which unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly
annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed about such institutions indicating the presence of such
institutions, shall be a violation of this article.
(Code 1985, § 10-25)
Sec. 38-84. - Hawkers; peddlers; vendors.
The shouting and crying of hawkers, peddlers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood shall be a
violation of this article.
(Code 1985, § 10-25)
Sec. 38-85. - Noises to attract attention.
The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale by
creation of noise shall be a violation of this article.
(Code 1985, § 10-25)
Sec. 38-86. - Transportation of metal rails, pillars or columns.
The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon
carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or
other public places shall be a violation of this article.
Sec. 38-87. - Pile drivers, hammers, other such appliances.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
105/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
The operation from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or
other appliance the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise without a special permit from the city council shall be a violation of
this article.
Sec. 38-88. - Blowers.
The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due
to the explosion of operating gases of fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a
muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise, shall be a violation of this article.
Sec. 38-89. - Sound trucks.
The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial
purposes and the use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during such hours or in such places or with such volume as would
constitute such use a public nuisance shall be a violation of this article.
Sec. 38-90. - Vehicle repair in residential areas.
The repairing, rebuilding, or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in
such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the residents of the area shall be a violation of this article.
(Code 1985, § 10-25)
Sec. 38-91. - Exemptions.
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise regulations set forth in this article:
Noises of safety signals and warning devices.
Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or responding to an
emergency.
Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity, or work requited to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to
danger.
Applications for other exemptions should be filed with the city clerk for approval by the mayor, and should state the
time, date, organization and reason for the request.
(Code 1985, § 10-23)
Sec. 38-92. - Injunctions.
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this article which causes
discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of
residents of this city shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a
restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Code 1985, § 10-22)
Sec. 38-93. - Complaint.
Authorized. Any person disturbed by noise as provided in this article may file a complaint with the police department.
Form. The complainant shall submit a complaint form stating the name and address of the complainant, the name and
address of the person causing the noise disturbance, a description of the nature of the disturbance and such complaint
form shall be accompanied by the following:
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
106/246
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
A videotape complete with sound which depicts the person causing disturbing and unnecessary noise; or
An audiotape with sounds of the disturbing noise together with the names and addresses of two witnesses who
observed the making of the audiotape.
Sec. 38-94. - Investigation.
Upon receipt of the complaint under this article, the police department shall conduct an investigation of the complaint and upon
determination that a violation has occurred, shall issue a warning to the party responsible for the disturbance.
Sec. 38-95. - Second complaint.
If, within 30 days of the submission of complaint under this article, the complainant notifies the police department that such person
is again making disturbing and unnecessary noise in violation of this section, the party causing such disturbance shall be subject to
citation under this section.
Sec. 38-96. - Warning by ocer.
Issuance. If the unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise is heard or observed by an officer from the police
department, a written warning may be issued to the violator.
Issuance of citation. If the unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise is heard or observed a second time
within 48 hours of a previous written warning, the police department may issue a citation for the incident against the
violator.
Sec. 38-97. - Penalty for violation of article.
Activities and disturbances in violation of this article in which a citation is issued shall be subject to punishment as provided in
section 1-11. Each occurrence and activity completed in violation of this section shall be deemed a separate offense.
Secs. 38-98—38-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 38-131. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Nuisance means anything within the city that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another; and the fact that the act done may
otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect
only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as
provided in this article.
(Code 1985, § 10-7)
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1.
Sec. 38-132. - Enumeration.
The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be in
addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code.
The following are declared to be nuisances:
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
107/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or
disturb the quiet of the city.
Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it
offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood.
Discharging of offensive matter. The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or
out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or
public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground.
Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city.
Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in
the city so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of
smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, as published and used by the United States Geological Survey, shall be the
standard for such grading; and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of
number 3 on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is
consecutive or not.
Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a
fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare.
Nonconforming structures and machines. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired,
conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this
Code, state law or city ordinance.
Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens
wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate.
Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city.
Depositing trash, garbage and refuse on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public
property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree
residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the city or
which unreasonably annoys others.
Unoccupied buildings. Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed.
Unsafe vehicles, machinery and equipment. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other
automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or
equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was
manufactured for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards). The absence of a license plate for the
current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such
vehicle is junked.
Gutters or spouts. Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the city.
(Code 1985, § 10-7)
Sec. 38-133. - Prohibited generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city.
Sec. 38-134. - Issuance of summons for abatement.
Whenever any nuisance exists within the city, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the city that is required or
subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the city, and the owner or other responsible person refuses
or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate the nuisance, the chief of police, or the officer having responsibility for
enforcement of this article, may issue a summons and cause the summons to be served upon such owner or other person responsible
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
108/246
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts of ordinances claimed to be violated,
and requiring such person to appear before the municipal judge at a time, date and place specified in the summons, to show cause why
such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated.
(Code 1985, § 10-7)
Sec. 38-135. - Order for abatement.
If the municipal judge at the hearing required by section 38-134 shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that
constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code or the ordinances of the city is required or subject to be
demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his order and judgment so finding and shall order the property
owner or other responsible person to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the
judge. The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated including, but not limited to, rehabilitation or demolition
of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property
owner or other responsible person shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the city shall be authorized
to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever actions deemed
necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition; and the expense shall be charged against the owner of the
property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the
lien for city taxes.
Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of city taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution
shall thereafter be the same as in the case of city taxes.
(Code 1985, § 10-7)
State law reference— Authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5.
Sec. 38-136. - Special provisions for old, unused, stripped, junked automobiles.
Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and
of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely
usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards)
within the corporate limits of this city is a nuisance.
The owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of this city upon which the storage of
property is made, and also the owners and/or lessees of the property involved in such storage shall jointly and severally
abate the nuisance by the prompt removal of the property into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for
such storage purposes, if within the corporate limits of the city, or otherwise by removing it to a location outside the
corporate limits.
Sec. 38-137. - Nuisance constituting imminent danger.
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring
immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in
sections 38-134 and 38-135.
Sec. 38-138. - Service on nonresidents and others.
Whenever it shall be necessary for the city to proceed under sections 38-134 and 38-135 and the owner of the property or other
responsible person resides outside the city limits, or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 38-
135 shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved, and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general
circulation in the city once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to
the hearing. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall
also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person
within the city limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
109/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(a)
Sec. 38-139. - Other powers preserved.
Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish for any violations which the
conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply
with his order.
Secs. 38-140—38-160. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - VEGETATION
Sec. 38-161. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions.
Any weeds such as jimpson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or
tract of land in the city, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants
growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement
as provided in this division.
Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds,
grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section.
The provisions of this division shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of
the superior court of the county, and to the original city lots. They shall not apply to undeveloped areas of unsubdivided
land within the city.
(Code 1985, § 10-6)
Sec. 38-162. - Height permitted.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible
for its management, maintenance or upkeep, to permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a height in
excess of 12 inches above the ground.
(Code 1985, § 10-6)
Sec. 38-163. - Notice to abate.
For a violation of this division, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove excess growth within seven days
from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail, or
by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of
the property upon which such condition exists.
Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States mail by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad
valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return
receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt
or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to
sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made.
(Code 1985, § 10-6)
Sec. 38-164. - Abatement by city; notice of abatement.
Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified pursuant to the
provisions of section 38-163, the city is authorized to enter the property, and cut and remove the weeds, grass and
vegetation. The city shall promptly perform the work.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
110/246
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
The city treasurer shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment on or before
named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than 15 days nor later than 45 days after payment to the contractor.
If payment under subsection (b) of this section shall not have been made on or before the date named, the city treasurer
shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the municipal judge, notifying such owner to show
cause before the judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue against the
property for its approval amount.
If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this division, that the notice required in section 38-
163 was given, that the work was performed and the cost paid by the city, and that the city has not been reimbursed,
execution shall issue for such amount, and shall be executed by the chief of police in the same manner as tax executions
are executed.
If the owner of the property is unknown or cannot be located, the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall
not apply, but in lieu thereof, a notice shall be published once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city, which notice shall:
Be addressed "To Whom It May Concern";
Describe with reasonable particularity the property involved;
Provide a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation; and
Notify all persons interested to show cause before the municipal judge at a time and place and on a date named in
the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount.
In such event, subsection (a) of this section will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in rem.
(Code 1985, § 10-6)
Sec. 38-165. - Remedies.
The remedies provided in this division are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishments of the objectives set
forth in this division. Nothing in this division shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code, all
ordinances, laws or regulations of the city, or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance, and any nuisance shall be subject
to be abated in the manner provided by law.
Secs. 38-166—38-190. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - MOSQUITO CONTROL
Sec. 38-191. - Nuisance declared.
A violation of any provision of this division is a nuisance.
Sec. 38-192. - Keeping water in which mosquitoes may breed.
It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city any collection of standing or flowing water in
which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed unless such collection of water is so treated as to effectually prevent such
breeding.
The collections of water prohibited by subsection (a) of this section shall be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds,
excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs
(except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of
flush closets, or other similar water containers.
Sec. 38-193. - Treatment of collections of water.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
111/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
The method of treatment of any collections of water that are specified in section 38-192 directed toward the prevention of breeding
of mosquitoes shall be approved by the health officer and may be one or more of the following:
Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way, or with any other material that will effectually
prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes.
Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough drying and cleaning.
Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the health officer.
Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven days.
Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquitodestroying fish.
Filling and draining to the satisfaction of the health officer, his agent or accredited representative.
Proper disposal by removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to
hold water.
Sec. 38-194. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding.
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there; and
failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the health officer, his authorized agent or representative, shall be
deemed a violation of this division.
Sec. 38-195. - Failure to remedy conditions after notice.
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to
prevent the breeding of mosquitoes, within three days after due notice has been given to him, the health officer or his authorized agent
is authorized to do so, and all necessary costs incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other
person offending, as the case may be.
Sec. 38-196. - Right of entry of health ocer.
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this division, the health officer, or his duly accredited agent under his authority, may at
all reasonable times lawfully enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction.
Secs. 38-197—38-230. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 38-231. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Applicant means a person submitting a request and accompanying materials to the local governing authority for a permit.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly
designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed," as used in
this definition, means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment
Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b).
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
112/246
(1)
Board means the board of natural resources.
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates
the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission.
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below
original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation."
Department means the department of natural resources.
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources.
District means the Alapaha Soil and Water Conservation District.
Divisionmeans the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources.
Drainage Structure means a device composed of virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material
that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management,
drainage control, and flood control purposes.
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice and gravity.
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land
disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan".
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. Also
known as "embankment."
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design.
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling
and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into
state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of
land but not including agricultural operations as described in section 38-232(5).
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities
are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purpose of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement, piece
of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or
computer design, or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities
may occur on a specific plot.
Local issuing authority means the city council, by and through the county engineering department.
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring
light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water
in which colloidally dispersed particles are present.
Operator means the party or parties that have:
Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
113/246
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
those plans and specifications; or
Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater
pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a
site to carry out activities required by the storm water pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit
conditions.
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article.
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission,
board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate
body or any other legal entity.
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.
Qualified personnel means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19.
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as
concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way
consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its
site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion.
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by action of water, wind, ice or gravity.
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the
Alapha Soil and Water Conservation District.
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent
structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or
gravity.
State general permit means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff
from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to
implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., and
subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30.
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other
bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not
entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation.
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment producing areas
by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or
disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap,
sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading,
etc. Such practices can be found in the state Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control.
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment producing
areas by covering the soil with:
Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or
Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod forming grass.
Such measures can be found in the state Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
114/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway,
gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and
including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances, do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-31; Ord. No. 04-06, § II, 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-232. - Exemptions.
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following:
Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act".
Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying.
Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work,
fences and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion.
The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not part of a
larger common development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not
otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall
conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in this subsection and division 3 of this article.
Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions" to include raising, harvesting or storing of
products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; production of livestock, including
but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry,
including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl or animals; the production of
aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds.
Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry
practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer as established in
section 38-293(15), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be
allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after
completion of such forestry practices.
Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United
States Department of Agriculture.
Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to
any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal
to or greater than one acre within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection,
"state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after
rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year round; provided, however, that any
person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which
is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the
boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein
shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by
subsections (1)—(10) of this section.
Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the state
department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or
maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or
maintenance projects of the state department of transportation or the state tollway authority which disturb one or
more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the the state
department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
115/246
(10)
(11)
permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit,
in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing
authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. §
12-7-6 as if permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit
holders.
Any land disturbing activity conducted by an electric membership corporation or municipal electric system or any
public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory
jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-
1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of
power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electric system or any public utility under the
regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or
instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary
permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit,
in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in
O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by
permit holders.
Any public water system reservoir.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-32; Ord. No. 04-06, § III, 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-233. - Inspection of permitted sites; notice to comply; failure.
The county engineering department will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued
to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in
controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such
terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best
management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a
person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or
with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures
necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the
land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-35(A); Ord. No. 04-06, § VI(A), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-234. - Right of entry.
The county engineering department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to
carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for
the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-35(B); Ord. No. 04-06, § VI(B), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-235. - Refusal of entry or access.
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the
district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person
obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-35(C); Ord. No. 04-06, § VI(C), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-236. - Review of issuing authority's actions; deadline for corrective action.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
116/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to the local issuing authority for the purpose of improving
the effectiveness of its erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division (with a copy to
the local governing authority) and request investigation by the division if any material deficient or ineffective local program hereunder is
found.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-35(D,E); Ord. No. 04-06, § VI(D), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-237. - Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity.
If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbance permit as prescribed in this article without first
obtaining a permit hereunder, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for
the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-36(A); Ord. No. 04-06, § VII(A), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-238. - Stop work orders.
For the first violation of the provisions of this article, the director or local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to
the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the
director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until
necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent
threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the
necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning.
For a second and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work
order.
All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective
action or mitigation has occurred.
When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts
of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being
discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and
maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop
work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or
mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of
the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-36(B); Ord. No. 04-06, § VII(B), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-239. - Bond forfeiture.
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved
plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon the person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve
compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land
disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other
penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 38-262. The
local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the
site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-36(C); Ord. No. 04-06, § VII(C), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-240. - Monetary penalties.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
117/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
Any person who violates any provision of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who
negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article
shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day, per violation. Each day during which a violation or failure or refusal to
comply continues shall be a separate violation.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-36(D); Ord. No. 04-06, § VII(D), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-241. - Administrative remedies.
The denial of a permit by the local issuing authority upon proper and complete application under this article; or the suspension,
revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in
compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or upon finding that the holder of a permit is in violation of the
permit's conditions; or upon finding that the holder is in violation of this article; shall in each case entitle the person submitting the plan
or holding the permit to an appeal hearing before the county board of commissioners within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing
authority of written notice of appeal of the foregoing.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-37(A); Ord. No. 04-06, § IX(A), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-242. - Judicial review.
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have
the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-37(B); Ord. No. 04-06, § IX(B), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-243. - Liability.
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall
relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose
any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property.
The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall
neither constitute proof of nor create presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or terms of
the permit.
No provision of this article shall permit any person to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A.
§ 12-7-1 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), or the rules and regulations
promulgated and approved in each case thereunder, or to pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-38(C); Ord. No. 04-06, § IX(C), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-244. - Education and certication.
After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or
inspection or any land disturbing activity within the city shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on
their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder
advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20.
(Ord. No. 04-06, § VIII, 9-2-2004)
Secs. 38-245—38-260. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES
Sec. 38-261. - Review of ordinances regulating land development by applicant.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
118/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed
plans of the city that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it, together with the zoning ordinances, stormwater
management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and other ordinances which regulate
the development of land within the city. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-34(A); Ord. No. 04-06, § V(A), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-262. - Application requirements.
No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city council without first
obtaining a permit from the local issuing authority to perform such activity.
The application for a permit shall be submitted to the county engineering department and must include the applicant's
erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the
data specified in section 38-263. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section
38-292 and section 38-293. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of applicant's
soil erosion control plans, drainage calculations, the county's plan review checklist and any documentation the applicant
has submitted in conjunction with a notice of intent (NOI) as required by the state permit. All applications shall contain a
certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such
a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board.
A plan review and processing fee, in the amount of $125.00 shall be charged for each plan submittal. However, Moody Air
Force Base will be exempted from this $125.00 review fee on projects confined to the air force base property.
In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees
shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary
permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned
development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance
permit. To the extent required by applicable state law (including regulations of the department or division), one-half of
such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give
notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10), shall be submitted in full to the division.
Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and
plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation
control plan. The district is expected to approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act
within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been
approved by the district, and any variances required by section 38-293(15) and (16) and bonding if required as per this
section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered
into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without
referring the application and plan to the district.
When reviewing any application for a land disturbing activity permit, the local issuing authority shall consider the past
record of the permit applicant in complying with previous land disturbing activity permits issued to it and this article. If a
permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation
Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration,
the local issuing authority may deny the permit application.
The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash,
irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of
the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with
the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited
and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into
compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for
hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit
violations.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
119/246
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-33(B); Ord. No. 04-06, § V(B), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-263. - Plan requirements.
Generally. Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 38-292 and section 38-293.
Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of
the state Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a
guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and
engineering practices. The state Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control is hereby incorporated by reference into this
article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and
hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways,
constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws.
Data required. Data required for the site plan are as follows.
Narrative or notes, and other information: notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in
erosion and sediment control notes.
Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project.
Name, address, and phone number of the property owner and of the party responsible for preparing the plan.
Name and phone number of the 24-hour local contact for the property owner who is responsible for erosion and
sedimentation controls.
Size of project or phase under construction, in acres.
Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold
letters, that "The installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or
concurrent with land disturbing activities."
Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including
offsite drainage areas.
Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding,
fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding.
Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the state Manual for
Erosion and Sediment Control.
Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full
implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion
and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source."
Certification of plans; contents. Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered
professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or a certified professional in erosion and
sediment control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting,
construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification
requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain:
Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north.
Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets.
Boundary line survey.
Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary.
Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following:
Map Scale Grade Slope (Percent) Contour Interval (Feet)
1 inch = 100 ft. Flat 0—2 0.5 or 1
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
120/246
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
or larger scale Rolling 2—8 1 or 2
Steep 8% + 2, 5, or 10
Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be
indicated on the plan.
Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas.
Delineate the 25-foot undisturbed horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters.
Location of erosion control measures and practices using coding symbols from the state Manual for Erosion and
Sediment Control, chapter 6
Maintenance of control practices. Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary
or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-34(A); Ord. No. 04-06, § V(C), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-264. - Permits.
Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later that 45 days after receipt by the local
issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary.
No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been
approved by the district as required, and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in
compliance with this article, any variances required by section 38-293(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if
necessary, as per section 38-262 are met, and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the
applicant.
If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase which separate permit
shall be issued before work may begin in a subsequent phase.
The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land
affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved
erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a
permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of land affected by the approved plan of the
conditions contained in the permit.
If the land disturbing activity and related work to which the permit relates has not begun within six months of the issuance
of the permit, then the permit shall expire. If the land disturbing activity and related work to which the permit relates has
not been completed and approved within 24 months of the issuance of the permit, then the permit shall expire; provided,
however, the owner, developer and/or contractor will remain responsible for all erosion and sediment control compliance,
until the owner, developer and/or contractor has successfully submitted a notice of termination (NOT) to the state
department of natural resources and copies submitted to the county engineering department at which time the permit will
also be terminated.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-34(A); Ord. No. 04-06, § V(D), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-265. - Injury by permit holder to property of another.
The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither
constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-33(E); Ord. No. 04-06, § IV(D), 9-2-2004)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
121/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
Secs. 38-266—38-290. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 38-291. - Plans to contain control measures and practices; application and installation.
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land
disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 38-293(15) and (16). The
application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and
other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution
during all stages of any land disturbing activity.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-33(A); Ord. No. 04-06, § IV(A), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-292. - Best management practices.
Best management practices as set forth in section 38-293(15) and (16) shall be required for all land disturbing activities.
Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any
action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b) of this section or any substantially
similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia
Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed
in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the state Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control
specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b).
A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly
designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by the local
issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water
Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by
more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries. The turbidity of receiving waters
shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land
disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of
development or sales unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres.
Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land
disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to
O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs.
The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the
turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-33(B); Ord. No. 04-06, § IV(B), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-293. - Conservation and engineering practices.
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land disturbing
activities shall require, as a minimum, protection at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices,
including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are
consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the state Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control published by
the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well
as the following:
Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
122/246
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
a.
b.
erosion.
Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum.
Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential.
Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented.
The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum.
Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable, but in no case will bare soil be allowed to be exposed
longer than 14 days.
Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during all phases of
development; this would include, but not be limited to, slopes, rights-of-way, channels, ditches, parking areas,
building pad areas, etc.
Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable. All
permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices must be installed before the local issuing authority will
accept the improvements and/or give approval hereunder to the project.
To the extent necessary, sediment in run off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt
traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is
stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et
seq.
Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the
sloping of fills.
Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property.
Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourse or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other
property owners.
Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not
feasible, provided in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum.
Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control
of any source of sediments adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude
sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 38-292(b) of this article.
There is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point
where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to
allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by
the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be
constructed; provided, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and
specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to
O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted
by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer under this
subsection:
No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural,
undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once
final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a
protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in
sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a singlefamily residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own
occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to
protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the
stream bed; and
The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
123/246
1.
2.
(16)
measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of
disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are
incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented:
Stream crossings for water lines; or
Stream crossings for sewer lines.
Brush barriers are not acceptable for use as a sediment barrier for any land disturbing activity other than for a
timbering operation.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-33(C); Ord. No. 04-06, § IV(C), 9-2-2004)
Sec. 38-294. - Adoption of requirements exceeding article standards.
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions
that contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 38-292 and 38-293.
(Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 7-33(D))
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; statewide
application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶
III(a)(1).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 42-1. - False alarm.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, give, send or turn in, in any manner or way whatever, a false fire alarm or riot alarm,
knowing the same to be false.
(Code 1985, § 7-1)
State law reference— Transmitting false report of a fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27.
Sec. 42-2. - Right-of-way of apparatus.
The fire department, including its apparatus, when going to any fire in the city or returning therefrom, shall have the right-of-way
over the streets, lanes and ways of the city to the exclusion of all persons, vehicles and railroad trains of every kind.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(f))
Sec. 42-3. - Persons permitted on apparatus.
No persons other than members of the fire department shall be permitted to ride upon the firefighting apparatus in going to or
returning from fires.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(g))
Sec. 42-4. - Obstructing reghting apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner any firefighting apparatus or any of the officers or members of the fire
department in the performance of their duties.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(h))
(21)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
124/246
Sec. 42-5. - Obstructing replugs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any fireplug so as to obstruct approaches to the fireplug by the fire department.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(i))
Sec. 42-6. - Persons permitted within vicinity of re.
No persons other than firemen, city officials and police officers shall be allowed to go within the immediate vicinity of a fire, unless
such persons are given permission to do so by the fire chief or incident command.
(Code 1985, § 7-17)
Secs. 42-7—42-40. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 42-41. - Composition.
The fire department shall consist of a chief and such subordinate officers and firefighters as may from time to time be provided for,
by the mayor and council.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(a))
Sec. 42-42. - Rank.
Following the fire chief in rank shall be the assistant fire chief, captain, the lieutenants and the firefighters, in order of seniority in
each group.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(b))
Sec. 42-43. - Fireghters' duties.
It shall be the duty of all firefighters to become familiar with and proficient in the handling of all of the apparatus of the fire
department, to be prepared at a moment's notice to respond to all alarms of fire, to observe all rules and regulations of the fire
department established by the fire chief and to obey all orders of the commanding officer at all fires.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(d))
Sec. 42-44. - Daily inspections.
Each fire station and its equipment shall be examined daily. Such inspections shall be rigidly made and shall ensure that all
apparatus is maintained in excellent working condition at all times, ready for immediate service, and that all fire stations and
surroundings are in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(e))
Sec. 42-45. - Command at res.
In case of fire, the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the management
thereof for the suppression of the fire in the best manner possible. Such commanding officer may cause buildings to be removed, torn
down or destroyed when such acts are necessary for the protection of other property and for the prevention of the spread of the
conflagration.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
125/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(Code 1985, § 7-16(j))
Sec. 42-46. - Use of equipment outside city limits.
Upon the orders of the fire chief or the mayor, members of the fire department are authorized to go outside the corporate limits of
the city for the purpose of extinguishing fires or rendering aid to other fire departments, or for rendering aid in the case of accidents.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(k))
Secs. 42-47—42-70. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - FIRE CHIEF
Sec. 42-71. - Appointment.
The fire chief shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall be the chief executive
officer of the fire department, subject always to the orders and regulations of the mayor and council.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(c)(1))
Sec. 42-72. - Bond and oath.
Prior to entering upon the discharge of his duties, the fire chief shall execute a bond in the amount of $5,000.00 and shall take and
subscribe the oath prescribed in section 2-2.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(c)(2))
Sec. 42-73. - Powers and duties.
The fire chief shall be responsible for and have control over the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging to the city, and shall
have the following duties:
To see to the proper and speedy extinguishment of all accidental or intentionally caused fires;
To see to the enforcement of the fire prevention code adopted by the mayor and council;
To keep or cause to be kept adequate records of all fires, inspections, equipment, fire prevention efforts and other
activities of the department;
To establish rules and regulations concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care and management of
the fire department, subject to approval by the mayor and city council; and
To investigate the causes of all extended or destructive fires occurring within the city.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(c)(3))
Sec. 42-74. - Resignation, removal, death, or disability.
In the event of resignation, removal, death or disability of the fire chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief
until removal of such disability or until a successor has been appointed.
(Code 1985, § 7-16(c)(4))
Chapter 46 - FLOOD PROTECTION
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
126/246
(1)
(2)
Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 46-31. - Denitions.
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning
they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is
connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is
separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction.
Appeal means a request for a review of the city's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance.
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building means any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or permanent storage of materials.
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid
foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), sheer walls or breakaway walls.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets, are completed before the effective date of floodplain
management regulations previously adopted by this community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, either final site
grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets.
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the official map issued by the Federal Insurance Administration where the areas of
special flood hazard have been designated as zone A.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency which contains flood
profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
127/246
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Habitable floor means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a
combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a habitable floor.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls
of a structure.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's
lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this article.
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed
to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended
to be improved property.
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various
elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) (as corrected in 1929) means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.
New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after August 8, 1985.
Start of construction, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, P. Law
97-348 (U.S.C. 3501 et seq.), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure, including a manufactured home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings,
installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank or
other manmade facilities or infrastructures.
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, alteration or improvement to a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure, either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been
damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include any
project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to ensure safe living conditions.
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this article where specified enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-2)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
128/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
Sec. 46-32. - Lands to which article applies.
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-3)
Sec. 46-33. - Basis for establishing areas of special ood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in its flood insurance rate map, Number 130352,
dated May 15, 1986, and any revision thereto are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-4)
Sec. 46-34. - Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any
development activities.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-21(a))
Sec. 46-35. - Compliance with article provisions.
No structure or land shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article
and other applicable regulations.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-5)
Sec. 46-36. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this
article and another ordinance provision conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-6)
Sec. 46-37. - Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
Considered as minimum requirements;
Liberally construed in favor of the mayor and council; and
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-7)
Sec. 46-38. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific
and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or
natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-8)
Sec. 46-39. - Amendment procedure.
Whenever justified or required by the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good floodplain management
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
129/246
(b)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
practice, and after a public hearing, the mayor and city council may, by ordinance, amend the regulations set forth in this
article.
Any amendment to this article shall be submitted to the state research and development center and the federal flood
insurance administrator.
Sec. 46-40. - Penalty for violation of article.
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variance, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than the maximum fine provided by state law. Each day
such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-9)
Sec. 46-41. - Statutory authorization.
The state legislature has delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of their citizenry.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-1(a))
Sec. 46-42. - Findings of fact.
The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
The flood losses cited in this section are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in
flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-1(b))
Sec. 46-43. - Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due
to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or
which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage
at the time of initial construction;
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in
the accommodation of floodwaters;
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase
flood hazards to other lands.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-1(c))
Sec. 46-44. - Objectives of article.
The objectives of this article are to:
Protect human life and health;
Minimize expenditures of public money for costly flood control projects;
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
130/246
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
(2)
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of
the general public;
Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines,
streets and bridges located in floodplains;
Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a
manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and
Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-1(d))
Secs. 46-45—46-60. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 46-61. - Local administrator.
Designated. The city engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article.
Duties and responsibilities.
The duties of the local administrator under this article shall include, but not be limited to:
Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied.
Advise the permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state
permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with
the development permit.
Notify adjacent communities and the state research and development center, which is the state coordinating
agency, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of a watercourse so that the floodcarrying capacity is not diminished.
Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of
all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with section 46-62(a)(1).
Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 46-62(a)(2).
When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the local administrator shall obtain certification from a
registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with section 46-82(2).
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the
local administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article.
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 46-33,
then the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway
data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this
article.
All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the local administrator and
shall be open for public inspection.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-22; Ord. No. 90-001, art. 4, § A, 3-19-1990)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
131/246
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Sec. 46-62. - Permit procedures.
Application; contents. Application for a development permit shall be made to the local administrator on forms furnished
by him prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn
to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is
required:
Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including the basement, of all structures;
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;
Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure will
meet the floodproofing criteria in section 46-82(2);
Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
Construction stage. In the construction stage, a floor elevation or floodproofing certification shall be provided after the
lowest floor is completed. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, it shall
be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the local administrator a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or
floodproofed elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Such certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by such engineer or surveyor. When
floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, such certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of
a professional engineer or architect and certified by such engineer or architect. Any work undertaken prior to submission
of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk.
Review of application data. The local administrator shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted pursuant to this
section. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further
progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections required by
this section shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-21(b))
Sec. 46-63. - Variance procedures.
The board of adjustments and appeals, as established by the city, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this article.
The board of adjustments and appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision or determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
article.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustments and appeals under this section or any taxpayer may
appeal such decision to the circuit court of the county.
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of
this section, except for subsections (h)(1) and (h)(4) of this section, and provided that the proposed reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the structure losing its historical designation.
In passing upon applications for variance, the board of adjustments and appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this article and:
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
132/246
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of
wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
Upon consideration of the factors listed under subsection (e) of this section, and the purposes of this article, the board of
adjustments and appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this article.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
Conditions for variances are as follows:
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building.
Variances shall only be issued upon:
A showing of good and sufficient cause;
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the lowest floor of the structure will be
permitted to be built below the base flood elevation and the number of feet below the base flood elevation shall be
indicated in the written notice, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
Secs. 46-64—46-80. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 46-81. - General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required:
New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
of the structure.
Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring
may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with the state insurance department's Rules and Regulations for Proper Anchoring and
Blocking of Movable Homes.
New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant
to flood damage.
New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
133/246
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
1.
2.
3.
b.
c.
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other facilities shall be designed and/or locate
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system.
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding.
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of
this article shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this article.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-31(1-3))
Sec. 46-82. - Specic standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in section 46-33 or section 46-
61(b)(1)i, the following provisions are required:
Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure, including
manufactured homes, except those manufactured homes to be located in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to or above the base 100-year flood
elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of subsection (3) of this
section.
Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or
nonresidential structure, including manufactured homes, except those manufactured homes to be located in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision, shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to or
above the level of the base flood elevation. Structures located in all A zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being
elevated provided that all areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section
46-62(c).
Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed
areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude
finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or
meet the following minimum criteria:
Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they
permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevation unless they are
designed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within equipment component (floodproofing).
Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or
limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
134/246
d.
(4)
a.
b.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-33 are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwater which carries debris
and potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments
unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base
flood discharge;
If subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions in this division.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-32)
Sec. 46-83. - Standards for streams without established base ood elevations and/or oodways.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-33, where small streams exist but where no base flood data
have been provided or where no floodways have been provided, the following provisions shall apply:
No encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be located within 50 feet of the stream bank at its
widest point, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations
established in accordance with section 46-61(b)(1).
Sec. 46-84. - Standards for subdivision proposals.
All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
(Code 1985, § 7.5-31(4))
Sec. 46-85. - Standards for areas of unnumbered A zones.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-33 are areas designated as unnumbered A zones. These
areas have special flood hazards where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures in unnumbered A zones shall have the
lowest floor, including the basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall:
Have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade; or
Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that
any space below that level is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
135/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Secs. 46-86—46-100. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Ord. of 6-7-2007, §§ 1—10.6, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, these provisions have been included as
herein set out, at the editor's discretion.
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 46-101. - Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined that:
Land development projects and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition;
this stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants, and; stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff.
Therefore, the City of Hahira establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters to provide
reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation and
preventing flooding and other stormwater runoff hazards. It is determined that the regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land
development projects and other construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and
volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest
and will prevent threats to public health and safety.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 1.1)
Sec. 46-102. - Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard
the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This article seeks to meet that purpose
through the following objectives:
Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation and
streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels;
Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would
otherwise degrade local water quality;
Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following
development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable;
Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible,
through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained
and pose no threat to public safety.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 1.2)
Sec. 46-103. - Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to all major subdivision or site plan applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver
by the City of Hahira under the specifications of division 4 of this article. The article also applies to land development activities that are
smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the
(22)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
136/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times
on different schedules. In addition, all plans must also be reviewed by local environmental protection officials to ensure that established
water quality standards will be maintained during and after development of the site and that post construction runoff levels are
consistent with any local and regional watershed plans.
To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the City of Hahira has developed a set of performance standards that must be
met at new development sites. These standards apply to any construction activity disturbing 5,000 or more square feet of land. The
following activities may be exempt from these stormwater performance criteria:
Any logging and agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved soil conservation plan or a timber
management plan prepared or approved by the department of natural resources, as applicable;
Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures;
Developments that do not disturb more than 5,000 square feet of land, provided they are not part of a larger
common development plan;
Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by the City of Hahira.
When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project as defined in division 2 of this article, decisions
on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the then current
edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. This criteria is dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the
redevelopment and its impact on water quality and surface water runoff. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be
determined after a review by the City of Hahira or its designated agent.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 1.3)
Sec. 46-104. - Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of
law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are
more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 1.4)
Sec. 46-105. - Severability.
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause of this article.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 1.5)
Sec. 46-106. - Development of a stormwater management manual.
The City of Hahira hereby adopts the policies, criteria and information for stormwater management and design as stated in the
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as may be amended from time to time. The City of Hahira may also adopt additional policies,
criteria and information including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. To the
extent that any policy or criteria specifically adopted by the City of Hahira conflicts with or differs from those stated in the stormwater
management manual, the criteria specifically adopted by the city shall control.
The stormwater management manual includes a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including the specific design
criteria for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the local review
authority, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Stormwater treatment
practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum
water quality performance standards.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
137/246
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 1.6)
Secs. 46-107—46-120. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS
Accelerated erosion means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the
land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action.
Applicant means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a stormwater management permit.
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person,
animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing
water.
Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use.
Detention means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak
discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants.
Detention facility means a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or
surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
Developer means a person who undertakes land disturbance activities.
Drainage easement means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater
management purposes.
Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site
during construction activities.
Fee in lieu means a payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the stormwater performance standards required by this
article.
Hotspot means an area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess
of those typically found in stormwater.
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into
four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which have low
permeability rates and produce much more runoff.
Impervious cover means those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks,
driveways, etc).
Industrial stormwater permit means an national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued to a commercial industry or
group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution
control strategies.
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
Infiltration facility means any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be
above grade or below grade.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
138/246
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic
vegetation.
Land disturbance activity means any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land
surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction,
substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or manmade
watercourse.
Landowner means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other
person holding proprietary rights in the land.
Maintenance agreement means a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for longterm maintenance of storm water management practices.
Nonpoint source pollution means pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances,
and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban
runoff sources.
Offset fee means a monetary compensation paid to a local government for failure to meet pollutant load reduction targets.
Off-site facility means a stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit
application for land development activity.
On-site facility means a stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit
application for land development activity.
Recharge means the replenishment of underground water reserves.
Redevelopment means structural development (construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure), creation or
addition of impervious surfaces, replacement of impervious surface not part of routine maintenance, and land disturbing activities
associated with structural or impervious development. Redevelopment does not include such activities as exterior remodeling.
Stop work order means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped.
Stormwater management manual means the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as amended.
Stormwater management means the use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff
pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates.
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either
no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site.
Stormwater runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation.
Stormwater treatment practices (STPs) means measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most
effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water
bodies.
Water quality volume (WQ ) means the storage needed to capture and treat 90 percent of the average annual stormwater runoff
volume. Numerically (WQ ) will vary as a function of long term rainfall statistical data.
Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries
surface water.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 2)
v
v
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
139/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 46-121. - Permit required.
No land owner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land
disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity.
The intent is to ensure that no activities that disturb the land are issued permits prior to review and approval of the stormwater
management plan. Communities may elect to issue a stormwater management permit separate of any other land development permits
they require, or, as in this article, to tie the issuing of construction permits to the approval of a final stormwater management plan.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 3.1)
Sec. 46-122. - Application requirements.
Unless specifically excluded by this article, any land owner or operator desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit
to the City of Hahira an application for stormwater management plan review on a form provided by the City of Hahira.
Unless otherwise excepted by this article, the application must be accompanied by the following in order that the application be
considered: a stormwater management concept plan; a maintenance agreement; and a nonrefundable plan review fee.
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of division 5 of this article, the maintenance
agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 46-177 and division 9 of this article, and fees shall be those established
by the City of Hahira.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 3.2)
Sec. 46-123. - Application review fees.
The fee for review of any land development application shall be based on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee
structure shall be established by the City of Hahira. All fees must be paid in full prior to the commencement of review and the issuance of
any building permit for the development. Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be used to offset the costs and expenses of the City
in conducting the land development application review.
Engineer recommends that fees for plan review be set at $300.00 for plans covering one acre or less and $100.00 for each additional
acre or part thereof. If the stormwater management plan is disapproved, a resubmit fee of $300.00 would be charged.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 3.3)
Sec. 46-124. - Application procedure.
Applications for stormwater management plan review must be filed with the ____________ [DESIGNATE WITH WHOM
APPLICATIONS SHOULD BE FILED] on any regular business day.
A copy of this permit application shall be forwarded to City of Hahira for review. Not needed if plans are submitted to the
city.
Plan review applications shall include the following: Two copies of the stormwater management concept plan, two copies
of the maintenance agreement, and any required review fees.
Within 20 business days of the receipt of a complete plan review application, including all documents as required by this
article, the City of Hahira shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance agreement are
approved or disapproved.
If the plan review application, stormwater management plan or maintenance agreement are disapproved, the applicant
may revise the stormwater management plan or agreement. If additional information is submitted, the City of Hahira shall
have ten business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
140/246
(f)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(d)
(1)
maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved. The applicant shall pay a resubmit fee of $300.00 for the
second review.
If the plan review application, final stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement are approved by the City of
Hahira, all appropriate land disturbance activity permits shall be issued.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 3.4)
Sec. 46-125. - Permit duration.
Plan approvals issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the City of Hahira notifies the
permitholder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required hereunder.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 3.5)
Secs. 46-126—46-140. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - WAIVERS TO STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 46-141. - Waivers for providing stormwater management.
Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management, unless they file a written request to waive this requirement.
Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the City of Hahira for approval.
The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the
applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this
article.
Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a
stormwater management plan that has been approved by the City of Hahira and that is required to be implemented
by local ordinance.
Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be
designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which
would be afforded by on-site practices and has a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and
maintenance of the stormwater practice.
The City of Hahira finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible due to the
natural or existing physical characteristics of a site.
In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the City of Hahira may grant a waiver from strict compliance with
stormwater management provisions that are not achievable, provided that acceptable mitigation measures are provided.
However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City of Hahira that the
immediately downstream waterways or property will not be subject to:
Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures;
Deterioration of biological functions or habitat;
Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation;
Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life and property.
Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater management is waived, the applicant will
satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by the jurisdictional stormwater
authority. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation
and/or reforestation. These lands should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent
buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat,
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
141/246
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage improvements on previously developed properties
private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in accordance with the purpose
of this article,
Monetary contributions (fee-in-lieu) to fund stormwater management related studies including regional wetland
delineation studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and macroinvertebrates, stream flow monitoring,
and threatened and endangered species studies.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 4.1)
Sec. 46-142. - Fee in lieu of stormwater management practices.
Where the City of Hahira waives all or part of the minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on
the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant shall be required to
pay a fee in an amount as determined by the City of Hahira.
When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required stormwater management, the monetary contribution required shall be in
accordance with a fee schedule (unless the developer and the stormwater authority agree on a greater alternate contribution)
established by the City of Hahira, and based on the cubic feet of storage required for stormwater management of the development in
question. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program project, and shall be made
by the developer prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 4.2)
Sec. 46-143. - Dedication of land.
In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management by entering into an
agreement with the City of Hahira for the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the
construction of an off-site stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the City of Hahira
prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the building permit.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 4.3)
Secs. 46-144—46-160. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - GENERAL PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Sec. 46-161. - General performance criteria.
Unless judged by the City of Hahira to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for
stormwater management at all sites:
All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater
discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should
seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways,
sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for
both water quality and quantity.
All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not discharge untreated stormwater directly into a
jurisdictional wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the
impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the City of
Hahira. In no case shall the impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the Army Corp of Engineers (ACE)
or the Georgia Department of Natural Resources.
Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained, by promoting infiltration through the use of structural and
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
142/246
(4)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
nonstructural methods. At a minimum, annual recharge from the post development site shall mimic the annual
recharge from pre-development site conditions.
For new development, structural STPs shall be designed to remove 80 percent of the average annual post
development total suspended solids load (TSS). It is presumed that a STP complies with this performance standard if
it is:
Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQ ).
Designed according to the specific performance criteria outlined in the stormwater management manual and
any,
Constructed properly, and
Maintained regularly.
To protect stream channels from degradation, a specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in
the current Georgia Stormwater Manual.
Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be
subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management
practices.
Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and shall file
a notice of intent (NOI) under the provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general
permit. The stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement applies to both existing and new industrial sites.
Applicants and local communities may wish to consult the Environmental Protection Agency website at
http://www.epa.gov/owm/swm/phase2 for more information on Phase II requirements.
Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots",
may require the use of specific structural STPs and pollution prevention practices.
Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the City of Hahira to determine if they are subject to
additional stormwater design requirements.
The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the stormwater management manual shall be used for sizing
all stormwater management practices.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 5)
Secs. 46-162—46-170. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - BASIC STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA
Sec. 46-171. - Minimum control requirements.
All stormwater management practices will be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes (e.g., recharge, water
quality, channel protection, ten-year, 100-year) as identified in the stormwater management manual are met, unless the City of Hahira
grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements.
In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control
requirements, the City of Hahira reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the
volume, timing, and rate of runoff.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 6.1)
Sec. 46-172. - Site design feasibility.
v
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
143/246
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that
should be considered:
Topography
Maximum drainage area
Depth to water table
Soils
Slopes
Terrain
Head
Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or ultra-urban areas
Applicants shall consult the stormwater management manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when
selecting a stormwater management practice.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 6.2)
Sec. 46-173. - Conveyance issues.
All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and
reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to:
Maximizing of flowpaths from inflow points to outflow points
Protection of inlet and outfall structures
Elimination of erosive flow velocities
Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable
The stormwater management manual shall provide detailed guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved
stormwater management practices.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 6.3)
Sec. 46-174. - Pretreatment requirements.
Every stormwater treatment practice shall have an acceptable form of water quality pretreatment, in accordance with the
pretreatment requirements found in the current stormwater management manual. Certain stormwater treatment practices, as specified
in the stormwater management manual, are prohibited even with pretreatment in the following circumstances:
Stormwater is generated from highly contaminated source areas known as "hotspots".
Stormwater is carried in a conveyance system that also carries contaminated, nonstormwater discharges.
Stormwater is being managed in a designated groundwater recharge area.
Certain geologic conditions exist (e.g., karst) that prohibit the proper pretreatment of stormwater.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 6.4)
Sec. 46-175. - Treatment/geometry conditions.
All stormwater management practices shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff according to the specifications
outlined in the stormwater management manual. These specifications will designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria
that apply to an approved stormwater management practice.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 6.5)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
144/246
Sec. 46-176. - Landscaping plans required.
All stormwater management practices must have a landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the practice and how and
who will manage and maintain this vegetation. This plan must be prepared by a registered civil engineer, landscape architect or soil
conservation engineer.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 6.6)
Sec. 46-177. - Maintenance agreements.
All stormwater treatment practices shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions
as designed. This agreement shall be in substantially the same form as shown in Appendix "A" attached hereto [See end of article]. Said
maintenance agreement shall include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the stormwater treatment
practices as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater treatment practice. In addition, a legally binding covenant, which
runs with the land, specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater treatment practices shall be secured
prior to issuance of any permits for land disturbance activities.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 6.7)
Sec. 46-178. - Nonstructural stormwater practices.
The use of nonstructural stormwater treatment practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices.
Credit in the form of reductions in the amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned through the use of nonstructural
practices that reduce the generation of stormwater from the site. Examples of nonstructural treatment practices include grassed
waterways, level spreaders and undisturbed natural stream buffers. Applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of nonstructural practices
must ensure that these practices are documented and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners. The appropriateness and
suitability of proposed nonstructural treatment practices, as well as the amount of any reductions in the amount of stormwater to be
managed, shall be determined by the city engineer.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 6.8)
Secs. 46-179—46-190. - Reserved.
DIVISION 7. - REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPROVAL
Sec. 46-191. - Stormwater management plan required for all developments.
No application for development will be approved unless it includes a stormwater management plan detailing in concept how runoff
and associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed. This plan must be prepared by an
individual approved by the City of Hahira and must indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site and, if on-site, the
general location and type of practices.
The stormwater management plan(s) shall be referred for comment to all other interested agencies, and any comments must be
addressed in a final stormwater management plan. This final plan must be signed by a licensed professional engineer (PE), who will verify
that the design of all stormwater management practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist attached
hereto as Appendix "B" [See end of article].
No building, grading, or sediment control permit shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan, or a waiver
thereof, shall have undergone a review and been approved by the City of Hahira after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent
with the requirements of this article.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 7.1)
Sec. 46-192. - Stormwater management concept plan requirements.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
145/246
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
A stormwater management concept plan shall be required with all permit applications and will include sufficient
information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the
potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the
effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The
intent of this conceptual planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management measures necessary for
the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for management of stormwater runoff from future development. To
accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan:
A map (or maps) indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
stormwater management and sediment control facilities. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed land use with
tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities,
roads and easements; the limits of clearing and grading. A written description of the site plan and justification of
proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required.
Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of
controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this article and the specifications of the stormwater management
manual.
A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the
commencement of the project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the project site. This description
should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas
on the site. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
A written description of the required maintenance burden for any proposed stormwater management facility.
The City of Hahira may also require a concept plan to consider the maximum development potential of a site under
existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum potential.
For development or redevelopment occurring on a previously developed site, an applicant shall be required to include
within the stormwater concept plan measures for controlling existing stormwater runoff discharges from the site in
accordance with the standards of this article to the maximum extent practicable.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 7.2)
Sec. 46-193. - Final stormwater management plan requirements.
After review of the stormwater management concept plan, and modifications to that plan as deemed necessary by the City of Hahira,
a final stormwater management plan must be submitted for approval. The final stormwater management plan, in addition to the
information from the concept plan, shall include all of the following information:
Contact information. The name, address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the property
and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected.
Topographic base map. A one inch = 200 feet topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of 50 feet
beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates existing surface water drainage including streams,
ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands; current land use including all existing structures; locations of utilities, roads,
and easements; and significant natural and manmade features not otherwise shown.
Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions
for the design storms specified in this article. Such calculations shall include:
Description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration,
Time of concentration,
Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients,
Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area,
Infiltration rates, where applicable,
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
146/246
f.
g.
h.
i.
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
Culvert capacities,
Flow velocities,
Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the stormwater
management manual, and
Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results.
Soils information. If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g.,
infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil
pit profiles. The number and location of required soil borings or soil sits shall be determined based on what is
needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure.
Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed
maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or
components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or
training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance
program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan.
Landscaping plan. The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after
construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what
practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a
registered landscape architect or by the soil conservation district.
Maintenance easements. The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment practices at the site for the
purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent basis. These
easements will be recorded with the plan and will remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property.
Maintenance agreement. The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement
binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management measure in accordance with
the specifications of this article.
Erosion and sediment control plans for construction of stormwater management measures. The applicant must
prepare an erosion and sediment control plan for all construction activities related to implementing any on-site
stormwater management practices.
Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits have been
acquired for the site prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan.
Miscellaneous. The applicant shall provide such other information, as requested in writing by the city, as may be
reasonably necessary for the city to fully and properly assess the stormwater design plan.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 7.3)
Sec. 46-194. - Performance bond/security.
The City of Hahira may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond prior to issuance of a permit in
order to insure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management
plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management
practices approved under the permit, plus 25 percent. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete
work specified in the stormwater management plan.
The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of "as built plans" and written certification by a
registered professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other
applicable provisions of this article. The City of Hahira will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in
compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this article. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security
based on the completion of various development stages can be done at the discretion of the City of Hahira.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
147/246
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
Some communities elect to also require a maintenance performance security. This bond typically is set at the maintenance costs
estimated in the stormwater plan for the period during which the permit holder has maintenance responsibility and is released when the
responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another party, via an approved maintenance agreement.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 7.4)
Secs. 46-195—46-210. - Reserved.
DIVISION 8. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION
Sec. 46-211. - Notice of construction commencement.
The applicant must notify the City of Hahira in advance before the commencement of construction. Regular inspections of
the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City of Hahira or certified by a
professional engineer or their designee who has been approved by the jurisdictional stormwater authority. All inspections
shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information:
The date and location of the inspection;
Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan;
Variations from the approved construction specifications; and
Any violations that exist.
If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No added work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has
received approval by the City of Hahira.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 8.1)
Sec. 46-212. - As built plans.
All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management practices located on-site after final
construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be
certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the City of Hahira is required before the release of any performance securities
can occur.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 8.2)
Sec. 46-213. - Landscaping and stabilization requirements.
Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared or removed by development
activities shall be revegetated within ten days from the substantial completion of such clearing and construction. The following criteria
shall apply to revegetation efforts:
Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of
sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over 90 percent of the seeded area.
Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of
sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion.
Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of 75 percent of the cover crop throughout the year immediately
following revegetation. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum 75 percent survival for one year is
achieved.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
148/246
In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative
stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site
will be stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be
employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect or by
the soil conservation district, and must be approved prior to receiving a permit.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 8.3)
Secs. 46-214—46-225. - Reserved.
DIVISION 9. - MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF STORMWATER FACILITIES
Sec. 46-226. - Maintenance easement.
Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the
applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land
served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic
inspection by the City of Hahira, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that
the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article. The
easement agreement shall be recorded by the City of Hahira in the land records.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 9.1)
Sec. 46-227. - Maintenance covenants.
Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that
must be approved by the City of Hahira and recorded into the land record prior to final plan approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule
shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility.
The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts.
The City of Hahira, in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management
facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access
and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 9.2)
Sec. 46-228. - Requirements for maintenance covenants.
All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and repair
needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include;
removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and
necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by
the City of Hahira, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper
functioning of the stormwater management facility.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 9.3)
Sec. 46-229. - Inspection of stormwater facilities.
Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random
inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as
higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated
with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
149/246
discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater permit; and joint
inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing
maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities;
and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 9.4)
Sec. 46-230. - Right-of-entry for inspection.
When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private
property and a public drainage control system, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the property owner shall grant to the City of Hahira
the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to
enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when
necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 9.5)
Sec. 46-231. - Records of installation and maintenance activities.
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation
and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five years. These records shall be made available to the City of
Hahira during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 9.6)
Sec. 46-232. - Failure to maintain practices.
If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the City of Hahira, after reasonable
notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in
proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the
City of Hahira shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that
notice, the responsible person shall have 30 days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. After proper
notice, the City of Hahira may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work
shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as
ordinary taxes by the city.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 9.7)
Secs. 46-233—46-250. - Reserved.
DIVISION 10. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Sec. 46-251. - Violations.
Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this article may be restrained by injunction or otherwise
abated in a manner provided by law.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 10.1)
Sec. 46-252. - Notice of violation.
When the City of Hahira determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article, it
shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall contain:
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
150/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
The name and address of the owner or applicant;
The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with this article
and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of
violation is directed;
A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the municipality by filing a written notice of
appeal within 15 days of service of notice of violation.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 10.2)
Sec. 46-253. - Stop work orders.
Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction activities. This "stop work order" will be in effect until
the City of Hahira confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to
address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement
measures authorized in this article.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 10.3)
Sec. 46-254. - Civil and criminal penalties.
In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall
be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 10.4)
Sec. 46-255. - Restoration of lands.
Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a
reasonable time after notice, the City of Hahira may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the
property until paid.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 10.5)
Sec. 46-256. - Holds on occupation permits.
Occupation permits will not be granted until all corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the City of
Hahira.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, § 10.6)
APPENDIX A
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICE
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT/BMP FACILITIES AGREEMENT
_____
City of Hahira, Georgia
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
151/246
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this ;#rule; day of ;daterule;, 20;#rule;, by and between ____________ hereinafter called the
"Landowner", and the City of Hahira, Georgia, hereinafter called the "City".
WITNESSETH, that
WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property described as ____________ as recorded by deed in the land records of
Lowndes County, Georgia, Deed Book ;daterule; Page ;#rule;, hereinafter called the "Property".
WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build on and develop the Property; and
WHEREAS, the Site Plan/Subdivision Plan known as ____________ (Name of Plan/Development), hereinafter called the "Plan", which is
expressly made a part hereof, as approved or to be approved by the City, provides for detention of stormwater within the confines of the
property; and
WHEREAS, the City and the Landowner, its successors and assigns, including any homeowners association, agree that the health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of the City, require that on-site stormwater management/BMP facilities be constructed and
maintained on the Property; and
WHEREAS, the City requires that on-site stormwater management/BMP facilities as shown on the Plan be constructed and adequately
maintained by the Landowner, its successors and assigns, including any homeowners association.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing premises, the mutual covenants contained herein, and the following terms and
conditions, the parties hereto agree as follows:
The on-site stormwater management/BMP facilities shall be constructed by the Landowner, its successors and assigns, in
accordance with the plans and specifications identified in the Plan.
The Landowner, its successors and assigns, including any homeowners association, shall adequately maintain the
stormwater management/BMP facilities. This includes all pipes and channels built to convey stormwater to the facility, as
well as all structures, improvements, and vegetation provided to control the quantity and quality of the stormwater.
Adequate maintenance is herein defined as good working condition so that these facilities are performing their design
functions. The latest Annual Inspection Report is to be used to establish what good working condition is acceptable to the
City.
The Landowner, its successors and assigns, shall inspect the stormwater management/BMP facility and submit an
inspection report annually. The purpose of the inspection is to assure safe and proper functioning of the facilities. The
inspection shall cover the entire facilities, berms, outlet structure, pond areas, access roads, etc. Deficiencies shall be
noted in the inspection report.
The Landowner, its successors and assigns, hereby grant permission to the City, its authorized agents and employees, to
enter upon the Property and to inspect the stormwater management/BMP facilities whenever the City deems necessary.
The purpose of inspection is to follow-up on reported deficiencies and/or to respond to citizen complaints. The City shall
provide the Landowner, its successors and assigns, copies of the inspection findings and a directive to commence with the
repairs if necessary.
In the event the Landowner, its successors and assigns, fails to maintain the stormwater management/BMP facilities in
good working condition acceptable to the City, the City may enter upon the Property and take whatever steps necessary to
correct deficiencies identified in the inspection report and to charge the costs of such repairs to the Landowner, its
successors and assigns. This provision shall not be construed to allow the City to erect any structure of permanent nature
on the land of the Landowner outside of the easement for the stormwater management/BMP facilities. It is expressly
understood and agreed that the City is under no obligation to routinely maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event
shall this Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the City.
The Landowner, its successors and assigns, will perform the work necessary to keep these facilities in good working order
as appropriate. In the event a maintenance schedule for the stormwater management/BMP facilities (including sediment
removal) is outlined on the approved plans, the schedule will be followed.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
152/246
7.
8.
9.
In the event the City pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of any nature, or expends any funds in performance of said
labor, use of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner, its successors and assigns, shall reimburse the City
demand, within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof for all actual costs incurred by the City hereunder.
This Agreement imposes no liability of any kind whatsoever on the City and the Landowner agrees to hold the City
harmless from any liability in the event the stormwater management/BMP facilities fail to operate properly.
This Agreement shall be recorded among the land records of Lowndes County, Georgia, and shall constitute a covenant
running with the land, and shall be binding on the Landowner, its administrators, executors, assigns, heirs and any other
successors in interests, including any homeowners association.
WITNESS the following signatures and seals:
_____
Company/Corporation/Partnership Name
By: ____________ (Seal)
Printed name: ____________
Title: ____________
STATE OF ____________
COUNTY OF ____________
The foregoing Agreement was acknowledged before me this ;#rule; day of ;#rule;, 20;#rule;, by ____________.
____________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires: ;daterule;
CITY OF HAHIRA, GEORGIA
By: ____________ (SEAL)
____________
(Type Name)
____________
(Type Title)
STATE OF GEORGIA
COUNTY OF LOWNDES
The foregoing Agreement was acknowledged before me this ;#rule; day of ;#rule;, 20;#rule;, by ____________.
____________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires: ____________
Approved as to Form:
____________ ;daterule;
City Attorney Date
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, App. A)
APPENDIX B
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
153/246
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
SUBMITTAL CHECKLIST
Applicant information:
Name, legal address, and telephone number.
Common address and legal description of site.
Signature and stamp of registered engineer/surveyor and design/owner certification.
Vicinity map.
Existing and proposed mapping and plans (recommended scale of one inch = 50 feet or greater detail) which illustrate at a
minimum:
Existing and proposed topography (minimum of two-foot contours recommended).
Perennial and intermittent streams.
Mapping of predominant soils from USDA soil surveys as well as location of any site-specific borehole investigations
that may have been performed.
Boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing.
Location and boundaries of resource protection areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, and other setbacks (e.g.,
stream buffers, drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks).
Location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, and other structures.
Location of existing and proposed utilities (e.g., water, sewer, gas, electric) and easements.
Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains.
Flow paths.
Location of floodplain/floodway limits and relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and
drainages.
Location and dimensions of proposed channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings.
Location, size, maintenance access, and limits of disturbance of proposed structural stormwater management
practices.
Representative cross-section and profile drawings and details of structural stormwater management practices and
conveyances (i.e., storm drains, open channels, swales, etc.) which include:
Existing and proposed structural elevations (e.g., invert of pipes, manholes, etc.).
Design water surface elevations.
Structural details of outlet structures, embankments, spillways, stilling basins, grade control structures, conveyance
channels, etc.
Logs of borehole investigations that may have been performed along with supporting geotechnical report.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of stormwater system (e.g., storm drains, open channels,
swales, management practices, etc.) for applicable design storms including:
Existing condition analysis for time of concentrations, runoff rates, volumes, velocities, and water surface elevations
showing methodologies used and supporting calculations.
Proposed condition analysis for time of concentrations, runoff rates, volumes, velocities, water surface elevations,
and routing showing the methodologies used and supporting calculations.
Final sizing calculations for structural stormwater Management practices including, contributing drainage area,
storage, and outlet configuration.
Stage-discharge or outlet rating curves and inflow and outflow hydrographs for storage facilities (e.g., stormwater
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
154/246
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
ponds and wetlands).
Final analysis of potential downstream impact/effects of project, where necessary.
Dam breach analysis, where necessary.
Final landscaping plans for structural stormwater Management practices and any site reforestation or revegetation.
Structural calculations, where necessary.
Applicable construction specifications.
Erosion and sediment control plan that at a minimum meets the requirements of the local erosion and sediment control
guidelines.
Sequence of construction.
Maintenance plan which will include:
Name, address, and phone number of responsible parties for maintenance.
Description of annual maintenance tasks.
Description of applicable easements.
Description of funding source.
Minimum vegetative cover requirements.
Access and safety issues.
Testing and disposal of sediments that will likely be necessary.
Evidence of acquisition of all applicable local and nonlocal permits.
Evidence of acquisition of all necessary legal agreements (e.g., easements, covenants, land trusts).
Waiver requests.
Review agency should have inspector's checklist identifying potential features to be inspected on site visits.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, App. B)
APPENDIX C
CHECKLIST FOR PRELIMINARY/CONCEPT
Stormwater Management Plan Preparation and Review
Applicant information.
Name, legal address, and telephone number.
Common address and legal description of site.
Vicinity map.
Existing and proposed mapping and plans (recommended scale of one inch = 50 feet) which illustrate at a minimum:
Existing and proposed topography (minimum of two-foot contours recommended).
Perennial and intermittent streams.
Mapping of predominant soils from USDA soil surveys.
Boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing.
Location and boundaries of resource protection areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, and other setbacks (e.g.,
stream buffers, drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks).
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
155/246
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, and other structures.
Existing and proposed utilities (e.g., water, sewer, gas, electric) and easements.
Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains.
Flow paths.
Location of floodplain/floodway limits and relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and
drainages.
Preliminary location and dimensions of proposed channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings.
Preliminary location, size, and limits of disturbance of proposed structural stormwater management practices.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis including:
Existing condition analysis for runoff rates, volumes, and velocities presented showing methodologies used and
supporting calculations.
Proposed condition analysis for runoff rates, volumes, and velocities showing the methodologies used and
supporting calculations.
Preliminary analysis of potential downstream impact/effects of project, where necessary.
Preliminary selection and rationale for structural stormwater management practices.
Preliminary sizing calculations for structural stormwater management practices including, contributing drainage
area, storage, and outlet configuration.
Preliminary landscaping plans for structural stormwater management practices and any site reforestation or revegetation.
Preliminary erosion and sediment control plan that at a minimum meets the requirements outlined in local erosion and
sediment control guidelines.
Identification of preliminary waiver requests.
(Ord. of 6-7-2007, App. C)
Chapter 50 - LAW ENFORCEMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; municipality's liability for torts of
police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 50-31. - Composition.
The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other officers and personnel as the mayor and council shall
prescribe.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(a))
(23)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
156/246
Sec. 50-32. - Rank.
Following the police chief in rank shall be the captain, the lieutenants, sergeants, corporal and the police officers, in order of seniority
in each group.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(b))
Sec. 50-33. - Arms; uniforms.
Each officer and member of the police department shall be furnished with such uniform, arms and police equipment as shall be
provided for by the city council. Uniforms shall be kept clean and pressed and shall be worn on duty at all times, unless otherwise
ordered by a superior officer. The equipment, arms and uniforms furnished by the city shall be and always remain the property of the
city and, when a change is ordered or on retirement from office, shall be returned to the city. The members of the department shall be
liable on their bonds for any loss or careless destruction of or damage to their arms and uniforms.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(e))
Sec. 50-34. - Arrests.
In exercising their powers of arrest, all police officers shall see that all necessary warnings are given to the accused as required by
law.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(f))
Sec. 50-35. - Entering private dwellings.
No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless he is in pursuit of a fugitive who the officer
has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a felony or in hot pursuit of a
misdemeanor.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(g))
Sec. 50-36. - Disposition of stolen, abandoned or impounded property.
All personal property which comes into the custody of the police department, where said property has been stolen or impounded or
where the ownership is unknown, shall be held for a period of 45 days awaiting claim by its owner. The owner of said property, upon
proving ownership and paying all expenses and costs, including reasonable charges for storage, shall have the right to have such
property returned to him. If after the expiration of 45 days the property is unclaimed, the chief of police shall advertise the property for
sale in the newspaper in which the city's legal advertisements are printed; provided, however, that firearms and alcoholic beverages shall
be destroyed after that period. Such advertising shall take place at least 45 days before the date set for the sale and shall give a
description of the property to be sold and specify the time and place of sale. If the property is still unclaimed by the time of the sale, it
shall be sold as advertised and the proceeds shall be placed in the city treasury.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(h))
State law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; qualifications of officers, O.C.G.A. § 35-
8-8; right of forcible entry into private dwellings pursuant to a warrant charging a crime, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-3; obstruction or hindering of law
enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; arrest generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-20.
Secs. 50-37—50-60. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - POLICE CHIEF
Sec. 50-61. - Appointment; powers.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
157/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
The police chief shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall be the chief
executive officer of the police department, subject always to the orders and regulations of the mayor and council. In the exercise of his
duties, the police chief shall have the power to establish and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the members and
employees of the department, which rules shall, however, be consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(c)(1))
Sec. 50-62. - Bond; oath.
Prior to entering upon the discharge of his duties, the police chief of the city shall execute a bond in the amount of $5,000.00 and
shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by this article.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(c)(2))
Sec. 50-63. - Duties.
The police chief shall have the following duties:
To attend regular meetings of the mayor and council;
To see to the proper service of all summonses, subpoenas, citations, executions, attachments and rules of the city
council;
To see to the collection of all fines and costs imposed by the municipal court;
To see that the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and all statutes applicable therein are faithfully enforced;
To preserve the public peace, prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof;
To protect the rights of persons and property;
To oversee the conduct of the officers and other members of the police force, and to be held strictly responsible for
such conduct and for the general good order of the department;
To keep adequate records of all personnel and equipment of the department including a log of all questions,
activities and investigations;
To submit a monthly report to the city council outlining the number and type of arrests for state offenses, the
number and type of cases involving violations of municipal ordinances and the number of arrests made and cases
reported by each police officer;
To submit monthly to the state department of public safety a uniform crime report; and
To discharge such other duties as may be required of him by the mayor or council.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(c)(3))
Sec. 50-64. - Resignation; removal; death; disability.
In the event of resignation, removal, death or disability of the police chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the
chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been duly appointed.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(c)(4))
Secs. 50-65—50-90. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - POLICE OFFICERS
FOOTNOTE(S):
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
158/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; qualifications of officers, O.C.G.A. §
35-8-8; right of forcible entry into private dwellings pursuant to a warrant charging a crime, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-3; obstruction or hindering of
law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; arrest generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-20.
Sec. 50-91. - Oath.
Prior to entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers of the police department shall take and subscribe the oath
prescribed by this article.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(d)(1))
Sec. 50-92. - Duties.
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to acquire a full knowledge of and to enforce all of the ordinances of the
city and all statutes applicable therein, to become familiar with the rules and regulations established by the police chief concerning the
discipline, good order, proper conduct, care and management of the police department, and to respect and obey all orders of the police
chief not in conflict with the law or ordinances of the city.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(d)(2))
Sec. 50-93. - Conduct.
Every member of the police department shall conduct himself in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times and shall avoid the
use of unnecessary force. Prohibited conduct shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Absence from regular hours of duty without permission;
Sleeping on duty;
Insubordination or disobedience of orders;
Drinking any malt or intoxicating beverage while on duty or in uniform;
Wilful maltreatment of any person or prisoner;
Using profane language;
Giving out or releasing any information covering the affairs, business or operation of the police department without
the consent of the police chief;
Receiving or accepting a reward from any person for any services rendered in the line of duty;
Accepting bribes of money, gifts or other articles of apparent or actual value, or accepting any fee, reward or gift of
any kind from a person arrested or from any friend in his behalf while he is in custody or after his release or
discharge; or
Active participation in any political campaign to the neglect of his official duty.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(d)(3))
Sec. 50-94. - Penalties for improper conduct.
Any police officer violating the rules or regulations of the police department or of this Code, upon conviction thereof by the chief of
police or the municipal court, after due notice and hearing, or upon a plea of guilty, shall be reprimanded, fined, suspended or dismissed
by the chief of police. Any one or more of said penalties may be imposed in the discretion of the chief of police.
(Code 1985, § 2-75(d)(4))
Chapter 54 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(24)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
159/246
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations
with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2).
Sec. 54-1. - State misdemeanors adopted.
The state criminal statutes, as the same apply to municipalities within this state are hereby adopted by reference with full force and
effect as if set out in full herein. The municipal judge is hereby authorized to impose fines in an amount equal to the amount provided by
state law.
(Ord. No. 3-2000, 11-9-2000)
Sec. 54-2. - Disorderly conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to violate any of the following:
Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in danger
of safety of his life, limb or health;
Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is
placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged;
Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb,
health or property of another;
Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose or with the intent to engage in
gaming;
Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and
fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices;
Any person who assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick, to obtain any
valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or who shall aid or abet therein;
Any person who shall use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates a
turmoil;
Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or
Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority.
Any person who shall violate any subsection of this section may be charged with the offense of disorderly conduct and,
upon conviction thereof, may be found guilty of disorderly conduct.
(Code 1985, § 10-2)
Sec. 54-3. - Interference with an ocer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, hinder, willfully resist, or oppose any law enforcement officer, firefighter or
emergency medical technician in the lawful discharge of their duties.
Sec. 54-4. - Wearing of pants below the waist in public, unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in public wearing pants below the waist which expose the skin or
undergarments.
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section after the issuance of a verbal warning shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed $100.00 plus up to eight hours of work on the public streets of the city.
Any violation of subsection (a) hereof shall be cited by the law enforcement officer by the issuance of a citation and
summons to appear before a court of proper jurisdiction, and shall not, in and of itself, be grounds for an arrest or for
search of the person cited.
(Ord. of 3-6-2008(2))
(25)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
160/246
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Chapter 58 - PARKS AND RECREATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Authority to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings
used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; authority to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5).
Sec. 58-1. - Use of grounds and facilities generally.
Each person using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted and leave
the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition.
(Code 1985, § 11-1(a))
Sec. 58-2. - Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person using such parks, grounds or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the
following acts:
Wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any:
Buildings;
Bridges;
Tables;
Benches;
Fireplaces;
Railings;
Paving or paving material;
Waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof;
Signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent;
Monuments; stakes, posts or other boundary markers; or
Other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal;
Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or
other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such
waters, any substance, matter or thing (liquid or solid) which will or may result in the pollution of said waters;
Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof;
Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; or remove
or have in his possession the young of any wild animal or the eggs, nest or young of any other animal;
Bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage,
refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left
anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where
receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for the presence of same, and properly disposed of elsewhere;
Disturb the peace, or use any profane or obscene language;
Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act;
Commit any assault or battery, or engage in fighting;
Violate any rule for the use of the park, made or approved by the park and recreation board;
Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this
(26)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
161/246
(11)
(12)
chapter and with the rules applicable to such use;
Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places
as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter
adopted; or
Dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as
may be provided for that purpose.
(Code 1985, § 11-1(b))
Sec. 58-3. - Hours of operation.
The public parks shall be open daily to the public during all hours, and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons other than city
personnel conducting city business therein to occupy or be present in such parks during any other hours. Any section or part of a park, or
an entire park, may be declared closed to the public by the director of public works at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular or stated intervals.
(Code 1985, § 11-1(c))
Sec. 58-4. - Group activity.
Whenever more than 25 members of any group, association or organization desire to use any park facilities for a particular purpose,
such as picnics, parties or theatrical or other entertainment performances, a representative of such group, association or organization
shall first obtain a permit from the director of public works for such purpose. The director of public works shall grant the application for a
permit if it appears that the group, association or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members
of the public, and if said group, association or organization meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the director
of public works. Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the city from any liability of any kind or
character and to protect city property from damage.
(Code 1985, § 11-1(d))
Sec. 58-5. - Picnic areas and use.
No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas, or of any of the buildings or structures therein, for the purpose of
holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the
facilities are crowded.
(Code 1985, § 11-1(e))
Sec. 58-6. - Games.
It shall be unlawful for any person to take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects
such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or
potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts or areas provided therefor.
(Code 1985, § 11-1(f))
Sec. 58-7. - Camping.
It shall be unlawful for any person to set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor
shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such
purpose, such as a house-trailer, camp-trailer, camp-wagon or the like.
(Code 1985, § 11-1(g))
Sec. 58-8. - Fires.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
162/246
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be
designated by the director of public works. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars,
tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
(Code 1985, § 11-1(h))
Sec. 58-9. - Automobiles.
It shall be unlawful to drive or park any automobile except on a street, driveway or parking lot in any park; or to park or leave any
such vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking.
(Code 1985, § 11-1(i))
Sec. 58-10. - Sales.
It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, sell, peddle or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park.
(Code 1985, § 11-1(j))
Sec. 58-11. - Alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful for any person within any park to have in his possession, custody or control, or to drink, any alcoholic beverage of
any kind whatsoever, or permit the same to be done.
(Code 1985, § 11-1(k))
Sec. 58-12. - Signs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor
shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever, on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park, except that
these provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any official duty.
(Code 1985, § 11-1(l))
State law reference— Prohibited acts in state parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-10; litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; control of water pollution
and surface water use, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; reckless conduct causing harm to or endangering the bodily safety of another, O.C.G.A.
§ 16-5-60.
Chapter 62 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - GREATER LOWNDES PLANNING COMMISSION
Sec. 62-31. - Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to make and amend a master plan, recommend approval or disapproval of proposed zoning changes
and control land subdivision within neighborhood planning areas and submit, annually, a list of recommended capital improvements.
(27)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
163/246
(a)
(b)
Sec. 62-32. - Authority.
The Greater Lowndes Planning Commission is revised by joint-ordinance of Lowndes County, the City of Valdosta, the City of Dasher,
the City of Hahira, and the City of Lake Park, Georgia as its member governments.
Sec. 62-33. - Membership.
The commission shall consist of ten appointed members:
Member Government Appointed No.
Lowndes County 3
City of Valdosta 4
City of Hahira 1
City of Lake Park 1
City of Dasher 1
All members shall be appointed for five-year terms and/or until their successors are appointed.
(Ord. of 12-5-1996, § 3)
Sec. 62-34. - Compensation.
All members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in
connection with their official duties.
(Ord. of 12-5-1996, § 4)
Sec. 62-35. - Organization, rules, sta and ocers.
The commission shall elect from its members a chair and a vice-chair, each to serve for a term of one calendar year and until a
successor is elected. The commission shall meet at least once each month, and at such other times as determined by the chair. Voting
actions at meetings shall only take place when a quorum of members are present. A quorum shall be defined as six members. The
commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its meetings and the transaction of its business, and shall keep records
of its resolutions, motions, transactions, findings, determinations, and recommendations. These records shall be public records. The
commission may appoint such employees and staff as it deems necessary for its work, within the budget provided for its operation by the
respective member governments, or other funds lawfully available to it.
(Ord. of 12-5-1996, § 5)
Sec. 62-36. - Meetings.
Work sessions. Commission work sessions meet the second to last Monday of each month, 5:30 p.m. 327 West Savannah
Avenue (South Georgia RDC Conference Room).
Regular meetings. Commission regular meetings meet the last Monday of each month, 5:30 p.m., Lowndes County Board
of Commissioners, 325 West Savannah Avenue (Meeting Room).
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
164/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Sec. 62-37. - Powers, duties and responsibilities.
It shall be the function and duty of the commission, subject to the direction and control of the respective member governments, to
make surveys and studies of existing conditions and future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social and economic
growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, general welfare, efficiency and economy in the
development of the member governments. In particular, the commission shall have the power and duty, subject to the direction and
control of the member governments, to:
Prepare and maintain a local comprehensive plan, for each of the member governments, in accordance with State of
Georgia guidelines and regulations, and make recommendations on any amendments thereto.
Prepare and recommend to the member governments the adoption of amendments or revisions to local
development regulations, including zoning ordinances and maps, subdivision regulations, special ordinances, and the
like.
Prepare and recommend to the member governments for the adoption of subdivision plats, or official maps, and
amendments thereto, showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened,
narrowed, or closed streets, public open spaces, or public building sites.
Attend training necessary to accomplish planning commission duties and responsibilities.
The commission shall have such additional duties and responsibilities and shall perform such additional functions and
services as may be called for from time to time by the member governments.
(Ord. of 12-5-1996, § 7)
Secs. 62-38—62-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 62-71. - Purpose of article.
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its
most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and
general welfare of the people, the city council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform
procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures,
objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this
article. This article is also intended:
To stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local
historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business;
To enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and
To provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts
and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § I)
Sec. 62-72. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
165/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure.
The term "building" may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn.
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to
make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district.
Exterior architectural features means to architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building,
structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors,
signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing, as more fully described in the
design guidelines for the city, division 2 of this article.
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical
character of the property.
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites,
buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise
individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area
designated by the city council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 62-74(b).
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper
appreciation thereof designated by the city council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 62-74(c).
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a
historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as:
A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or
windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements;
Demolition or relocation of a historic structure;
Commencement of excavation for construction purposes;
A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or
The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any buildings or other structure within a historic property or
district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features.
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable
yet related to a specific setting or environment.
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether
standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing
structure.
Structure means a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by
man, it is often an engineering project large in scale.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § II)
Sec. 62-73. - Historic preservation commission.
Creation. There is hereby created a council whose title shall be "Hahira Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter
"commission").
Position within the city. The preservation commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city.
Members: number, appointment, terms and compensation. The commission shall consist of five members appointed by
the mayor and ratified by the commission. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have
demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources.
To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
166/246
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions and at least one member shall
be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real property appraisal. Members
shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered
terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three
years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses.
Statement of powers. The preservation commission shall be authorized to:
Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic
property;
Recommend to the city council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance
as historic properties or historic districts;
Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of
this article;
Recommend to the city council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic
property or as a historic district be revoked or removed;
Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city;
Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the
provisions of the "Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976" (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10.1—44-10.5);
Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation
activities;
Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic
preservation experts, the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or
appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources;
Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council
concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired;
Submit to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or
historic districts designated;
Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program;
Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission;
Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties; the
preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent;
Review and make comments to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources concerning
the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and
Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council enter
into agreements to do the same.
Power to adopt rules and standards. The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of
its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws,
removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the
flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and
place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it
deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members.
Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in state statutes and in the city
Code of Ordinances and Code of Ethics, the provisions of which are hereby incorporated by reference.
Authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall
insure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds.
Records of meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission resolutions, proceedings and actions.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § III)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
167/246
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(b)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(d)
(1)
a.
Sec. 62-74. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties.
Preliminary research by commission.
Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect
information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city.
Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the council for designation. The commission shall
present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties.
Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic
district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination
consisting of:
A physical description;
A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance;
A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., historic, non-historic, intrusive) of individual
properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties;
A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and
Representative photographs.
Designation of a historic district.
Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains
buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which:
Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest;
Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the
municipality, county, state or region; and
Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or
county.
Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances
designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city.
Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as:
Historic (contributes to the district);
Nonhistoric (does not contribute but does not detract from the district, as provided for in subsection (b)(1)); and
Intrusive (detracts from the district as provided for in subsection (b)(1)).
Designation of a historic property; criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure,
site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of
preservation by reason of value to the nation, city, or the state, for one of the following reasons:
It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era.
It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style.
It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state, or
the region; or
It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development
and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region.
Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties.
Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the city council or the
commission:
For historic districts: A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to
the commission for designation;
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
168/246
b.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(a)
(b)
For historic properties: A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commis
Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall:
List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property;
Set forth the name of the owner of the designated property;
Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in
appearance of the designated property; and
Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and kept as a public record
to provide notice of such designation.
Require public hearings. The commission and the city council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance
for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three
consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by
the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less
than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to
the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall
constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article.
Notification of historic preservation section. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any
ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in
subsection (a)(3) of this section to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources.
Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed
ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be
in the form of a resolution to the city council.
City council action on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the
city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems
necessary, or reject the ordinance.
Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for
designation by the commission, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and
occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written
notification of such designation by the commission which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the
necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the
historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the
last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of
the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this
article.
Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the
city of the ordinance for designation.
Moratorium on applications for alternation or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance
for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved
property.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § IV)
Sec. 62-75. - Application to preservation commission for certicate of appropriateness.
Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by
ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or
of a historic or nonhistoric building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to
be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been
submitted to and approved by the commission.
Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings,
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
169/246
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
(g)
photographs, plans and documentation required by the commission.
Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider
interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features.
Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any
application.
Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness; notices; right to be heard. The commission shall hold a
public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published
in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the
commission to all owners and occupants of the proposed property. The written and published notice shall be provided in
the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. The commission shall give
the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing.
Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness; commission action. The commission
may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any
modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of
appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse
effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In
making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria
for each of the following acts:
Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of
appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setback
and landscaping as further specified in the design guidelines for the city, division 2 of this article, and to the secretary
of interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings," a copy of which is
attached hereto as Appendix "D" and hereby incorporated by reference.
Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a
building, structure, or object shall be guided by:
The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting.
Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character
of the surrounding area will be.
Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity.
Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the
building, structure, site or object.
Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of
buildings, structure, sites, or objects shall be guided by:
The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object.
The importance of the building, structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district.
The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, or object because of its design,
texture, material, detail, or unique location.
Whether the building, structure, site or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the
neighborhood or the city.
Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the
effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be.
Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site or object from collapse.
Whether the building, structure, site or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value.
Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would
result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the
commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
170/246
(h)
(1)
(2)
(i)
(1)
(2)
(j)
(1)
(2)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided, however, that such
variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions,
so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done.
In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in
its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making.
Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness.
The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the
filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within
a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice
of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all
other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission.
Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval
shall be needed.
Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness.
In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record
of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it
thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications
to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so.
In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the
issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission
shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officers charged with issuing building permits
and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued.
Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness.
All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such
certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease
and desist order and all work shall cease.
The commission or the council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic
district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or
conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district.
Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void
unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued
for a period of 18 months and are renewable.
Recording applications for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for
certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application.
Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the commission and is reasonably
necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the
acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein.
Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of
a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the
commission within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection (h)(1) of this section or, in the
case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed from the
commission action, subsection (h)(2) of this section. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination
made by the commission, if the city council finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision.
Appeals from the decision of the city council may be taken to the superior court of the city in the manner provided by law
for appeals from conviction for the city ordinance violations.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § V)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
171/246
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Sec. 62-76. - Maintaining of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions.
Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in
or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a
material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness.
Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic
districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission
shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect:
The commission shall from time to time observe the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic
districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Referrals may be made by a public authority
or from at least five residents of the city and should be submitted in writing to the commission. Such conditions as
broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of a building's
structural system or failure to provide maintenance following rejection of a certificate of appropriateness shall
constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair.
In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission may act
as a referral source making recommendations to the mayor and city council.
Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners
form complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any
use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § VI; Ord. of 5-8-1997)
Secs. 62-77—62-100. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - DESIGN GUIDELINES
Sec. 62-101. - Urban design goals; historic district.
The City of Hahira is located in North Lowndes County and was incorporated into a city on October 2, 1891, receiving the approval of
the Assembly of Georgia. The city has two major state roads that cross at the center of town (State Highway 7 or U.S. Highway 41 and
State Highway 122) and they establish the dominant development patterns of the city. The Norfolk-Southern Railway that transverses The
city on a north-south axis paralleling U.S. Highway 41 constitutes another important feature of the city's historic environment. These
three elements together represent critical features in the historic district that command special design consideration. It is from this
background that the urban design guidelines have been generated.
Avoid demolishing buildings that contribute to the historic character of the district. With emphasis on rehabilitating
commercial and civic buildings in the central business district. Consider ways to preserve agricultural elements such
as the tobacco warehouses or grain storage structures which represent important aspects of the city's history.
Build on the existing character of the historic district. Give special attention to Church Street, Main Street and the
Railroad Corridor and the adjacent buildings. Maintaining the strength of the street "wall" in the CBD.
Respect the boundary between the commercial areas and the surrounding neighborhoods. With special
consideration for "buffer" landscape zones between conflicting land uses.
Respect the architectural character of the historic district when designing new buildings adjacent to the district.
Encourage changes that will improve the historic district for pedestrian use. Including maintaining sidewalks and
controlling traffic.
Consider development of open space and parks to be used by pedestrians in the district. Placing emphasis on
prominent locations along Church Street, Main Street, and the Railroad Corridor.
Strengthen the definition of the entrances and boundaries of the historic district. Possibilities include special civic
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
172/246
(8)
(9)
(10)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
signs and/or landscaping where opportunities exist.
Emphasize important civic buildings in the historic district. The city hall and the chamber of commerce buildings
represent unique possibilities.
Maintain the emphasis on attractive and well maintained landscaping within the district.
Respect the existing physical street patterns and lot orientation of the historic district.
Sec. 62-102. - Design guidelines—New construction.
Categories. New construction or building additions within the historic district fall into one of four categories:
Commercial;
Institutional;
Transitional;
Residential.
These categorical zones are drawn on the historic district map and defined on the design guideline sheets. Each zone within
the historic district has specific guidelines for design, and once the zone is determined, design and construction should
adhere to the specific guidelines of that zone. Refer to the historic district map and design guideline sheets to determine
zone and appropriate design considerations.
Purpose. The purpose of the design guidelines for new construction and additions is to assist in the design and
construction of contemporary buildings that will be located on undeveloped land located within the historic district, or
additions that will be added to historic buildings. Each category describes a typical building type within the historic district
that requires special attention. All types of new construction should be reviewed to determine the appropriateness,
compatibility, and impact of the proposed work on the existing historic building and district.
Historic context. It is important for the design of new buildings or additions to respect the historic context in which they
will be located. The historic character of the district is derived from the collective elements of properties in the district:
buildings, streets, sidewalks, and landscaping. The character of specific properties is derived from the form, details,
materials, and landscaping of the specific building.
Relationships. The important concern in each zone is that new buildings or additions relate in terms of height/width,
setback/spacing, massing, placement, materials, and landscaping of the adjacent buildings within the historic district. The
design of new buildings should be influenced by the character of the district and should include not only the building, but
also the site design and landscape treatment.
Detractions. New construction or additions should not be of such type, size, or design as to detract from the historic
character of the area in which it is located, nor should it alter, damage, or destroy significant site or streetscape elements
located within the district or on the property.
Guidance not dictation. The guidelines are designed to guide decisions, not dictate them. The issues represented within
the guidelines themselves are only a set of principles and recommendations and are not intended to be a set of strictly
followed laws. The architectural review board should adhere to the intent of the guidelines and interpret them generally.
The purpose is not to be overly specific nor intended to encourage copying or mimicking particular historic styles, but to
provide a general design framework for new construction. The zoning ordinance provides more specific regulations and
property owners should consult both the zoning ordinance and the subdivision ordinance of the city before undertaking
any building projects within these districts.
Sec. 62-103. - Same—Building rehabilitation.
The guidelines outlined are based on the secretary of the interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating
Historic Buildings." These guidelines first developed in 1979, have been expanded and refined, most recently in 1990. They are used by
the National Park Service to determine if the rehabilitation of a historic building has been undertaken in a manner sensitive to its historic
integrity. By nature these guidelines are very broad since they apply to the rehabilitation of any contributing building in any historic
district.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
173/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining
the building and its site and environment.
The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of
features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of
historical development, such as adding conjectural features of architectural elements from other buildings, shall not
be undertaken.
Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be
retained and preserved.
Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic
property shall be preserved.
Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires
replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old design, color, texture, and other visual
qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary,
physical, or pictorial evidence.
Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The
surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be
disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize
the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale,
and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the
future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
Chapter 66 - SOLID WASTE
Sec. 66-1. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Collection means collection by a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, do the work of
collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and/or similar locations, or from
residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his
own single-family dwelling unit.
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or deposition of solid waste occurs.
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal, including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design and
other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal.
Disposal site means the location or land area where the final deposition of solid waste occurs.
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than
normal household use), pathological wastes, highly flammable or explosive wastes, toxic wastes, sewage sludges, and other waste
material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials as provided for
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
174/246
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
(c)
(d)
in Rules of the Department of Human Resources, Chapter 270-5-20, entitled "Radioactive Materials."
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations.
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn or
otherwise to create environmental pollution or a nuisance.
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, offal,
hatchery and poultry wastes and garbage.
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use in accordance with an approved plan.
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as
paper, cardboard, cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
Sanitary landfilling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover
thereon.
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials.
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes (except water-carried body wastes) including garbage, rubbish, ashes,
street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, food-processing wastes,
construction wastes, hazardous wastes and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in this chapter.
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposing of solid wastes, or
any combination thereof.
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a
disposal facility.
(Code 1985, § 14-1)
Sec. 66-2. - Purpose.
The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter is to provide for the protection of the public health by prescribing
the manner of storage, collection, transportation and disposal of residential and industrial waste, rubbish, garbage and other refuse.
(Code 1985, § 14-2)
Sec. 66-3. - Enforcement of chapter.
Generally. The director of public works shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. In the
exercise of his solid waste management duties, said director shall:
Supervise the collection of solid waste, including the operation and maintenance of equipment and the supervision
of personnel;
Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
Supervise the operation and maintenance of the sanitary landfill and/or other disposal sites or facilities; and
Inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors and private transportation and disposal systems to ensure
that such operations are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Limitations of authority. All regulatory actions of the director of public works shall be subject to the review of the mayor
and council.
Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or a fee charged by, the director of public works shall have the right to
appeal to the mayor and council, which body may, upon a hearing, confirm, modify or revoke such requirement or fee.
Large container dumping. Any person found dumping solid waste, household, yard trimmings, or any type or form of
waste, will be charged with open dumping and be subject to the state and city's dumping policies. Enforcement would be
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
175/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
as follows:
First offense: Informed of the action and cited with no further action;
Second offense: A fine of no less than the cost of one-half of the monthly cost of the container;
Third offense: A fine for the total monthly cost of the container according to its size; and any further offense would
be twice the cost of the monthly charge of the container.
Warning signs will be posted as to enforcement for illegal large container dumping.
(Code 1985, § 14-3; Ord. of 1-9-2003)
Sec. 66-4. - Precollection.
Generally. No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the city, except in proper
containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth in this chapter, or under the express prior approval of the
director of public works. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited. The director of public works by written notice shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such
solid waste accumulation to remove same. Failure to remove such accumulation within two weeks of the date of such
written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each
day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues.
Containers.
Garbage containers will be furnished by the city for each residence and/or business, as required.
The resident or business occupant is responsible for the care and maintenance of garbage containers while in his
use. Repair of any damage beyond fair wear and tear of garbage containers, or replacement thereof due to damage,
will be charged to the occupant.
A deposit for each container shall be charged to the resident or business occupant at the time of request for garbage
containers, the occupant will sign for the numbered container. The container deposit shall be set by the mayor and
council from time to time. When the occupant moves from the residence or business, the container must be cleaned.
The city public works department will pick up the cleaned garbage containers. If the container is not damaged
beyond fair wear and tear, the deposit will be refunded by the city clerk at the city hall. Garbage containers not in use
will be stored by the city public works department in the city barn.
Rubbish. Rubbish may be stored for collection in paper-board boxes or other throw-away containers strong enough to
retain the waste; loose paper shall be tied in bundles. Rubbish containers or bundles shall be placed for collection beside
the solid waste containers.
Placement. On days designated as collection days for the respective routes by the director of public works, garbage and/or
rubbish shall be placed for collection on the curb or beside the roadway in front of the residence in such manner as to not
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
Scavenging. No person other than the owner or authorized collection personnel shall sift the contents of or remove
anything from containers, boxes or bundles containing garbage or rubbish.
(Code 1985, § 14-4)
Sec. 66-5. - Collection.
Frequency. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected from residential premises once weekly. Garbage and rubbish shall be
collected from commercial and business establishments in congested areas as determined by the public works director.
The collection of solid waste will not take place on Saturday or Sunday and holidays unless the situation requires
exception by the public works director and city manager.
Limitations.
No yard clippings, tree clippings, building material, animals, industrial waste, processing material and demolition
debris shall be collected by the sanitation truck.
Industrial waste will require prior approval by the public works director.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
176/246
(3)
(4)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
Building and demolition material may be collected with private hauler or through special containers provided by the city
Yard clippings, landscape and tree trimmings require a special pickup provided by the city for an additional charge.
Collection vehicles. Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be kept clean and in good repair.
They shall be readily identifiable by letters, not less than three inches high and easily legible, painted on the door of the
vehicle cab or in an equally conspicuous place, showing the owner's name, telephone number, state permit number, truck
number and rated load capacity in cubic yards. The rated load capacity shall be specified by the director of public works
following his measurement of the load-carrying portion of the truck body.
Private contractors. No person other than employees of the city shall collect, transport or dispose of solid waste for pay in
the city without having first applied for and received a license to engage in such business as provided in chapter 22 of this
Code.
(Code 1985, § 14-5)
State law reference— Public and legal holidays, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1; securing loads on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-21.
Sec. 66-6. - Disposal.
All disposal of solid waste shall be at approved sites that comply with the rules and regulation of the state department of natural
resources (EPD). No other sites will be allowed.
(Code 1985, § 14-6)
Sec. 66-7. - Fees.
Charges for public collection shall be as set from time to time by the mayor and city council.
(Code 1985, § 14-7)
Sec. 66-8. - Billing.
Against whom levied. Service charges in accordance with section 66-7 are levied against both the owner and the occupant
of premises served, jointly and severally, but collecting from one shall relieve the other.
Charges for solid waste collection and disposal. Charges for solid waste collection, special collections, additional
collections, and special containers will be included with the utility bill sent to each customer the first of each month. All
bills will be sent the first of the billing cycle of each month. Payment will be due by the 15th of each month. After the 15th
of each month, a 15 percent service charge will be added to all unpaid bills. After the 20th of each month, service will be
disconnected for residential and commercial accounts, all other accounts will be turned over for collections.
(Code 1985, § 14-9)
Chapter 70 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— State, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-
90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads
generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; authority to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to
control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 70-1. - Maintenance and repair of streets.
(28)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
177/246
(a)
(b)
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the
director of public works, which officer shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this Code and all ordinances of the city
relating to such public ways.
(Code 1985, § 15-1(a))
Sec. 70-2. - Maintenance—Sidewalks.
It shall be the duty of all owners of property in the city upon which sidewalks have been laid to keep such walkways in good repair at
all times and to remove from them all snow or ice within 12 hours from the time such snow or ice ceases to fall, or within less time if so
ordered by the chief of police or the director of public works.
(Code 1985, § 15-1(b))
Sec. 70-3. - Same—Property between sidewalks and streets.
All persons who own real estate in the city which abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved shall be required to keep that portion of
such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curb line of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts, in good
and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other things which would mar or
detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. Any property owner who shall place or allow grass
to grow upon the portion of the sidewalk lying between the property line and the curbline of the street as aforesaid, and upon which his
real estate abuts, shall keep such grass property mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of
their property, then this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession or control of the same.
(Code 1985, § 15-1(c))
Sec. 70-4. - Defacing sidewalks, streets, and curbs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street or curb in the city by painting any signs thereon, whether for
commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk or drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way any newly laid street, sidewalk or
curbing pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid.
(Code 1985, § 15-1(d))
Sec. 70-5. - Obstructions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way,
except as may be provided in this chapter or in the ordinances and laws of the city.
(Code 1985, § 15-1(e))
Sec. 70-6. - Deposits and discharges onto streets and sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the
pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal or
property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or
other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk or other organic material.
(Code 1985, § 15-1(f))
Sec. 70-7. - Report of defects, obstructions, deposits, and discharges.
It shall be the duty of every city officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or
discharge, in or on any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk or other public way of the city to report the same to the director of public works
as soon as possible.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
178/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(Code 1985, § 15-1(g))
Sec. 70-8. - Private use.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise
for sale; or to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement.
(Code 1985, § 15-1(h))
Sec. 70-9. - Encroachments.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or
property, or to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley or other public way, without
having first secured a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter.
(Code 1985, § 15-1(i))
Sec. 70-10. - Openings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk or alley without
first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded
by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the director of public works.
(Code 1985, § 15-1(j))
Sec. 70-11. - Changing street names.
The names of streets in the city will not be considered for change unless a majority of the property owners living on the
street presents a petition to the city council requesting consideration for the change.
If a petition is submitted with a majority of the property owners living on the street requesting the name change, then the
mayor and city council will call for a referendum to be submitted to a vote of the qualified voters of the city, and, if
approved by a two-thirds vote of the qualified voters voting in the city, the street name will be changed as requested.
The referendum will be placed on the ballot for voters consideration at the first election held in the city after a call for a
referendum by the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 3-90, 11-15-1990)
Secs. 70-12—70-40. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS
Sec. 70-41. - Application.
Every person required to procure a permit under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or law of this city relating to the
subject matter of this chapter shall submit a written application for such permit to the city clerk. The written application shall state the
following:
The name and address of the applicant;
The purpose for which the application is submitted;
The nature and location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person or firm that is to do such
work;
The estimated cost of the proposed work; and
The date of commencement and date of completion of the proposed work, and any other date or plans as may
reasonably be required by the city clerk or the director of public works.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
179/246
(Code 1985, § 15-5(a))
Sec. 70-42. - Fee.
Each application for a permit under this article shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges.
(Code 1985, § 15-5(b))
Sec. 70-43. - Issuance of receipts.
The city clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a permit, provided that
such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application.
(Code 1985, § 15-5(c))
Sec. 70-44. - Rebate of fee.
Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall
refund such fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city.
(Code 1985, § 15-5(d))
Sec. 70-45. - Review of application.
Upon receipt of the application for a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall forward such application to the
director of public works, who shall approve or disapprove such application within seven days after receipt thereof. After indicating
approval or disapproval on the application, the director of public works shall return the same to the city clerk.
(Code 1985, § 15-5(e))
Sec. 70-46. - Issuance.
Upon receipt of an approved application from the director of public works, the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant therefor,
which permit shall state the nature of the work to be done or activity to be carried out and bear the date of issuance and the signature of
the city clerk.
(Code 1985, § 15-5(f))
Sec. 70-47. - Display.
It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the permit issued to him in a conspicuous place at the site of the work or
activity to be engaged in. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such permit at or about any location not covered thereby, or to
misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit.
(Code 1985, § 15-5(g))
Sec. 70-48. - Limitation on issuance.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no permit shall be issued to any applicant therefor who has failed to satisfy any
bonding requirements imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done or carried out by such
applicant.
(Code 1985, § 15-5(h))
State law reference— Bonds for public contractors, O.C.G.A. §§ 13-10-1, 36-82-100 et seq.
Secs. 70-49—70-80. - Reserved.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
180/246
ARTICLE III. - STREET CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; curb ramps, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-94.
Sec. 70-81. - Council resolution.
Whenever the improvement of any street or part thereof shall be deemed necessary by the mayor and council, a resolution stating
the nature and location of the proposed improvement shall be declared and published once a week for three consecutive weeks in the
newspaper in which the county sheriff's advertisements are published. If the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the
lands abutting on the proposed improvement do not, within 15 days after the last day of publication of said resolution, file with the city
clerk a written protest against such improvement, contracts for the work to be done shall be entered into and assessments and liens
shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.
(Code 1985, § 15-2(a))
Sec. 70-82. - Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley or other public
way, or to repair the same, without having first obtained a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in article II of this chapter.
(Code 1985, § 15-2(b))
Sec. 70-83. - Specications.
All street and sidewalk pavements and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the specifications established or approved from
time to time by the mayor and council.
(Code 1985, § 15-2(c))
Sec. 70-84. - Barricades.
Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent
injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime.
(Code 1985, § 15-2(d))
Secs. 70-85—70-110. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS
Sec. 70-111. - Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break up any street, or to make or
cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose, or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any
earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have
obtained an excavation permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in article II of this chapter.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(a))
Sec. 70-112. - Permit fee.
The excavation permit fee to be collected by the city clerk shall be as set from time to time by the council.
(29)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
181/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(Code 1985, § 15-3(b))
Sec. 70-113. - Surety bond.
Each applicant for an excavation permit shall be required to file a surety bond with the city clerk in an amount set from time to time
by the council. The required surety bond must be:
With good and sufficient surety approved by the city council;
Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance; and
Conditioned upon the permittee's agreement to secure and hold harmless the city and its officers against any and all
claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for
which the city, the city council or any city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or
property through the fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury
resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned on the permittee's agreement to fill up,
restore and place in good and safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the
director of public works, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any street where excavation
is made in as good condition for the period of 24 months after said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear
excepted, as it was in before said work shall have been done. Any settlement of the surface within said two-year
period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee, except that nothing herein
contained shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the city if such
repairs should prove defective. Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond, but it
shall in its entirety cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given. In the
event of any suit or claim against the city by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the city's
giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the city requiring it to pay for
such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and its surety.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(c))
Sec. 70-114. - Routing of trac.
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions shall
be maintained at all times as nearly normal as practicable so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the
abutting property and to the general public; provided, that the director of public works may recommend the closing of streets to all traffic
for a period of time if in his opinion it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic, including his own vehicles, as directed by
the city police department. The following steps shall be taken before any highway may be closed or restricted to traffic:
The permittee must receive the approval of the director of public works and the police department.
The permittee must notify the chief of the fire department of any street so closed.
Upon completion of construction work, the permittee shall notify the director of public works and city police
department before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made.
Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the chief of police, they shall be furnished by the permittee at his own
expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. In instances in which this would
not be feasible, the director of public works will designate detours. The city shall maintain roadway surfaces of
existing highways designated as detours without expense to the permittee, but in case there are not existing
highways the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of the
director of public works. The permittee will be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any highways by
the operation of its equipment.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(d))
Sec. 70-115. - Clearance for re equipment.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
182/246
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials
or obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire plugs. Passageways leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be
kept free of piles of material or other obstructions.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(e))
Sec. 70-116. - Protection of trac.
The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement
to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections. Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of
plank, timbers and blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safely; pedestrian crossings shall be of adequate
thickness, width and length, together with necessary blocking, to ensure safe passage by pedestrians.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(f))
Sec. 70-117. - Interference with utilities.
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the director of public works and the utility
company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility
owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee. The cost of
moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the
utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be
in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or
across said work. In case any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency
or person owning them; the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee; and the bond of the same shall be liable therefor.
The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes,
sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other utility, and its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence
and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(g))
Sec. 70-118. - Protection of adjoining property.
The permittee shall at all times, and at his own expense, preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper
foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon
private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain permission from the owner of
such private property for such purpose. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other
property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private
property or highways resulting from his failure to properly protect and carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary for the
permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled. All
construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clear of earth and debris and in a
condition as near as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove even temporarily any trees
or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent
of the property owner, or in the case of public property, the director of public works.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(h))
Sec. 70-119. - Sidewalk excavations.
Any excavation made in or under any sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over said excavation on
the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that pedestrians can pass over
safely at all times.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(i))
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
183/246
Sec. 70-120. - Protective measures.
The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons
using the street or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed.
At twilight there shall be placed upon each place of excavation, and upon any excavated materials, structure or other obstructions to
streets, suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the night for the duration of such obstructions.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(j))
Sec. 70-121. - Attractive nuisances.
It shall be unlawful for the permittee to allow to remain unguarded at the place of excavation any machinery, equipment or other
device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children and be hazardous to their safety or health.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(k))
Sec. 70-122. - Care of excavated material.
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner
as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is
caused to those using the streets and adjoining property.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(l))
Sec. 70-123. - Damage to existing improvements.
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials
for such repair shall conform to the requirements of any applicable Code provision or ordinance. If upon being ordered, the permittee
fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the director of public works shall have the authority to cause said
necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the city. The cost shall be charged against the permittee, and the permittee shall also be
liable on his bond therefor.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(m))
Sec. 70-124. - Cleanup.
As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock
and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the
expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the director of public works. From time to time, as may be ordered
by said director of public works, and in any event immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall at its own expense clean
up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from said work, and upon failure to do so within 24 hours after
having been notified to do so by the director of public works, said work may be done by the city and the cost thereof charged to the
permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided for hereunder.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(n))
Sec. 70-125. - Backlling.
Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation permit issued hereunder shall be compacted to a degree
equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug and in a manner consistent with sound engineering practices
generally recognized in the construction industry.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(o))
Sec. 70-126. - Restoration of surface.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
184/246
The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work to its original
condition in accordance with the specifications of the director of public works. The permittee may be required to place a temporary
surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes and shall be required to exercise special care in making and maintaining such
temporary restorations to assure safe traveling conditions until such time as permanent restorations are made. Permanent restoration
of streets shall be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the director of public works.
Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the director of public works shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against
the permittee and its surety under the surety bond required hereunder for incomplete or defective work if such defects are discovered
within 24 months from the completion of the excavation work.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(p))
Sec. 70-127. - City's right to restore surface.
If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the
time fixed by the permit, or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the director of public
works, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the street and to complete the
excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25 percent of such cost, in addition, for general overhead
and administrative expenses. It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same
condition it was prior to the excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(q))
Sec. 70-128. - Prompt completion of work.
The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expediency all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall
promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon as practicable and in any
event not later than the date specified in the excavation permit.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(r))
Sec. 70-129. - Emergency work.
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such
condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer,
main, conduit or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder, shall immediately take proper
emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of the property, life, health and safety of individuals.
However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next
succeeding day during which the city clerk's office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first
obtaining an excavation permit as herein provided.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(s))
Sec. 70-130. - Noise; dust; debris.
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and
annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the
fullest extent practicable noise, dust and unsightly debris, and during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., shall not use, except with the
express written permission of the director of public works or in case of an emergency as herein provided, any tool, appliance or
equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(t))
Sec. 70-131. - Inspections.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
185/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
The director of public works shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this
article, and shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be required to enforce
and carry out the intent of this article.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(u))
Sec. 70-132. - Drawings.
Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans and profiles showing the location and character of all
underground structures including abandoned installations, and shall provide the director of public works with a copy of the same.
Corrected maps shall be filed with such officer within 60 days after new installations, changes or replacements are made.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(v))
Sec. 70-133. - Exemption.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any excavation work carried out under the direction of competent city
authorities by employees of the city.
(Code 1985, § 15-3(w))
Secs. 70-134—70-160. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - DRIVEWAYS, CURBS
Sec. 70-161. - Permit required.
No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any driveway, curb or curb-cut on the public streets without
first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in article II of this chapter.
(Code 1985, § 15-4(a))
Sec. 70-162. - Fee.
The permit fee shall be as set from time to time by the city council.
(Code 1985, § 15-4(b))
Sec. 70-163. - Bond.
The director of public works shall have the authority to require an applicant for a permit under this section to file a bond with his
application conditioned to protect and save harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to any persons by reason of the
proposed alteration work.
(Code 1985, § 15-4(c))
Sec. 70-164. - Standards for issuance of permit.
The city clerk shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds:
That the plans for the proposed operation have been approved by the director of public works, to whom such plans
shall be forwarded by the city clerk within a reasonable time after receipt thereof;
That the work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the city for public work of like character;
That the operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the means of ingress to
and egress from the affected and adjacent properties; and
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
186/246
(4)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
That the health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired.
(Code 1985, § 15-4(d))
Sec. 70-165. - Supervision.
All work for which a permit is granted hereunder shall be under the direction and supervision of the director of public works.
(Code 1985, § 15-4(e))
Secs. 70-166—70-200. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - STREET NUMBERS
Sec. 70-201. - Designation; recordkeeping.
Each property in the city shall be assigned an official property number designating that particular property location upon
that particular street. The number shall be assigned by the county planning commission in accordance with its
administrative procedures and in accordance with the official property numbering map of the city, dated March 5, 1992,
and entitled, "City of Hahira Property Numbering Map."
The county planning commission shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this article.
(Ord. No. 1-92, § I(1), 3-5-1992)
Sec. 70-202. - Display required.
Every house, mobile home, apartment, business or other building having a street number assigned to it under the system of
numbering in the city shall display such number in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 1-92, § I(2), 3-5-1992)
Sec. 70-203. - Posting of designated street numbers address.
The owner or agent of any house or building to which a number has been assigned will be notified in writing by the county
planning commission of the number assigned to the same at any time after the adoption of this article.
Within 60 days after receipt of such written notification from the county planning commission, the owner or agent of a
house or building to which the number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous manner in a
conspicuous place.
It shall be the duty of such owner or agent upon affixing the new number to remove any different number which might be
mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned to said structure by the county planning commission.
Assigned street numbers may be affixed to the house, apartment, business or other building itself, provided that such
house, apartment, business or other building is not more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge, or edge of
travelway of the street in front of the house, apartment, business or other building, and the number is readily visible from
the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. Street numbers may also be placed on mailboxes or
signs located on the premises in front of the house, apartment, business or other building, provided that such signs are of
a durable type, and are located not more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge, or edge of travelway of the street
in front of the property, and provided that the numbers on such sign shall be readily visible from the street by persons
traveling along such street in each direction.
If the house, apartment, business or other building to be numbered is more than 50 feet from the curb, pavement edge, or
edge of travelway of the street in front of the property, or if for any reason a street number affixed to the building would
not be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction, the street number shall not be
displayed on the building, but must be displayed on a sign or mailbox complying with the requirements of this section.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
187/246
(f)
(a)
(b)
(a)
Street numbers affixed to buildings or signs shall be a minimum of four inches in height. Those affixed to mailboxes in the m
specified in this article shall be a minimum of two inches in height. All such signs shall be of a color contrasting to the backgro
to be clearly visible. Reflective numbers are recommended. Street numbers and signs to which they are affixed shall be maint
times in good condition.
(Ord. No. 1-92, § I(3), 3-5-1992)
Sec. 70-204. - New structures.
Numbers will be assigned to each proposed lot or tract on the surveyor's copies of final subdivision plats by the county
planning commission.
No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the owner or developer has procured from the building
inspector for the city the official number of the premises. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any principal
building erected or repaired after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be withheld
until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the requirements of section 70-202
(Ord. No. 1-92, § I(4), 3-5-1992)
Sec. 70-205. - Duty of owners; violations.
The obligation of complying with the provisions of this article shall be upon the owner of the property. The property owner shall have
60 days from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived to comply with the provisions herein. If any of the
provisions of this article shall be found to have been violated, notice shall be given to the owner of the property, or his agent, specifying
the manner in which the section is being violated, and giving the owner ten days to bring the property into compliance. Each day a
violation of this section continues after the expiration of said ten-day period shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable
as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 1-92, § II, 3-5-1992)
Sec. 70-206. - Responsibility for enforcement.
The responsibility for making the inspections provided for in this article, and for the enforcement of the provisions thereof, shall rest
upon the county board of commissioners, department of public safety, division of emergency telecommunications, and the agents and
employees of such department are hereby authorized and empowered to make cases and issue summonses for violations. However, all
public safety agencies providing services in the city are authorized to identify property owners in violation of this article and to forward
notification of said violations to the E-911 department for appropriate action.
(Ord. No. 1-92, § III, 3-5-1992)
Chapter 74 - TAXATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1
et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 74-1. - Public utility franchise tax.
Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on each electric light and power company, gas company, telegraph company,
water company and other public utility making use of the streets, alleys or other public ways or places of the city, for the
purpose of rendering utility services, a franchise tax, in such amounts as are provided in individual franchises or by other
authority.
(30)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
188/246
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
(2)
(3)
(4)
Due date; report. The public utility franchise tax shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month following the calendar m
which the utility was provided and the sale was made, and payment shall be accompanied by a report showing the volume of
by service classifications (residential, commercial, industrial) for the preceding month.
(Code 1985, § 16-3)
State law reference— Franchises, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2.
Sec. 74-2. - Telephone franchise tax; rate; payment.
Rate. Each telephone company operating in the city shall pay an occupational license tax in the amount of three percent of
recurring local service revenues, less uncollectibles, received by such company from subscribers located within the city.
Said occupational license tax shall be paid in quarterly installments, each of which shall be due on or before the last day of
the second month following the end of each calendar quarter and shall be based on recurring local service revenues billed
during such calendar quarter.
Payment. The first payment under this section shall be based on revenues billed between the effective date of the
ordinance from which this section is derived and the end of the calendar quarter in which such effective date falls. Any
amount of license tax previously paid and absorbed by a telephone company which is applicable to any period subsequent
to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be credited against the amounts imposed
herein or by subsequent ordinance.
Term defined. The term "recurring local service revenues," as used in this section, shall mean:
Monthly charges for local exchange service, including:
Charges for additional listings and joint users;
The guarantee portion of the charge for semipublic pay station services; and
Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages.
Charges for signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are
within the city limits.
All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission service) where both terminals
of the private line are within the city limits.
Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or
video programs to customers by CATV companies.
(Ord. No. 2000, 4-6-2000)
Secs. 74-3—74-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES
Sec. 74-31. - Rate of levy.
There is hereby set and levied to meet the ordinary current expenses of the city an annual ad valorem tax, upon a millage specified
from year to year by the council, upon all real and personal property within the city, and there is hereby set and levied for the payment of
principal and interest on general obligation bonds an annual ad valorem tax, upon a millage specified from year to year by the council,
upon all real and personal property within the city. Such levies shall be shown separately on all tax bills.
(Code 1985, § 16-1(a))
Sec. 74-32. - When taxes due and payable.
Ad valorem taxes shall become due on November 15 each year and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid within 20 days after said
due date. Tax bills showing the assessed valuations, amount of taxes due, tax due dates and information as to delinquency dates and
penalties shall be sent to all taxpayers at least 30 days prior to the due date, but failure to send a tax bill shall not invalidate any tax.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
189/246
(a)
(b)
(Code 1985, § 16-1(b))
Sec. 74-33. - Failure to pay tax.
The city shall forthwith issue an execution against any person who has defaulted in the payment of any ad valorem tax to be paid.
The execution thus issued shall be a lien on all the property of such person, both real and personal, and shall be placed in the hands of
the city officer responsible for collection by levy and sale.
(Code 1985, § 16-1(c))
Secs. 74-34—74-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
Sec. 74-61. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Gross receipts has the same meaning as is ascribed to the term "gross receipts" for each such depository financial institution in
O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
(Code 1985, § 8-38(a))
Sec. 74-62. - Tax levied.
Pursuant to the authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied for each year, upon each state and national bank,
each federal savings and loan association, and each state building and loan association located in the city, not exempted
by state law, an annual business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of each such institution, or
$1,000.00, per annum, whichever amount is greater.
The taxes levied by subsection (a) of this section for each year shall be levied on the amount of gross receipts received by
each such depository financial institution during the immediately preceding calendar year.
(Code 1985, § 8-38(a))
Sec. 74-63. - Returns.
Each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file with the city not later than March 1 of each year,
a return of its gross receipts received by it during the immediately preceding calendar year. The returns shall be made in the manner and
in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based on the allocation method set forth in
O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the
return.
(Code 1985, § 8-38(b))
Sec. 74-64. - When taxes due and payable.
The taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable on April 1 of each year.
(Code 1985, § 8-38(b))
Secs. 74-65—74-90. - Reserved.
(31)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
190/246
ARTICLE IV. - INSURERS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2; general assembly authorized to provide
for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of
counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c).
Sec. 74-91. - License fee; license fee for additional locations generally.
There is hereby levied an annual license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges upon every insurance company engaging
in the business of insurance within the corporate limits of the city, and there is hereby levied an additional annual license fee in such
amount for each separate business location in excess of one operated and maintained by any such company within the corporate limits.
(Ord. of 11-3-1994, § 1)
State law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A, § 33-8-8.1.
Sec. 74-92. - License fee for businesses lending money or oering term nancing of sales; taking insurance applications.
There is hereby levied an additional license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on each insurance company for each
separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under section 74-91, which company is operated and maintained by a
business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and which, in
connection with the loans or sales involving term financing, offers, solicits, or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of
the insurance company for insurance.
(Ord. of 11-3-1994, § 2)
State law reference— Local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2.
Sec. 74-93. - License fee for additional location of independent agencies and brokers.
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which
a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by either section 74-91 or section 74-
92, in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each such location within the city.
(Ord. of 11-3-1994, § 3)
Sec. 74-94. - Gross direct premiums tax.
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness
insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in
accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The expression "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums
as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by sections 74-91 and 74-92.
(Ord. of 11-3-1994, § 4)
Sec. 74-95. - Gross direct premiums tax on classes of insurance other than life, accident and sickness.
There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance
designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1) doing business as provided in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2 in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct
premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The expression "gross direct premiums" as used in
this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a).
(Ord. of 11-3-1994, § 5)
(32)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
191/246
Sec. 74-96. - Due date for license fees.
License fees imposed in this article shall be due and payable February 1 of each year.
(Ord. of 11-3-1994, § 6)
Secs. 74-97—74-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - OCCUPATION TAXES
Sec. 74-131. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Administrative fee means the component of the occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing
the occupation tax.
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer
withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individuals compensation or whose employer issues to such individual
for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099.
Location or office means any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a
temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project, or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or
practitioner of a profession.
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an
occupation, profession or business in the city.
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative
fee.
Practitioners of professions and occupations means those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18), but does not include a
practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax.
Regulatory fee means a fee which approximates the cost of regulatory activity by the city.
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee.
Sec. 74-132. - Administrative fee.
A prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk is
required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts.
Sec. 74-133. - Regulatory fee.
Businesses and individuals engaging in any occupation or business in the city shall pay a nonrefundable regulatory fee as provided in
the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk.
Sec. 74-134. - Display of certicate.
Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this article shall display a current regulatory
fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent
location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer or
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
192/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
city clerk upon request.
Sec. 74-135. - Occupation tax levied.
An occupation tax based upon number of employees in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and
occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-ofstate businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or
serve customers or clients in the state in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk.
Sec. 74-136. - Multiple locations of taxpayer.
The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner.
Sec. 74-137. - Taxpayers subject to other local governments.
A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or
limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the
other local government and the basis of such tax.
If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provides to the city proof of payment of a local
business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in
this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax.
If a business or practitioner with no location or office in this state shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the
local government in the state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such
business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city
satisfactory proof as to the applicability of this subsection.
A business or practitioner which has locations in the state subject to occupation tax by more than one local
government in the state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are
employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has
provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local governments.
If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and
the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if
the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year.
Sec. 74-138. - Proration of tax.
If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining
portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced.
Sec. 74-139. - Estimated number of employees.
If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees, which are the basis of this occupation tax, will be employed by the
business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of
employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than December 31, the business or
practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment
of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due
and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city clerk.
Sec. 74-140. - Real estate brokers.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
193/246
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the
city.
Sec. 74-141. - Certicate; display, possession.
Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this article shall display a current
occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a
permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request.
Sec. 74-142. - Application to professionals.
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall pay the occupation tax levied by this article or shall pay an occupation tax as
provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. On the tax return for 1995 or such later time as the
practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for
subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is
to be changed.
Sec. 74-143. - Exemptions.
No occupation tax shall be levied by this article on the following:
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the
state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or
county of the state.
Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission.
Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.
Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any
agribusiness.
Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105.
Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15.
Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for
distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355.
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356, for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock,
including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the
product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city.
Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States.
The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any
franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, the following ordinances are specifically not repealed or otherwise affected by this article:
Regarding license fees on life insurers;
Regarding regulation of peddlers;
Regarding malt beverage brewer dealers and wine retailers;
Regarding business license taxes on financial institutions;
Regarding adult entertainment establishments.
Sec. 74-144. - Evidence of state registration.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
194/246
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq., by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office, shall provide
evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued.
Sec. 74-145. - Evidence of qualication.
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other
regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show
evidence of such qualification.
Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration
is issued.
Sec. 74-146. - Filing returns; other information.
On or before November 1 of each year, an individual business or practitioner subject to this article shall file with the city
clerk, on a form approved by and available from the city, a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such
business or practitioner during the calendar year.
Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available, within
30 days such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the
occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fees.
Sec. 74-147. - Condentiality.
Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the
occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.
Such information may be provided to the governing body of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court
order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax.
Sec. 74-148. - Date due.
Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on December 31. If any person
commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and
payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity.
Sec. 74-149. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees.
The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing.
Such executions shall bear interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or
practitioners liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the
occupation tax or regulatory fee become delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon property of the delinquent tax or
fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty,
interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code and the ordinances and Charter of the city
and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as
provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions.
Sec. 74-150. - Duties of city clerk.
It is the duty of the city clerk to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer
and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk may issue executions
against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing.
Sec. 74-151. - Issuance of executions.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
195/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing.
Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per
month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or
regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be
levied by the city clerk upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and
sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as
provided by this Code and the Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense,
by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions.
Sec. 74-152. - Eect of nulla bona.
When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or
entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the
nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs
accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the
payment of the tax.
Sec. 74-153. - Penalties for violation of article.
Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant
to this article shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment not to exceed the limitations of the city Charter.
Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available
truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax
or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to suspension of the
right to conduct business.
All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such
tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such person business shall be subject to the
same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain, make a return for or pay the applicable
occupation tax or regulatory fee.
Sec. 74-154. - Public hearing prior to increase in taxes.
After January 1, 1996, the city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will
increase the occupation tax rate specified in this article.
Chapter 78 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); power of local
authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 78-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road.
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, are hereby adopted as and for
the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter.
(Code 1985, § 9-1; Ord. No. 3-2000, 11-9-2000)
(33)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
196/246
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
State law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372.
Sec. 78-2. - Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years
to permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, such minor to violate any provision of this Code or state law
regarding the operation of vehicles.
Sec. 78-3. - Temporary trac regulations.
In cases where traffic upon the roads of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public
assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the chief of police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the
traffic in these congested districts, and any person, who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them, shall
be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code.
Secs. 78-4—78-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES
Sec. 78-31. - Trac and speed zones; signs and trac control devices.
Upon approval of the mayor and council, the chief of police is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic
control signs, markings and devices:
Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway.
Other safety zones for pedestrians.
Traffic lanes.
Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones.
Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices.
Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the city.
All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a
particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control
devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices
of the city.
No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate
signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved.
Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established hereunder shall be a violation of
this Code.
Sec. 78-32. - General speed limit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or portion of a street in the city at a rate of speed greater
than 30 miles per hour unless another speed limits posted or otherwise designated for such street or portion of a street.
Sec. 78-33. - Specic speed limits.
On-system. The following on-system speed limits are hereby established on the streets in the city. Appropriate signs shall
be erected by the department of transportation.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
197/246
(b)
Street From: To: Distance Speed
State Route 7 (US 41) A point 106 feet east of State
Route 401 (I-75), milelog 31.81,
west city limits
County Road 392 (Main Street,
milelog 32.33)
0.52
mile
45
mph
State Route 7 (US 41) County Road 392 (milelog
32.33)
North city limits (milelog 33.23) 0.90
mile
35
mph
State Route 122 West city limits (milelog 3.90) State Route 7/State Route 401
(I-75, milelog 4.21)
0.31
mile
45
mph
State Route 122 Church Street (milelog 5.19) A point 686 feet east of County
Road 33 (Hagen Bridge Road,
milelog 6.08)
0.89
mile
35
mph
State Route 122 A point 686 feet east of County
Road 33 (Hagen Bridge Road,
(milelog 6.33)
East city limits (milelog 6.08) 0.25
mile
45
mph
Off-system. The following off-system speed limits are hereby established on the streets in the city. Appropriate signs shall
be erected by the city.
Street From: To: Distance Speed
Bareld St. Grace St. Coleman St. 0.25
mile
30
mph
Blakely St. Park Union Rd. 0.30
mile
30
mph
Church St. South city limits A point 50 feet south of
Coleman St.
0.25
mile
45
mph
Church St. A point 50 feet south of
Coleman St.
State Route 122 0.50
mile
35
mph
Coleman Rd. Church St. Hagen Bridge Rd. 0.43
mile
30
mph
College St. Grace St. Stanll St. 0.30
mile
30
mph
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
198/246
Grace St. Hall St. Hagen Bridge Rd. 0.86
mile
30
mph
Hagen Bridge Rd. Church St. State Route 122 0.88
mile
35
mph
Hagen Bridge Rd. State Route 122 Northeast city limits 0.35
mile
30
mph
Hall St. Grace St. Stanll St. 0.40
mile
30
mph
Hall St. Grace St. South city limits 0.50
mile
35
mph
Lawson St. Newsom St. Stanll St. 1.00
mile
30
mph
Lemaka St. Main St. Hagen Bridge Rd. 0.27
mile
30
mph
Main St. Extension Union Rd. State Route 122 0.30
mile
45
mph
Nelson St. Church St. Stanll St. 0.75
mile
30
mph
Park St. Union Rd. Nelson St. 0.90
mile
30
mph
Randall St. Church St. Nelson St. 0.25
mile
30
mph
Sargent St. Washington St. Railroad St. 0.45
mile
30
mph
Stanll St. Union Rd. A point 200 feet west of Laurel
Dr.
0.36
mile
35
mph
Stanll St. A point 200 feet west of Laurel
Dr.
Hagen Bridge Rd. 1.44
miles
30
mph
Union Rd. West Main St. North city limits 0.55
mile
45
mph
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
199/246
(c)
(a)
(b)
Union Rd. West Main St. South city limits 0.32
mile
45
mph
Weaver St. Grace St. Coleman Dr. 0.25
mile
30
mph
School zones. A speed limit of 25 miles per hour shall be enforced in the school zones of the city. Such limits shall be
enforced only on school days.
Street From: To: Distance Times
State Route 122 A point 270 feet west
of Nelson Street
A point 1,650 feet
west of Hagen Bridge
Road
0.57 mile 7:30 a.m. to 8:45
a.m.; 3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Hagen Bridge Rd. Coleman Rd. State Route 122 0.50 mile 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m.; 3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Nelson St. Grace St. Lawson St. 0.25 mile 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m.; 3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
(Code 1985, § 9-2; Ord. of 5-8-1997)
Sec. 78-34. - Maximum speed limits on specic streets.
The mayor and city council may alter the maximum speed limits established by section 78-33 on any street or portion thereof within
the city in accord with the provisions of state law. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so
established for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed
in excess of such limit.
Sec. 78-35. - Speed detection devices.
The city is hereby authorized to use speed detection devices for the purpose of traffic control on the roads and streets in
the city.
Such speed detection devices shall be used only for the purpose of public safety and traffic control, and shall not be used
for the purpose of raising revenue.
Sec. 78-36. - Covering of loads.
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and
securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in
such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
200/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(d)
Sec. 78-37. - Parking in deceleration or acceleration lanes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any automobile, truck, bus, truck tractor, trailer, tractor, trailer combination,
motorcycle, moped, or other motor vehicle within or upon the deceleration or acceleration lanes lying in the
unincorporated areas of the city.
Deceleration and acceleration lanes shall be defined for the purpose of this section as those strips of pavement lying
adjacent to and to the east of the northbound lanes of traffic and adjacent to and to the west of the southbound lanes of
traffic which are not part of the regular roadway but afford access into and out of the driveways and side roads along the
highway.
Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a violation of a city ordinance and shall be prosecuted in the municipal
court. A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11
Secs. 78-38—78-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - PARADES
Sec. 78-71. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Parade means any march, ceremony, demonstration, exhibition or procession of any kind upon any public street of the city.
(Code 1985, § 9-4(b))
Sec. 78-72. - Permit.
Registration. Any person who wishes to organize, form or conduct a parade as defined in this section shall be required to
register such parade with the chief of police at least 24 hours in advance of the event and to obtain a permit therefor.
Application. An application for a permit to conduct a parade shall be made to the chief of police in writing, shall be signed
by the person responsible for the conduct of the parade and shall contain the following information:
The time proposed for the parade;
The route of the proposed parade;
The number of vehicles (if any) and number of persons whose participation is anticipated in the proposed parade;
The name and address of the person or organization sponsoring or promoting the proposed parade; and
The name and address of the person making the application for a parade permit.
Review of application. The chief of police shall forward the application to the mayor, who shall review the information set
forth in the application and ascertain the following:
The extent of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to be anticipated at the time and place of and on the route of the
proposed parade;
The availability of police forces to escort the proposed parade and to direct traffic in conjunction with the proposed
parade; and
Whether or not, in the light of all the circumstances, the proposed parade will unreasonably burden or interfere with
the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public.
Disposition. In the event the mayor determines, in view of all the circumstances, that the proposed parade will
unreasonably burden and interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, he
shall deny the request for a parade permit; and if he determines on the contrary that the proposed parade will not
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
201/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, he shall
grant the parade permit. In either case the mayor shall indicate his disposition on the application and shall notify the
applicant of the action taken.
(Code 1985, § 9-4(a), (c)—(e))
Sec. 78-73. - Exemption.
The provisions of this article shall be inapplicable to any parade which is conducted under the supervision of a practicing funeral
director in conjunction with any funeral.
(Code 1985, § 9-4(f))
State law reference— Funeral directors, O.C.G.A. § 43-18-1 et seq.
Secs. 78-74—78-110. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - MOTORIZED CARTS
Sec. 78-111. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Motorized carts means electric-powered and gasoline-powered pleasure carts, commonly known as golf carts. These carts have not
less than three wheels and cannot be operated typically at more than 20 miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 02-01, § 9-7, 5-2-2002)
Sec. 78-112. - Operations and limitations.
Motorized carts may be operated within the corporate limits of the city by:
Those persons who are 16 years of age and older and have a valid motor vehicle driver's license.
Those persons who are 15 years of age, but not yet 16 years of age, if accompanied in the front seat by a person at
least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle drivers license.
No person under the age of 15 years of age shall be permitted to operate a motorized cart on any public street within
the corporate limits of the city.
All operators of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic.
Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks or in city parks other than in parking areas.
Motorized carts shall be operated during daylight hours only except if such carts are equipped with functional
headlights and taillights.
Motorized carts may not traverse streets and highways under the jurisdiction of the state department of
transportation. Motorized carts may cross these streets to access other streets at street intersections only. The
specific streets and highways referenced include North Church Street, South Church Street, East Main Street and
West Main Street throughout the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. No. 02-01, § 9-8, 5-2-2002)
Sec. 78-113. - Registration.
Before any motorized cart may be operated within the corporate limits of the city, the cart must be registered and receive
a decal from the city clerk signifying its registration. A person desiring to register a motorized cart shall bring
documentation setting forth a description of said cart to the city clerk's office and complete an application for registration
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
202/246
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(c)
of said cart. Upon registration, the clerk shall issue a decal to be applied to the rear of such cart so as to be plainly visible.
There shall be a fee of $25.00 for such registration. The decal, issued, shall be non-transferable from the cart for which it is
issued. The registration shall be effective until such time as the cart is sold. New owners must register a cart within ten
business days within change of ownership at a cost of $10.00. If the registration is not transferred within ten business
days, a $20.00 penalty will be applied in addition to the $10.00 transfer charge.
Before any motorized cart may be operated within the corporate limits of the city, the cart must have affixed thereto an
emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. The emblem shall conform with those standards and specifications adopted for
slow-moving vehicles by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers in December 1966, and contained within such
society's standard ASAE S276.1, or shall be an emblem of the same shape and size painted on such vehicle in a bright and
conspicuous retro-reflective red-orange paint. Such emblem shall be mounted on the rear of such vehicles, in the
approximate horizontal geometric center of the vehicle, at a height of three to five feet above the roadway, and shall be
maintained at all times in a clean and reflective condition.
(Ord. No. 02-01, § 9-9, 5-2-2002)
Sec. 78-114. - Liability insurance coverage.
Each person operating a motorized cart is liable for his own actions. Liability insurance coverage varies and each person operating a
motorized cart should verify his coverage.
(Ord. No. 02-01, § 9-10, 5-2-2002)
Sec. 78-115. - Exceptions.
Nothing in this article shall apply to any self-propelled, two-wheeled vehicle.
Nothing in this article shall apply to motorized carts operated by the city.
(Ord. No. 02-01, § 9-11, 5-2-2002)
Secs. 78-116—78-150. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - JUNKED VEHICLES
Sec. 78-151. - Abandoned, junked vehicles described; declared nuisance.
A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned or to be a junked motor vehicle in the following circumstances:
When it is partially or completely dismantled or wrecked;
When it is incapable of self-propulsion or of being moved in the manner for which it was originally intended;
When it has been abandoned, or inoperable, or is damaged, and worth less than $50.00;
When it is a junked vehicle and has been so abandoned for a period of not less than 30 days; or
When it has been abandoned and does not display a current license plate.
A motor vehicle shall be deemed to constitute an attractive nuisance or to constitute a health and safety hazard for the
purposes of this article, in the following instances:
When it is an attractive nuisance for children;
When it is, or is reasonable likely to become, a breeding place for rats, vermin or snakes, or contributes to general
circumstances which are inimical to the health or safety of human beings; or
When it constitutes or is reasonable likely to constitute a fire and safety hazard and a source of fire and explosion,
and is otherwise detrimental to the safety of human beings, especially of children, and of property.
It is hereby declared that all such vehicles described in subsections (a) or (b) of this section which have remained on
privately owned property for as long as 30 days, are a hazard to health and safety and constitute an attractive nuisance for
children and a public nuisance.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
203/246
(a)
(b)
(Ord. of 11-9-2000, § 9-4)
Sec. 78-152. - Declaration of nuisance prerequisite to removal; appeal from declaration.
No vehicle described in section 78-151 shall be removed from privately owned property without the written request of the
owner, lessee or occupant of such premises, unless the city manager or his designate has declared it to be an attractive
nuisance for children or to constitute a public nuisance as hereinabove provided. Such findings and declaration of the city
manager or his designate may be appealed to the mayor and council under the following prescribed procedure: The
owner or other person having an interest in the ownership or right of possession of such abandoned or junked motor
vehicle which has been declared by the city manager or his designate to constitute a public nuisance or an attractive
nuisance for children shall have the right of appeal from such declaration or decision, to the mayor and council; provided,
however, that a notice of appeal in writing is served upon the city manager, stating the grounds for such appeal, within
seven days after notice is given of such decision or declaration from which the appeal is taken. The decision of the mayor
and council upon such appeal shall be final.
The finding and declaration of the city manager or his designate and the approval or confirmation of such declaration and
finding by the mayor and council, upon appeal, if any appeal has been taken, shall constitute the finding and declaration
that the existence of such conditions by the presence of such junked or abandoned motor vehicle on privately owned
property has become an attractive nuisance for children, a condition inimical to the health of human beings, or a fire
hazard or source of fire and explosion, so that such conditions constitute a health or safety hazard, and constitute a public
nuisance which may be abated by the removal of such abandoned or junked motor vehicle from such privately owned
property and the disposal thereof in the manner herein provided.
(Ord. of 11-9-2000, § 9-5)
Sec. 78-153. - Notice of owner.
When any junked or abandoned vehicle is to be removed from privately owned property, it shall be the duty of the city manager, or
such officer as he may designate, to give written notice of such proposed removal and of a hearing to the registered owner of such
vehicle at his last known address according to the latest registration certificate or certificate of title on file with the department of motor
vehicles, if such information is available upon reasonable inquiry. If the junked or abandoned vehicle in question has no license plate, or
other identification, or is in such state of disrepair as not to enable the city manager to ascertain its ownership from registration records,
it shall be deemed sufficient notice if the city manager causes to be published in one issue of a newspaper published in the county, a
description of the vehicle, the address from which it will be removed, the date after when the vehicle will be removed and where it will be
stored.
(Ord. of 11-9-2000, § 9-6)
Sec. 78-154. - Lien for nuisance vehicle; towing, storage; charges; payment of charges prerequisite to release.
All towing, storage, advertising and other charges incurred by the city or imposed upon the owner or operator of the vehicle in
connection with a vehicle towed or impounded under the provisions of this article, shall constitute a lien upon such vehicle, and no such
impounded vehicle shall have been paid.
(Ord. of 11-9-2000, § 9-7)
Sec. 78-155. - Redemption of impounded vehicle.
The owner of any vehicle removed pursuant to this article may regain possession of the vehicle by paying to the city all reasonable
costs incidental to the removal and storage of such vehicle as provided in this article.
(Ord. of 11-9-2000, § 9-8)
Sec. 78-156. - Keeping abandoned, junked, nuisance vehicle.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
204/246
(a)
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow to remain, for a period of more than 30 days, any abandoned or junked motor vehicle or
any motor vehicle constituting a public nuisance or attractive nuisance on any property which he owns, controls, leases or occupies.
(Ord. No. 02-01, § 9-9, 5-2-2002)
Sec. 78-157. - Applicability of article provisions.
Nothing in this article shall apply to any vehicle in an enclosed building or any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise being
operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of such enterprise, or to any vehicle in an appropriate
storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city.
(Ord. No. 02-01, § 9-10, 5-2-2002)
Chapter 82 - UTILITIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Water Resources Center, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to
payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-
39-7; authority to provide stormwater, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 82-1. - Waterworks.
The city waterworks shall be under the immediate control and supervision of the director of public works, who shall perform all acts
that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient and economical management and protection of said waterworks, subject to the approval
and confirmation of the mayor and council.
(Code 1985, § 17-1)
Sec. 82-2. - Rates.
Municipal water rates for residential customers within the city's service area shall be set by council from time to time.
Contracts for commercial water customers shall be set by the mayor and council from time to time.
(Code 1985, § 17-2; Ord. of 10-2-1990, § 1)
Sec. 82-3. - Application for water and sewer service.
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service, in person, at the city hall and at the same time shall make a cash
security deposit for water and/or sewer service, as set from time to time by the council.
(Code 1985, § 17-3; Ord. of 10-2-1990, § 2)
Sec. 82-4. - Connection fee.
Each consumer subscribing to use the water and sewer service of the city shall pay a connection fee set from time to time by the
council.
(Code 1985, § 17-4; Ord. of 10-2-1990, § 3)
Sec. 82-5. - Size of service tap.
The size of the service tap will be determined by the needs of the consumer.
(Code 1985, § 17-5)
(34)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
205/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Sec. 82-6. - Minimum charge.
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for each connection subscribed for under this chapter. Water
furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water
free of charge to any person.
(Code 1985, § 17-6; Ord. of 10-2-1990, § 4)
Sec. 82-7. - City's responsibility and liability.
The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be
constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served.
The city shall own and maintain the water line from the main to the meter box and the property owner shall own and
maintain the service line from the meter box to the premises served.
The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to
prevent cross connections or backflow.
Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city.
(Code 1985, 17-7(a), (b), (f), (g); Ord. of 10-2-1990, § 5)
Sec. 82-8. - Service line.
No more than one building shall be permitted to use a water service line. All service lines shall be installed at a depth at least 48
inches below the surface of the ground. Each service line shall contain a curb stop, meter, backflow preventer, and customer side valve
contained in the meter box where the water may be turned off.
(Code 1985, § 17-8)
Sec. 82-9. - Consumer's responsibility and liability.
Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees
only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use said water. Disregard for
this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service.
Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer
therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader.
The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter.
The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a
safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state department of natural resources.
In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer
proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system
and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of
the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system.
(Code 1985, § 17-9; Ord. of 10-2-1990, § 6)
Sec. 82-10. - Water waste.
Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water outlets closed when not in actual use. Hydrants, urinals,
water closets, bathtubs and other fixtures must not be left running for any purpose other than the use for which they were intended.
When any such waste occurs, the water service may be terminated.
(Code 1985, § 17-10)
Sec. 82-11. - Sprinkling.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
206/246
(a)
(b)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
(a)
(b)
In case of water shortage or scarcity, the mayor and council may by resolution place any restrictions upon the use of water for
irrigation or sprinkling purposes which such body deems necessary.
(Code 1985, § 17-11)
Sec. 82-12. - Use during re alarms.
During all fire alarms, the use by persons other than city firefighters of hoses and other apparatuses maintaining a constant flow of
water is absolutely forbidden.
(Code 1985, § 17-12)
Sec. 82-13. - Access to premises; extensions of system.
Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of
installing or removing city property, inspecting fixtures and piping, reading and testing meters or for any other purpose in
connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities.
Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or
conveyed, to the city, a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines.
(Code 1985, § 17-13; Ord. of 10-2-1990, § 7)
Sec. 82-14. - Change of occupancy.
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to
change occupancy. The outgoing person shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for
departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises, and
failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading.
(Code 1985, § 17-14; Ord. of 10-2-1990, § 8)
Sec. 82-15. - Meter readings; billings; collections.
Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be
determined as desirable by the city. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in
the automatic imposition of the following penalties:
Nonpayment within 15 days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of 15 percent of the total amount due.
Penalty shall be set by mayor and council from time to time.
Nonpayment within 20 days from the date due will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property.
Nonpayment for 20 days after the original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies to
terminate the agreement, and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated, to
supply any water under this agreement.
Water and sewer service shall not be reconnected until the customer's delinquent bill, including the penalty and
disconnection charges, have been paid in full. Should such customer thereafter desire to be reconnected to the water and
sewer system, a reconnection charge shall be collected. Reconnection charge shall be set by mayor and council from time
to time. Bills shall be paid at the city hall, and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming
delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of the same.
(Code 1985, § 17-15; Ord. of 10-2-1990, § 9)
Sec. 82-16. - Suspension of service.
When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills are paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the
consumer by the city.
Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
207/246
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the
bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts.
Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may
be required by the mayor and council is made and a service charge required by the council is paid for each meter
reconnected.
The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons:
To prevent fraud or abuse;
Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules;
Emergency repairs;
Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control;
Legal processes;
Direction of public authorities; or
Strike, riot, fire, flood or unavoidable accident.
(Code 1985, § 17-16; Ord. of 10-2-1990, § 10)
Sec. 82-17. - Complaints; adjustments.
If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes
delinquent. The bill is delinquent as of the 15th of each month. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent,
shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill
under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim.
The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer; provided, however, that if such special
reading discloses that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made.
Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the
test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge
will be made.
If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped
for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper
data.
(Code 1985, § 17-17; Ord. of 10-2-1990, § 11)
Secs. 82-18—82-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS
Sec. 82-51. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ASTM means The American Society for Testing and Materials.
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter.
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
208/246
(a)
(b)
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
Director means the director of public works of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative, as designated by the mayor
and council.
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter.
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to
such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater
than one-half inch in any dimension.
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally
admitted.
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treating sewage, presently owned or
afterward acquired by this city.
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and
polluted industrial wastes.
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids; and which
are removable by laboratory filtering.
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Code 1985, § 17-31)
Sec. 82-52. - Penalties for violation of article.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 82-54(d), shall be served by the city with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 82-54(d) or who shall continue any violation hereof beyond the time
limit provided for in section 82-55, or who shall continue any other violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in
subsection (a) of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense and, upon conviction therefor, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $200.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment for each violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Code 1985, § 17-32)
Sec. 82-53. - Power of inspectors.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
209/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
(Code 1985, § 17-33)
Sec. 82-54. - General regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or
private property within this city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of this city, any human or animal excrement, garbage
or other objectionable waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet within this city, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of this city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain, or cause to be constructed
or maintained, any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper
with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city sewerage works.
(Code 1985, § 17-34)
Sec. 82-55. - Connection to public sewers.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the
corporate limits of this city and located within 250 feet of a line of public sanitary sewer now in existence or after constructed to which
such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity is hereby
required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with said line of public sanitary
sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 60 days after date of official notice so to do.
(Code 1985, § 17-35)
Sec. 82-56. - Private sewage disposal.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 82-55, the building sewer shall be connected
to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit
signed by the county inspection department. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
county, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the
county. A permit and inspection fee, as set from time to time by the county shall be paid to the county at the time of
application. Prior to obtaining the permit from the county, the owner must fill out a preapplication form furnished by the
city.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is complete to the
satisfaction of the city's public works director. He shall be allowed to inspect the work from the house to the city's
connection. The applicant for the permit shall notify the county inspection department when the work is ready for final
inspection and before any underground portions are covered. Service will not be established until inspection of the
water/sewer lines is complete and approved by the city.
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of
the state department of natural resources. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool
shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in
section 82-55, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks,
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
210/246
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense
to the city.
No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be
imposed by the state department of natural resources.
(Code 1985, § 17-36)
Sec. 82-57. - Building sewers and connections.
Tampering with sewers. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent.
Permits generally. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
For residential and commercial service; and
For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
superintendent. Permit and inspection fees for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and for an industrial
building sewer permit, as set from time to time by the city council, shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
Costs. All cost and expense incident to the connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the city property
line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may be directly or
indirectly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. Any connection from the city property line into the public
sewer shall be made by the city, for which the owner shall pay the city sewer tap fees for residential and commercial taps,
as set from time to time by the council.
Separate buildings. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one
building stands at the rear of another or on an interior lot, and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be
extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
Old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on
examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article.
Specifications. Specifications for buildings and sewers shall be as follows:
The building sewer shall be SDR 35 or better.
The building sewer shall meet AWWA (American Water Work Association) standards for DWU pipe.
Joints shall be sealed gastight and waterproof as described by AWWA standards.
All pipe shall be installed in accordance with AWWA standards for pipe installation.
All sanitary sewer shall require a clean out located on or next to the city's rights-of-way. If a new system is installed or
if a system is replaced, a cleanout is required on the right-of-way and located to provide access for maintenance.
Size; slope. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event
shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per
foot.
Elevation; generally. Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be
weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in
direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings.
No gravity flow. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.
Excavations. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
211/246
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(d)
(1)
approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and back fill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12;
except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected.
Joints and connections. All joints and connections shall be gastight and watertight and shall comply with AWWA standards
for line installation.
Connection location. All sewer connections will be made at the closest location to the property as to provide proper
drainage of wastewater. The city crew will make all connections to the sanitary sewer system. If circumstances prevent the
city crew from performing the installations, a contractor shall be allowed to make the tap, provided that the equipment
and procedures meet the city standards and with prior approval by the public works director.
Notice to superintendent. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
Barricades; lights. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Code 1985, § 17-37)
Sec. 82-58. - Discharges into public sewers.
Unpolluted waters. No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Storm sewers. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
Prohibited waters or wastes. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of
the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit;
Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of fat, oil or grease;
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar plastics, wood, paunch manure or any
other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works;
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;
Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of
the sewage treatment plant. All fixed upper limits shall be governed by the environmental protection division of the
state and shall meet or exceed these requirements before discharge to the waste treatment plant;
Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense
is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant;
Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.
Interceptors.
Generally. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located as
to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
212/246
(2)
(e)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of
substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be
gastight and watertight.
Maintenance. When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense,
in continuously efficient operation at all times.
Review; treatment.
The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having:
A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 milligrams per liter;
Containing more than 350 milligrams per liter of suspended solids;
Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in subsection (c) of this section; or
Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city;
shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent.
Where necessary in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to:
Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to 350 milligrams
per liter;
Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in subsection (c)
of this section; or
Control the quantities and rates of discharge of water or wastes.
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall
be submitted for the approval of the superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until
said approval is obtained in writing.
Continuous operation of facilities. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall
be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
Control manhole. When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense, and the owner at his expense shall maintain the same so the manhole shall be safe and accessible at all times.
Tests. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in
subsections (c) and (e) of this section shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Sewage," at the control manhole provided in subsection (g) of this section, or upon suitable samples taken at
such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
Special agreements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
(Code 1985, § 17-38)
Chapter 86 - VEGETATION
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 86-1. - Burning of leaves and rubbish.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
213/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks
or alleys of the city.
(Code 1985, § 15-1(l))
Secs. 86-2—86-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - LANDSCAPE DEVELOPMENT
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 86-31. - Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain, and enhance the immediate and long-range health, safety, economic
stability, and general welfare of the present and future citizens of the city. This article is enacted to provide standards for
the preservation and/or replacement of trees and vegetation as part of land development and building construction within
the city.
The intent of this article is to provide information to facilitate the development of project design, plan and review and
enforcement processes administered in a most effectively and efficiently so as to accomplish the purpose of this article
and to provide for orderly, enhanced development within the corporate limits of the city.
The city is known as the Honey Bee City; the use of flowering plants, where appropriate, is encouraged.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-1)
Sec. 86-32. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Applicant means the person or entity making application for a permit as provided herein and who shall be responsible for, and in
charge of, a project; the applicant may be the owner, developer, project manager or contractor.
Basal caliper means the diameter of a plant's main stem measured at six inches above the ground level.
Board of appeals means the county planning commission of which the city is a member government.
Buffer means an area of land which includes landscape material established for the purposes of separating, screening, or shielding a
use from a dissimilar or more intense use.
Building permit means a permit issued by the department of inspections to proceed with the development or redevelopment of
property meeting the form and requirements as established by the city.
Canopy tree means a large tree or group of trees that has a distinct presence in the landscape or forest. For the purpose of this
article, all large trees and all medium trees identified as canopy trees are listed in the zoning ordinance published as a separate
document and on file in the city's offices.
Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the department of inspections certifying that all requirements for development
or redevelopment of property have been met and authorizing occupancy of buildings and structures.
Change of ownership means when the legal title or owner of the property changes from person, entity or corporation to another
person, entity or corporation.
City arborist means the city arborist for the City of Valdosta, or other person designated by the city council.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
214/246
Critical root zone (CRZ) means the minimum area beneath a tree which must be undisturbed in development in order to preserve a
sufficient root mass to assure a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone (CRZ) shall be a concentric circle centering on
the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one times the number of inches of the trunk diameter; i.e., the CRZ radius of a 20-inch
diameter tree shall be 20 feet.
Diameter, breast height (DBH) means the diameter or width of the main stem of a tree as measured 4½ feet above the ground.
Drip line means a vertical line extending from the outermost portion of a tree canopy to the ground.
Encroachment means the protrusion or extension of a vehicle outside or beyond the parameters of a parking space, display area,
storage area, or access way into a landscaped area.
Green space means lands to be left as natural areas or landscapes in accordance with this article after development.
Grubbing means the removal of underbrush, such as shrubs, vines and trees under four-inch basal caliper. Grubbing does not
include root raking and/or soil disturbance within the drip line of preserved trees.
Interior planting area means the area within vehicular use area devoted to growing plants or vegetation.
Land disturbance activity means any activity including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and/or
the filling of a parcel with topsoil or landfill soils. Land disturbance activity shall not include agricultural practices.
Landscape means existing natural vegetation or the placing of ground cover, shrubs or trees in a planting area in accordance with
the requirements of this article.
Mature tree means the mature height and canopy width of a tree as described in the "Manual of Woody Landscape Plants," latest
edition.
Outparcel means a parcel of property adjacent to a principal development not included in the original or first development, but
intended to be developed or sold or leased for development separately or at a later time.
Outside storage area means an outdoor area, open or fenced, or a separate building constructed for storage of materials or refuse.
Perimeter planting area means the front, sides and rear yard areas between vehicular surface areas and adjacent property lines
designed for planting and landscaping.
Planting area means an outdoor area devoted entirely to the planting or conservation and maintenance of trees, shrubs and ground
covers.
Preserved tree means any tree designated on a site development plan that is to be preserved during development for incorporation
into the final landscaping of the developed parcel.
Retention/detention basin means a land area designed to temporarily retain or detain stormwater runoff.
Sight triangle means the area of property on both sides of a driveway formed by the intersection of each side of the driveway and
public right-of-way with the two sides of each triangle being a minimum of 20 feet in length from the point of intersection and the third
side being a straight line connecting the ends of the two other sides.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control. See Code of Ordinances, city ordinances and/or requirements for issuance of land
disturbance permits.
Specimen tree means any tree designated by the city tree commission for preservation because of its rarity, aesthetic value,
historical value, botanical importance, or size. The following criteria shall apply: Large species trees: Oak and Magnolia species, 14 inches
DBH or larger; Long Leaf and Spruce Pines ten inches DBH or larger; other pines 20 inches DBH or larger. All other species, 18 inches
DBH or larger. Small species trees: six inches DBH or larger.
Street yard means a landscaped area required adjacent to a street right-of-way.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
215/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Substantial improvements means repair, reconstruction, alterations or improvements to existing structures in which the cost thereof
exceeds 25 percent of the ad valorem tax value as established by the current digest at the time the proposed improvements are begun or
contemplated.
Tree inventory means a listing and designation of all trees with a six-inch DBH or larger on a map or survey drawn to scale.
Tree save area means an area consisting of a group of trees designated to be preserved.
Utility service area means an area, which contains any surface, mounted HVAC equipment or freestanding, aboveground devices,
such as utility boxes, booster boxes, switch boxes and transformers that are part of an underground utilities system.
Vehicular use area means any ground surface area, excepting public rights-of-way used by any type of vehicle, whether moving or at
rest for the purpose of including, but not limited to, driving, parking, loading, unloading, storage or display, such as, but not limited to,
new and used car lots, activities of a drive-in nature in connection with banks, restaurants, service stations, grocery and convenience
stores.
Wetlands means lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or
the land is covered by shallow water. For this purpose, wetlands must have one or more of the following attributes:
At least periodically, the land supports predominately hydrophytes;
The substrate is predominately undrained hydric soil; and
The substrate is nonsoil and is saturated with water or covered by shallow water at some time during the growing
season of each year, or is designated by the National Cooperative Soils Survey of the Soil Conservation Service by the
U.S. Department of Agriculture as designed by the National Wetlands Inventory, United States Department of
Interior; or any future approved and designated state.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-2)
Sec. 86-33. - Oce of inspection.
The Valdosta Office of Inspection, acting through the director of inspections or his designee with the assistance of the city arborist,
shall be charged with the enforcement of this article and the regulation of the care and removal of all trees growing now or hereafter in
the city in accordance with this article.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-3)
Sec. 86-34. - Application of this article.
The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to real property within the city, as follows:
All undeveloped property, existing commercial or multifamily residential development that undergoes substantial
improvement as defined by this article and/or has a change in the zoning classification of said property. The current
developed and existing property zoned single-family or two-family residential is exempt from the application of this
article.
That portion of each lot that corresponds with the portion of the lot covered by the front (street), side, rear yard, or
interior vehicle use area as defined in this article.
Redeveloped or substantially improved property. All property except that zoned single-family or two-family
residential which is redeveloped or substantially improved to the extent that the cost thereof, excluding landscaping,
exceeds 25 percent of the ad valorem tax value as determined by the current digest shall comply with this article, as
follows: Improvements or renovations at a cost which equals 25 percent of the ad valorem tax value as determined
by the current digest shall comply with the landscape standards and requirements of this article at the rate of 25
percent of the total requirements. Improvements or renovations at a cost between 25 percent to 49 percent of the ad
valorem tax value as determined by the current digest shall comply with the landscape standards and requirements
of this article at the same ratio or percentage as the cost of improvements relates to the total ad valorem tax value
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
216/246
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(i.e., 45 percent improvements of the tax digest value requires 45 percent compliance with the landscape standards
and requirements herein). Substantial improvements or renovations at a cost that equals 50 percent of the ad
valorem tax value as established by the current tax digest or greater shall require full compliance with the landscape
standards and requirements of this article. A second substantial improvement within 12 calendar months shall
require full compliance with the landscape requirements and standards of this article. This provision shall not apply
to reconstruction or rebuilding of structures that are destroyed by fire or other natural disaster, if such compliance is
not possible due to conflict with health, safety, or zoning codes. Where construction is the result of fire or destruction
by natural disaster, the provisions of this article shall not result in noncompliance with zoning and parking
regulations or noncompliance with the American with Disabilities Act or other federal law or the city zoning
ordinance.
Property hereafter annexed into the corporate limits of the city is subject to the following conditions: Upon
annexation, the property owner shall have 12 months from the effective date of annexation within which to comply
with the provisions and terms of this article.
When development is commenced, trees are removed and cleared, but no actual construction has begun within six
months of the date of issuance of the initial permit, the owner and/or developer shall landscape the street yard
within 30 days thereafter in accordance with the plans approved.
Any expansion of existing vehicular use area shall require compliance with the landscape standards of this article for
expanded area only.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-4)
Secs. 86-35—86-50. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS
Sec. 86-51. - Tree removal permit.
Before commencing development or substantial improvements, no person, firm, organization or corporation or other entity, shall
directly or indirectly remove or destroy any tree without first obtaining a permit for the same.
Permits shall be obtained by making written application to the office of inspections. The application shall be
submitted with a site drawing to scale giving a complete tree inventory and proposed landscaping plan, if applicable,
showing all trees to be saved and all trees to be removed. The proposed plan must be submitted to and approved by
the city arborist by the issuance of a tree removal permit.
A copy of the tree removal permit must be displayed on site with all other construction permits during all phases of
construction.
Upon receipt of the application and accompanying documents, the office of inspections shall review the same and
either approve or reject said application within ten days of its receipt. Should any applicant be dissatisfied with the
denial of said permit or request an interpretation of this article, an appeal should be filed within 30 days with the
board of appeals.
A tree inventory drawn to scale shall accurately locate and identify all specimen trees and all other trees with a DBH
of six inches or more. Groups of trees less than six inches DBH and not specimen or canopy trees shall be delineated
as tree mass. The inventory shall indicate and designate which trees are to be removed and/or retained. (Note that
existing trees four inches DBH or greater may be used to meet minimum landscape requirements as defined under
this article.)
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-5(A))
Sec. 86-52. - Landscape permit.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
217/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
No person, firm, organization, corporation or entity shall directly or indirectly commence landscaping of any development or any
construction project without first obtaining a landscape permit as provided in this section. A permit shall be obtained by making written
application in the form prescribed by the city manager to the inspections department. The application shall be accompanied by a detailed
plan of the site drawn to scale on a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or larger indicating or exhibiting the following:
Proposed and existing buildings: location type, dimension and square footage of vehicular use areas, outdoor
storage areas, utility service areas and proposed parking spaces, including proposed truck parking and loading
service area.
Sidewalks or other pedestrian circulation or walkways.
All proposed landscaping, including location, botanical or common names, and size of proposed trees, shrubs and
ground cover which meets the landscaping requirements of this article, and the location and dimension of planting
areas, street yards, and the location and size of earthen berms and buffers.
All setback lines.
Location of all signage on property.
The location, species and DBH of existing trees to be preserved and those to be relocated or removed.
Any barriers to be erected to protect any existing vegetation and trees from damage during construction as required
under the tree and protected zone preservation standard.
A brief description of the type of barriers to be erected.
All walls, fences and railings.
Location of all overhead utility lines.
Any trenching adjacent to or within the drip line of trees to be preserved.
Location of all surface water retention and/or detention areas.
The proposed plan shall also indicate lineal feet of street yard, side yard and rear yard.
The total area in square footage of vehicular use areas, number of parking spaces provided and required.
Percentage of proposed green space, natural or landscape on parcel and designation of green space areas with
square footage. The total number and total caliper inches (DBH) of specimen trees removed by category of specimen
trees.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-5(B))
Sec. 86-53. - Procedures.
The applicant and the city shall follow the following procedures and requirements:
Landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city arborist prior to the issuance of permits by the
inspections department.
The inspections department shall have ten working days after receiving the completed landscape plan within which
to approve or deny the application for a landscape permit. If the permit is denied, the inspections department shall
specify to the applicant in writing the reasons for denial.
A copy of all approved landscape permits shall be permanently displaced on site during installation of landscape
improvements.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until the inspections department has determined at the final
inspection that required site improvements have been installed according to the approved application and all
landscaping has been completed in accordance with the landscaping plan. The city may require a performance bond
or other security in an amount of not more than 110 percent of the cost of required improvements in lieu of
withholding a certificate of occupancy and may further require that the improvements be satisfactorily installed and
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
218/246
(5)
(a)
(b)
completed within the specified length of time, not to exceed six months; excepting, however, additional allowances
up to one month may be granted from time to time if weather conditions do not permit planning with a reasonable
probability of plant survival.
An applicant objecting to the interpretation and/or any enforcement of this article shall have the right to appeal the
action to the board of appeals who shall in turn make recommendation regarding the request to the city council who
shall make the final decision. Appeals shall be advertised and processed under the same review criteria as an appeal
or variance to the city zoning ordinance. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the zoning administrator within 30
days of the action aggrieved. The appeal shall then be processed and heard with the next regularly scheduled
monthly meeting cycle of said board.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-6)
Secs. 86-54—86-70. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
Sec. 86-71. - Objectives.
To ensure the attainment of the objectives of this article, the design and installation of required landscaping shall be consistent with
the standards of this division unless it can be demonstrated that alternative design and installation plans will meet the intent and spirit of
this article.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-7)
Sec. 86-72. - Buer.
Requirements. A buffer shall be required along the side and rear yards of the proposed development, wherever the
proposed development abuts a different existing or permitted use. The existing use of the adjacent property shall
determine the type of buffer required. When a portion of a lot being developed borders a vacant lot, then the
predominant use of the zoning classification for that lot will determine the type of buffer yard required, if any.
_____
Specifications. The following tables prescribe buffer types, as well as minimum number of trees and shrubs per 100 linear
feet. Where feasible and appropriate, developers are encouraged to exceed these minimum requirements. A minimum 50
percent of all canopy trees, and minimum of 75 percent of all understory trees and shrubs shall be evergreen vegetation.
Planting areas must be mulched with approved material. Upon maturity, buffer yards shall not contain any unobstructed
openings more than ten feet in width.
BUFFER TYPE REQUIRED
New
Development
Existing Development
Single-family
subdivision/duplex
Multifamily Oce/
Institutional/
Professional
Commercial Industrial Recreation
Single-family/two-family (new
subdivisions only)
C C B B D
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
219/246
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Multifamily B D C B D
Oce/Institutional/Professional C D
Commercial B B
Industrial A A
Recreation C D
BUFFER TYPE DESCRIPTIONS
Buer Component
(per 100 linear feet)
Buer Type
A B C D
# Canopy trees 7 4 3 2
# Understory trees 11 6 4 4
# Shrubs 50 25 20 20
Buer width 40 20 15 10
Location. The buffer shall be located on the side and rear yard of the lot or parcel and extend inward from the parcel
boundary line for the required depth. The buffer shall not be located in any portion of an existing or dedicated public
right-of-way, public easement or private street, or stormwater detention/retention area. A buffer shall not be used by any
parking or loading purposes, nor contain any structures. Only approved driveways and pedestrian pathways may encroach
into a required buffer.
Existing vegetation. Existing vegetation may be retained and used to meet buffer requirements. In the event existing
vegetation does not satisfy buffer requirements, it shall be supplemented with additional plantings. Proposed plant
materials shall be grouped or massed to achieve a natural looking and unified buffer.
Maintenance. The entire buffer shall be maintained as green open space with the required plantings consistent with the
requirements of this article. Maintenance of a required buffer shall be the responsibility of the property owner or any
consenting grantee. If the plant materials die, they shall be replaced within 60 days.
Supplemental fencing. For all buffer types, buffer yard widths may be reduced up to 50 percent in exchange for an opaque
fence or solid wall between the height of six feet and eight feet being erected along the property line where buffer yards
are required. Such fence or wall shall consist of durable materials, be constructed to last at least ten years with minimum
maintenance and shall be plumbed and aligned to achieve an aesthetically pleasing appearance. The planting
requirements may be reduced up to 25 percent if the supplemental fence option is selected as described above.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-7(1))
Sec. 86-73. - General requirements.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
220/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
Green space. All properties subject to the provisions of this article shall be developed with a minimum of 15 percent of the
total area developed as green space. The street yard, side yard, rear yard, wetlands, surface water retention and/or
detention areas and parking islands may be used to satisfy the green space requirements, provided that these areas meet
the landscape requirements. All barren areas within the green space must be landscaped with a minimum of one tree
every 300 square feet. The minimum area to be designated green space is 100 square feet and the minimum width of any
area shall be three feet.
Line of sight. All landscaping shall be in compliance with the city's minimum line of site standards and site triangles for
streets, intersections or driveways as defined herein and in the city zoning ordinance, published as a separate document
and on file in the city's offices. No landscaping plant materials shall obstruct or impede the traffic flow on any public rightof-way or pedestrian walkways.
Plant protection. All planting in areas which are adjacent to vehicular use area or outdoor storage areas shall be protected
from vehicular encroachment by construction of curbing or other appropriate barriers.
Erosion control. Surface water on all planting areas shall be stabilized to prevent erosion by the use of live ground cover,
mulches, shrubs, permeable pedestrian paver blocks, or any combination thereof.
Maintenance. The owner and/or developer is responsible for maintaining all plant materials in healthy condition.
Maintenance practices include sufficient water, weeding and replacement of dead plant materials, proper pruning and
litter removal. All tree trunks shall be protected from damage from string trimmers and mowers by a protective collar, a
mulch ring or surrounded by other bedding material. It is recommended that the mulch rings shall be a minimum of three
feet in diameter for up to three inches DBH trees and expanded six inches for every additional one inch diameter.
Overhead utility lines. The location of all overhead utilities shall be considered during the placement of required trees in
accordance with the following standards:
Small species at maturity not to exceed height of utility line shall be used when located within 35 feet of the overhead
utility lines. (See the zoning ordinance published as a separate document and on file in the city's offices for
characterization of tree sizes by species).
Medium to large species at maturity may be used when located more than 35 feet from the nearest overhead utility
lines. (See the zoning ordinance published as a separate document and on file in the city's offices for a
characterization of tree sizes by species.)
Fire equipment. A minimum five-foot radius shall be maintained around all fire protection equipment, including fire
hydrants, and shall contain no plant materials or structural elements other than ground cover plants.
Minimum planting area per existing or proposed tree. Trees with irrigation provided shall have no less than 130 square
feet of planting area surrounding its base. Said area shall be maintained in either vegetative landscape material or other
pervious surface cover. Trees without irrigation shall have no less than 150 square feet of unpaved pervious area
surrounding its base. The length of all planting beds shall not exceed 2½ times its width.
Root barriers. Prior to the installation of trees, a determination shall be made as to whether root barriers are necessary to
prevent roots from uplifting or cracking sidewalks. If needed, root barrier collars shall be installed at the time of planting.
Tree wrap and binding devices. All tree wrap, burlap, wire baskets, tied, or other binding devices shall be removed from all
vegetation and trees at the time of planting.
Preservation of existing trees. Preservation of existing trees shall be given special consideration in the preparation of
landscape plans. The city desires to preserve all existing trees wherever possible in all developments. Preserved trees may
be used in the minimum landscape requirements. To be deemed a preserved tree and to comply with the minimum
landscape requirements, any existing tree must be at least four inches DBH and be included among the approved species
listed in the zoning ordinance, published as a separate document and on file in the city's offices. (See Tree and Protected
Zone Preservation Standards.)
Selection criteria. All plants shall be healthy, well-proportioned, disease free and pest free, and suitable for the climate. All
trees selected for planting shall be made from the locally adapted species list included in the zoning ordinance, published
as a separate document and on file in the city's offices. If a species not included is intended for planting, it must first be
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
221/246
(m)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(3)
a.
1.
2.
approved by the city arborist. All plants must conform to the "American Nursery and Landscape Association Nursery State
Standards," latest edition. (Copies are available at the office of the city arborist.)
Planting islands. Planting islands shall have at least a six-inch clearance of good topsoil, including six inches around and
below the root ball of all trees. The department of inspections, during planting, may require that undesirable soil be
removed and replaced with topsoil.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-7(2))
Sec. 86-74. - Vehicular use area landscape requirements.
The following landscaping standards shall apply to all interior or perimeter vehicular use areas:
Tree, shrub and ground cover selection and minimum size requirements.
All medium and large trees must be at least 2½-inch basal caliper and at least eight feet in height; if container
grown trees are used, they must be a minimum of 30 gallon size. If field grown trees are used, sufficient root
mass must be preserved to guarantee the survival of the trees.
All small trees planted must be at least two inches basal caliper and at least six feet in height, and a minimum
15 gallon container for container trees at the time of planting.
For multistemmed container trees, such as Crepe Myrtles and River Birch, the minimum size shall be 30 gallon
containers, and for all other multistemmed trees a minimum installation height of eight feet is required.
Shrubs included in interior planting areas must be a minimum of 12 inches in height at the time of installation.
At least 60 percent of the shrubs must be three gallon containers or larger. Shrubs shall be locally adapted
species and shall be spaced according to growth habit. Not more than 30 percent of the shrubs shall be
deciduous species.
Ground cover other than lawn grass shall be placed 18 inches on center.
Interior vehicular use area minimum landscape requirement.
Minimum landscape requirements for interior vehicular use areas shall be one tree, five shrubs, and a
combination of ground cover, grass or mulch to cover barren areas for every 2,100 square feet of vehicular use
areas or greater fraction thereof. All trees and shrub plantings may be spaced in any pattern so long as no
parking space is located more than 50 feet from the base of any tree. The street yard or exterior trees may be
included when calculating the 50 feet requirement for location of parking spaces. Interior planting areas shall
be protected from vehicular encroachment by curbing or other barrier.
A variance from the 50 feet spacing requirement for loading dock areas or heavy truck traffic areas and/or car
display areas may be granted upon approval by the city council after review and recommendation by the board
of appeals.
A minimum of 60 percent of all trees planted in the interior vehicular use areas shall be canopy trees. Canopy
trees are identified in the zoning ordinance, published as a separate document and on file in the city's offices,
and shall consist of all large trees and designated medium trees. (All trees have a minimum planting area as
described in the general requirements of the landscape standards.)
Perimeter area minimum landscape requirement.
Street yard.
A minimum six-foot wide landscaped street yard shall be required adjacent to all street rights-of-way. A
minimum of three trees and 30 shrubs and a combination of grass, mulch or ground cover to cover barren
area shall be required in every 75 linear feet or greater fraction thereof of all street yards. Under no
circumstances will the street yard contain less than three trees and 30 shrubs. The width of all street yards
is measured from the right-of-way line to the nearest impervious area.
All walkways constructed of impervious material shall be no less than four feet from the trunk of any
existing tree.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
222/246
3.
4.
b.
1.
2.
3.
4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
A minimum of 60 percent of all trees planted shall be large canopy trees whose growth form will provide shad
identified in the zoning ordinance, published as a separate document and on file in the city's offices, and cons
designated medium trees. (All trees have a minimum planting area as described in general requirements of la
All out-parcels shall have the same minimum width on the street yard as the main parcels.
Side and rear yard areas.
Side and rear yard areas shall be vegetated with a minimum width of five feet. Width is measured from
property line to the nearest impervious area. A minimum of one tree and a combination of ground cover
shall be required in every 50 lineal feet or greater fraction thereof on side and rear yards. Side or rear yard
areas may be used to meet the 15 percent green space requirements or buffer, as long as compliance with
the minimum side or rear yard landscape standards are met. The width is measured from the right-of-way
line to the nearest impervious area.
For property zoned so as to provide for zero lot lines, the side yard minimum is not required for the area
of the building only. Zero lot lines shall not change the side yard calculations for plant material
requirements. Developments with zero lot lines shall also comply with the 15 percent of the total area
green space requirements.
A minimum of 60 percent of all trees planted in side and rear yard areas shall be canopy trees whose
growth will provide shade. Canopy trees are identified in the zoning ordinance, published as a separate
document and on file in the city's offices, and consist of all large trees and designated medium trees. (All
trees have a minimum planting area described in the general requirements of the landscape standards.)
All out-parcels shall have the same minimum width on the street yard as the main parcels.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-7(3))
Sec. 86-75. - New residential subdivision requirements.
All new residential subdivisions are required to have a landscaped street yard at the primary street entrance to the
development. If there is more than one entrance, the developer shall designate the primary entrance. The street yard shall
be landscaped the entire length of the property line fronting on a public street at a minimum width of ten feet. The street
entrance must be landscaped with a minimum of three trees and 30 shrubs per 75 lineal feet. A combination of grass,
mulch or ground cover for bare areas shall be required. The width of the street entrance is measured from the right-ofway to the nearest impervious area. Existing trees that exceed four inches DBH can be used to meet minimum plant
requirements. Specimen trees provide a two-for-one credit.
All residential subdivision developments must comply with the buffer requirements.
No final inspection shall be performed for any residential structure until the minimum landscape requirements have been
met.
In all residential subdivision developments of 50 or more lots or phases of developments of 50 or more lots with a
minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet or less, the developer shall designate on the plat thereof one lot as green space or
open space to be landscaped in accordance with the green space development standards hereinafter stated.
Upon obtaining the written consent from the inspections department, the residential subdivision developer may, before or
at the time 50 percent of the total number of lots have been sold, substitute a different lot within the subdivision as the
designated green space lot, provided that the substituted lot satisfies the minimum square footage and landscape
requirements set forth in this section. Upon substitution of the green space, a revised plat shall be prepared and recorded,
along with any other documents necessary to effect such change at the expense of the developer.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-8)
Sec. 86-76. - Green space development standards.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
223/246
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
The specimen tree provisions of this article shall apply to residential subdivisions for the street yard only. Trees required to be
planted in the green space must meet the minimum size of 2.5 inches basal caliper or, if containerized, a minimum container size of 30
gallons.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-9)
Secs. 86-77—86-100. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - PRESERVATION, PROTECTION AND REPLACEMENT OF TREES AND OTHER VEGETATION
Sec. 86-101. - Tree and protected zone preservation.
Generally. The city arborist shall verify that trees and vegetation in protected zones, intended to be preserved, are
retained within the protected areas so as to eliminate the following:
Soil compaction in the critical root zone areas resulting from heavy equipment, vehicular or excessive pedestrian
traffic or storage of equipment or building materials.
Root disturbance due to cuts, fills or trenching.
Wounds to exposed roots, trunks or limbs by mechanical equipment.
Any other activity which may endanger trees or vegetation.
Preservation standards.
Trees, groups of trees, or protected zones to be preserved shall be protected during development or construction by
completely surrounding the critical root zone of all trees to be preserved with appropriate materials.
No construction or soil disturbance shall occur within a tree's drip line unless protective measures to ensure the
protection of the trees are detailed in the landscape plan.
The landscape plans shall indicate what tree protection devices are to be used. Active tree protection devices are
required where trees or protected zones are located in close proximity to construction activity.
Trees proposed to be preserved during construction shall be replaced prior to building occupancy.
The location of all tree protection devices will be verified by the inspections department before any construction
activity occurs on the site. Any change in protected zones must be reviewed and approved by the department of
inspections.
Materials.
Active tree protection shall consist of chain link, orange laminated plastic, wooden post and/or rail fencing or other
equivalent restraining material.
Passive protection shall consist of heavy grade plastic flagging, a minimum of four inches wide with dark lettering on
bright background reading "Tree Protection Area - Do Not Enter" or equivalent signage on a continuous, durable
restraint.
Installation and removal. All tree protection devices shall be installed prior to any clearing, grubbing or grading. The city
arborist or the department of inspections shall inspect and approve the installation of protection control devices before a
land disturbance permit is issued. Tree protection shall remain in functional condition throughout all phases of
development.
Other specifications.
Clearing. Where clearing has been approved, all trees shall be removed in a manner, which does not adversely
impact preserved trees. No felling of trees into protection zones or disturbance of roots inside the protection zones
is permitted.
Erosion and sedimentation control. All erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be installed in a manner,
which will not result in the accumulation of sediment in a tree protection zone.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
224/246
(3)
(4)
(5)
a.
b.
c.
(6)
a.
b.
c.
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
Signage. All tree protection zones shall be designated as such with "Tree Save Area" signs posted visibly at intervals alon
of the fenced in area during construction.
Tunneling. All boring under the tree protection zone shall be a minimum of 36 inches deep on center and shall begin
before the critical root zone and end beyond the critical root zone or drip line, whichever is greater.
Trenching. All trenching shall meet the following specifications:
All crushed or torn roots shall be cleaved back to good wood and a sharp clean cut made to promote regrowth.
All work in the area and foot traffic should be on the farthest side of the trench away from trees.
All exposed root ends shall be kept moist.
Pruning. All tree pruning is recommended to be in accordance with ANSI (American National Safety Institute) A300 -
1995 Standard Practices for Tree Care Operations (a copy is on file in the office of the city arborist) for trees, shrubs,
and other woody plant maintenance.
All pruning shall start beyond the branch collar of the tree.
Pruning shall be done so as to remove branch weight as much as possible before final cut to prevent tearing of
bark and cambium.
In all pruning, the branch collar, part of the trunk, shall remain intact and uninjured.
Safety. All tree care operations shall comply with ANSI (American National Safety Institute) Z133.1 - 1994 Safety
Requirements for Pruning, Trimming, Repairing, Maintaining, and Removing Trees and Cutting Brush.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-10)
Sec. 86-102. - Outdoor storage/utility service screening standards.
All outdoor storage with a lineal dimension of 15 feet or greater, or any dumpster type refuse container with a lineal
dimension of five feet or greater which is not screened by a building or other structure shall be screened from view from
street rights-of-way for the entire length of the structure, except for necessary access. All utility service areas shall be
screened from public rights-of-way. Screening for both outdoor storage areas and utility service areas shall be as
described in this section.
Evergreen plants shall have a minimum installation height of 36 inches, spaced three feet on center and be expected to
reach a minimum height of six feet within three years.
Fences or walls shall be constructed of a compatible material with that of the principal building of masonry, stone or wood
and of a height and width equal to or greater than the utility service structure to be screened. One third of fences or walls
must be screened with plants within three years, after the year of planting.
No screening shall be installed which would impair the safe operation, maintenance or function of the utility service
equipment.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-11)
Sec. 86-103. - Surface water retention and detention basins.
Surface water retention and detention basins designed to handle surface water runoff and overflow are recommended to be
constructed so as to appear natural in appearance. Landscaping must be provided at or immediately above the high water mark
consistent with the interior vehicular area use standards. Trees may be located for integration into the surrounding landscape. Where
surface water retention and detention basins are to be considered as part of the 15 percent green space requirements, all trees must be
planted at a density of one tree per 300 square feet, except in residential developments. Only a maximum 50 percent of the total green
space requirement can come from stormwater retention basins.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-12)
Sec. 86-104. - Land disturbance permit for site development.
Land disturbance permit for site development is required for parcels 1.1 acre or greater and shall be obtained only after
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
225/246
(b)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the approval of and issuance of a tree removal permit as required by this article.
The applicant is required to ensure that the land disturbance permit and tree removal permits are obtained in the name of
the owner of the project and displayed on the site prior to any land disturbance activity and is required to insure that all
contractors and workers are in compliance with the tree and protected zone preservation standards stated in this article.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-13)
Sec. 86-105. - Tree removal permit for specimen and canopy trees.
Procedure. Permits for removal of specimen or canopy trees shall be obtained by making written application on the form
prescribed by the city manager to the inspections department.
Identification of specimen trees. Specimen trees are trees that warrant special consideration and encouragement for
preservation. Specimen trees may be designated for preservation because of rarity, aesthetic value, historical value, and
botanical importance, importance to overall community planning or size. The size or condition of trees will be evaluated by
the city arborist to determine if they qualify as specimen trees based upon the following criteria:
Size criteria for large and medium species trees:
Oaks and Magnolia species: 14 inches DBH or larger
Long Leaf and Spruce Pine: ten inches DBH or larger
All other conifers (Pines): 20 inches DBH or larger
All other species: 18 inches DBH or larger
Small species trees: six inches DBH or larger
Condition criteria. All trees must be relatively sound and have a solid trunk. No major insect or pathological
problems. Trees which face imminent death within two years based upon the judgment of the city arborist may be
disqualified as specimen trees.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-14)
Sec. 86-106. - Preservation of specimen and canopy trees.
Preservation of specimen and canopy trees shall be given special consideration in the preparation of site development plans. It is the
desire of the city to preserve all existing trees wherever possible in development. Preserved specimen and canopy trees may be used in
minimum landscape or buffer requirements.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-15)
Sec. 86-107. - Removal and replacement of specimen trees.
Where application is made for removal of a specimen tree, a plan or written documentation indicating the reason for the
removal must be submitted and approved by the city arborist and/or director of inspections or their designee.
The replacement of specimen softwood species (pines) shall be on a one-for-one basis. Each specimen pine removed must
be replaced with one tree having a minimum 2.5-inch basal caliper. The replacement of all other specimen trees shall be
equivalent to 25 percent of the total diameter of removed trees with a minimum of 2.5-inch basal caliper. Small specimen
trees shall be replaced with a minimum of two-inch basal caliper.
Replacement trees may be planted on site, if the site can accommodate trees above the required minimum specifications.
In the event replacement trees cannot be planted on site, the canopy and specimen trees will be valued and funds placed
in the tree bank established under this article at the rate of $100.00 per diameter inch. Funds in the tree bank funds shall
be used to install trees on public property, entrances to the city, or other approved property. All projects shall be approved
by the city arborist.
If a specimen tree is preserved, a two for one credit is provided for new plantings. The root zone area for each preserved
tree shall be equal to two trees.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
226/246
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Where payment to the tree bank is required under subsection (c) of this section, the developer may plant trees larger than th
requirement and shall be entitled to a credit of $100.00 per inch above the minimum inch requirements.
Removal of specimen trees from property not being currently developed also requires the replacement of 15 percent of
caliper inches on same property or public property with a minimum of 2½-inch basal caliper trees. All removed trees that
cannot be planted on site will be valued and funds placed in a tree bank at the rate of $100.00 per diameter inch.
The same species or a species having the potential for comparable size, quality and longevity must replace specimen
trees.
No specimen tree or canopy tree overhanging any public right-of-way shall be removed without first obtaining a tree
removal permit.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-16)
Sec. 86-108. - Tree bank fund.
There is hereby established by the city manager a separate fund to be known and designated as the tree bank fund. Funds herein
provided shall be accumulated in said fund and used for the planting and installation of trees on public property, parks and other
approved property within the city. All projects for planting shall be approved by the city tree commission.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-17)
Sec. 86-109. - Continuing compliance.
All developments are to be reviewed within one year to insure continuing compliance with the landscape permit and to determine
and to establish that all plants are thriving and healthy. The owner of the property shall be notified by the department of inspections of
any missing or dead plants to be replaced. Replacement will be required if existing remaining plants or inventory of trees falls below the
minimum landscape requirements.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-18)
Secs. 86-110—86-130. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES
Sec. 86-131. - Enforcement authority.
The department of inspections and city police, with the assistance of the city arborist or their designee, shall be charged with the
enforcement of this article.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-19(1))
Sec. 86-132. - Enforcement procedures.
The following inspections shall be conducted in conjunction with all development activities under this article:
Initial inspections. Any inspection by the city arborist and/or the director of inspections or their designee shall be
conducted prior to approval of any permit application.
Vegetation protection inspection. An inspection by the city arborist to ensure proper installation of tree and
vegetation protection devices before site disturbance. (See Tree and Protected Zone Preservation Standards.)
Final inspection; notice of completion and certificate of occupancy. This inspection shall occur when all development
activities permitted for the site have been completed. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued, nor any building or
premises occupied, unless and until final inspection reveals that all work has been installed in accordance with the
approved permit and tree protection or removal activity has been carried out according to the approved permit and
plan.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
227/246
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Inspection for performance bond and temporary certificate of occupancy. In the event that there is a delay in complying
approved permits and plans by final inspection, the owner will be required to secure a performance bond or other secu
amount of no less than 110 percent of the cost of the nonconstructed improvements. A temporary certificate of occupa
issued where a performance bond has been approved, provided that such bonded uncompleted improvements be satis
installed within a reasonable length of time as specified by the City of Valdosta inspections department not to exceed th
After improvements are completed and approved, a permanent certificate of occupancy will be issued after a final inspe
department of inspections.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-19(2))
Sec. 86-133. - Notication of violations.
Where it is determined that a violation of this article has occurred, the department of inspections shall give written notice of the
violation to the occupant, applicant, and or the owner shown on the most recent tax roll of the city. Said written notice shall include, but
not be limited to:
A description of the location of the property involved, either by street address or by legal description.
A statement indicating the nature of the violations.
A statement showing the time within which all necessary remedial action must be accompanied which time may not
be less than ten days nor more than 60 days from the date of said written notice.
The name of the person upon whom the notice of violation is served.
A statement advising that upon failure to comply with the requirements of the notice the department of inspections,
city arborist and/or city police department shall take such enforcement procedures as may be required under this
notice.
Written notice required in this section shall be served upon the person violating this article and the person owning
the land by either personal delivery or certified mail.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-20)
Sec. 86-134. - Stop work order.
The director of inspections upon the recommendation and advice of the city arborist or his designee can request issuance of a stop
work order in any of the following circumstances:
When development is being implemented without approved permits;
When ongoing noncomplying work is not immediately and permanently stopped upon receipt of a written or oral
notice of violation;
Upon failure to post all required and approved permits under this article.
The director of inspections, city arborist or the city police department shall have the authority to issue a stop work order.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-21)
Sec. 86-135. - Failure to comply after notice of violation or stop work order.
Where work or development continues after issuance of a stop work order, the director of inspections may initiate any appropriate
act or legal action authorized by law.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-22)
Sec. 86-136. - Notice of compliance.
Upon satisfactory completion of corrective action required by a notice of violation or stop work order, the director of inspections or
his designee shall issue a notice of compliance and allow the work to continue.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
228/246
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-23)
Sec. 86-137. - Appeals.
In the event any person is dissatisfied with the decisions of the inspections department, adversely affecting such person, such person
involving the application of this article may, within 30 days of the decision for which the appeal is taken, file an appeal with the zoning
administrator who shall forward the request to the board of appeals for review and recommendation to the city council. The board of
appeals shall hear the appeal and render a written recommendation affirming an overruling or modifying the decision of the inspections
department. This recommendation shall then be transmitted to the city council for final decision at their next regularly scheduled
meeting. Appeals from the decision of the city council must be made within 30 days to the superior court in accordance with the
applicable state laws.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-24)
Sec. 86-138. - Violations and penalties.
The following shall constitute offenses punishable in the municipal court of the city:
It shall be unlawful to any person or entity to remove or destroy any tree without first obtaining a permit where
applicable. The removal or destruction of each tree shall constitute a separate offense under this article.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to commence construction or development without first obtaining a land
disturbance permit, tree removal permit, and/or landscape permit where applicable. Each day said development or
construction continues without obtaining a permit shall constitute a separate offense.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to fail to protect and preserve trees designated for preservation during
development. Each day said failure to protect said designated trees continues shall constitute a separate offense.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to fail to replace any dead plants or trees after 60 days written notice to
replace said plants or trees. Each day that said party fails to replace said dead plants or trees after said notice shall
constitute a separate offense.
The violation of any other provision or requirement of this article shall constitute a violation punishable in the
municipal court of the city.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-25)
Sec. 86-139. - Permit exemptions.
In the event any tree is damaged by a wind storm or any other act of God, or shall be in a hazardous or dangerous
condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare or safety and require immediate removal without delay, the same
shall be removed without obtaining a permit as herein required.
During any period of emergency, such as tornado, hurricane, flood, or any other act of nature, the requirements of this
article may be waived by the mayor and council or their designee.
The pruning or trimming of trees for beautification purposes or for removal of dead or diseased limbs shall be exempt.
Also, the pruning or trimming of trees, as part of normal maintenance, or public utilities maintaining lines and easements
within the city, shall be exempt from the provisions of this article; however, all public utilities holding easements within the
city shall give notice at least three days in advance when pruning or trimming of easements and rights-of-way is done. All
trimming and pruning shall be done prudently so as to maintain the natural shape and beauty of all plants and trees.
(Ord. of 11-17-2002, § 18-26)
APPENDIX A - ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— The zoning and subdivision ordinances are published as separate documents and are on file in the city offices.
(35)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
229/246
APPENDIX B - FRANCHISES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed herein are the gas light ordinances for the City of Hahira, Georgia, as adopted by the city council. Amendments
to such ordinances are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. Obvious misspellings and punctuation
errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same
system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been
used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
ARTICLE I. - ATLANTA GAS LIGHT COMPANY (Ordinance No. 3-94)
AN ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE, GRANTING TO ATLANTA GAS LIGHT COMPANY, A GEORGIA CORPORATION, HEREINAFTER DESIGNED AS
"GRANTEE", ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE EXCLUSIVE RIGHT AND franchise TO USE AND OCCUPY THE STREETS,
AVENUES, ROADS, PUBLIC HIGHWAYS, ALLEYS, LANES, WAYS, PARKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF THE CITY OF HAHIRA,
GEORGIA, FOR CONSTRUCTING, MAINTAINING, RENEWING, REPAIRING, AND OPERATING A GAS WORKS AND GAS
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, AND OTHER NECESSARY MEANS FOR MANUFACTURING, TRANSMITTING, DISTRIBUTING AND
SELLING OF MANUFACTURED, NATURAL OR COMMINGLED GAS WITHIN AND THROUGH THE CITY OF HAHIRA, GEORGIA; AND
FIXING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH GRANT.
WHEREAS, the City of Hahira, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as "city," and the undersigned warrant and represent that, with the
exception of the franchise granted to Atlanta Gas Light Company, its successors and assigns, by ordinance passed May 13, 1964, for a
period of 20 years, which franchise was accepted by Atlanta Gas Light Company, grantee, there is no franchise granted by the city in force
and effect, to any other person, firm or corporation, and that the city is under no contract or obligation to any other person, firm or
corporation, in anyway relating to the installation of gas service in the City of Hahira, Georgia; now, therefore:
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and council of the City of Hahira, Georgia, as follows:
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed herein is the franchise granted to the Atlanta Gas Light Company of Georgia as adopted by Ordinance No. 3-94
on July 7, 1994. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. Obvious
misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been
made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code
of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Section 1. - Grant of exclusive right.
The exclusive right is hereby granted to the grantee, its successors and assigns, to lay, construct, extend, maintain, renew, replace
and repair gas pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances and all appurtenances and appendages under,
along, through and across any streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places within the
territorial limits of the city, and to use and occupy the said streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other
public places for the purpose of therein laying, constructing, extending, maintaining, renewing, replacing and repairing mains, pipes,
valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances and all appurtenances and appendages thereto, used and useful for
the manufacture, transmission, distribution and sale of gas within and through the present or future territorial limits of the city, such
exclusive right, when exercised as herein provided, to continue for 20 years after date of approval of this ordinance.
Section 2. - Rates and charges.
(36)
(37)
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
230/246
[The] grantee shall be entitled to charge for gas furnished by it such rates as are prescribed by the public service commission or
other lawful regulatory body of the State of Georgia.
Section 3. - Gas sales receipts.
[The] grantee hereby agrees and covenants, for and in consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted to it, to pay within 60
days following the end of each quarterly period to the city three percent of the gas sales receipts received by [the] grantee from
customers served under all rate schedules except for interruptible rate schedules or interruptible contracts as defined and approved by
the Georgia Public Service Commission (or any successor state regulatory group) within the territorial limits of the city during the
preceding quarterly period. The city shall notify [the] grantee of any annexations, de-annexations or other changes of the territorial limits
of the city. Said notice shall be made within 30 days of any such change.
It is provided, however, that should the city require [the] grantee to pay any license fee or tax, excise tax, indirect tax, occupation tax,
franchise tax, privilege tax, regulation charge or related fees, taxes or charges, excepting ad valorem taxes and business license taxes for
appliance sales, the aggregate amount of such fees, taxes and charges shall be deducted in full by [the] grantee from the quarterly
payment or payments subsequently accruing to the city. The quarterly periods for which such payments shall be made shall commence
upon the first day of the month immediately following proper adoption, acceptance and effectiveness of this franchise ordinance. The
mayor and council of the city through its authorized representative or representatives shall have the right to inspect and audit the books
and records of [the] grantee for the purpose of determining the amount of its revenues received from the sale of gas as set forth above
within said territorial limits.
Section 4. - Rights.
All rights herein granted and authorized shall be subject to and governed only by this ordinance; provided, however, that the city
expressly reserves unto itself all of its police power to adopt general ordinances necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the
general public in relation to the rights hereby granted not inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 5. - Excavations; restoration of public ways; obstructions.
[The] grantee, upon making an opening upon any of the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other
public places in the city, for the purpose of laying, repairing or maintaining gas mains, shall use due care and caution to prevent injury to
persons, and shall replace and restore all public ways to their former condition as nearly as practicable, and within a reasonable time,
and shall not unnecessarily obstruct or impede traffic upon the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and
other places of said city.
Section 6. - Liability.
[The] grantee shall save and keep harmless the city from any and all liability by reason of damage or injury to any person or persons
whomsoever, on account of negligence of the grantee in the installation, maintenance and repair of its mains and pipe lines along said
streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places in the city, provided [that] the grantee shall
have been notified in writing of any claim against the city on account thereof and shall have been given ample opportunity to defend the
same.
Section 7. - Eective date.
This ordinance, after its passage according to law, in writing duly filed with the city clerk, shall be effective and in full force after the
date of acceptance by Atlanta Gas Light Company.
Section 8. - Conicts.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
231/246
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
ARTICLE II. - ATLANTA GAS LIGHT COMPANY FRANCHISE FEE (Ordinance of 10-8-1998 as amended 6-3-1999)
AN ORDINANCE
An ordinance to amend an ordinance dated October 8, 1998, granting Atlanta Gas Light Company (hereafter "company") a
franchise for the use of rights-of-way and other public property for the purpose of distributing gas within the City of Hahira,
Georgia, so as to modify the franchise fee calculation provisions; to repeal conflicting laws; to provide an effective date; and
for other purposes.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HAHIRA, GEORGIA:
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed herein is the franchise originally granted to the Atlanta Gas Light Company of Georgia, as adopted by
Ordinance of October 8, 1998, and as amended by Ordinance of June 3, 1999. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision
remains unchanged from the original ordinances. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation.
For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes,
and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by
brackets.
Section 1. - [Grant of franchise.]
An ordinance dated October 8, 1998, granting Atlanta Gas Light Company a franchise for the use of rights-of-way and other public
property for the purpose of distributing gas within the City of Hahira, Georgia, is hereby amended by inserting the following:
"Section 1. Definitions.
Base year means the fiscal year ending September 30, 1998.
Base year franchise fee factor means the total franchise fees paid during the base year divided by the design day
capacity as recorded by the company on the last day of the base year.
Design day capacity means the sum of the individual capacity in dekatherms (Dt) attributable to all firm customers
located within the city limits of the city, as of the last day of the previous fiscal year.
Firm customers means all residential and business customers who purchase gas service that ordinarily is not subject
to interruption or curtailment.
Fiscal year means the 12 months ending September 30, of each year.
Inflation index means the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers as published by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or any successor index, for the period from September 30, 1997, to the beginning of
the then current fiscal year. The percentage shall be reduced by any productivity factor adjustment for the same time
period determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission for the company.
Section 2. Franchise fee.
The total dollar amount of franchise fees paid by the company to the city shall be calculated as follows:
The current fiscal year total franchise fee shall equal the product of the design day capacity and the current franchise fee factor.
The current franchise fee factor shall be equal to the product of the base year franchise fee factor and one plus the inflation index
expressed as a decimal to three significant digits.
The following formula quantifies this payment:
FF = FFF × (1 + (CPI - PFA)) × DDC
Where FF = total franchise fees due the city for the current fiscal year
(38)
c by c
c
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
232/246
FFF = the base year franchise fee factor
CPI - PFA = the inflation index based on the cumulative change in the Consumer Price Index less the productivity factor
adjustment determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission.
DDC = the design day capacity as of the last day of the previous fiscal year.
FFF = FF /DDC where
FF = the total franchise fees paid in the base year
and DDC = the design day capacity of the base year.
Section 3. Responsibility for payment of franchise fee.
The company as the holder of the franchise privilege hereunder is responsible for the payment of all franchise fees payable
hereunder, and shall file such reports and returns as required by the franchise ordinance as modified by this amendment. In
addition, the company shall report annually the names of all gas marketers for which company is transporting natural gas on the
distribution system within the city.
The franchise fee payments required hereunder shall be in lieu of any franchise fee license fee, occupation tax or other payment
for use of the rights-of-way by the company for the provision of gas service, but shall not prohibit imposition of a license fee or an
occupation tax on gas marketers.
Section 4. Quarterly payments.
Effective for the fiscal year 1999, and for each fiscal year thereafter during the term of the franchise ordinance, the company
shall remit to the city quarterly franchise fee installments. The installments shall equal to one-fourth of the total annual franchise fee
calculated in accordance with this ordinance.
The quarterly payment is due and payable on or before the 30th day following the last day of each calendar quarter.
Section 5. Annual return.
The company shall file a return with its first quarterly installment in each fiscal year showing the details of the calculation of the
annual franchise fee.
Section 6. Delay of inflation adjustment.
Notwithstanding any other provision in this ordinance, any inflation adjustments shall be made to the franchise fee only when
the company changes its rates.
Section 7. Conflicts.
In the event of a conflict between this ordinance and the original franchise dated July, 1994, this ordinance shall control. All
terms, conditions and stipulations contained in such franchise ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that they
do not conflict with this ordinance."
and by renumbering the remaining sections accordingly.
Section 2. - [Conicts.]
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are repealed.
Section 3. - [Eective date.]
This ordinance shall become effective on the first day of the month following its approval by the mayor and council and its
acceptance by Atlanta Gas Light Company.
by
c
by by by
by
by
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
233/246
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1985 Code, as updated through August 7, 1986,
which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the Code, as supplemented. This table contains
some ordinances which precede August 7, 1986, but which were never included in the 1985 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons.
Ordinances adopted since August 7, 1986, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and
permanent nature.
Ordinance
Number
Date Section  Section
this Code
90-001  3-19-1990 art. 4, § A 46-61
10- 2-1990(Ord.) 1—3 82-2—82-4
4, 5 82-6, 82-7
6 82-9
7—11 82-13—82-17
3-90 11-15-1990 70-11
2-91 11-14-1991 1, 2 18-212, 18-213
5, 6 18-215, 18-216
1-92  3- 5-1992 I(1)—I(4) 70-201—70-204
II, III 70-205, 70-206
6-92 12- 3-1992 1—21 10-31—10-51
4093  9- 2-1993 1—3 26-1
 9- 2-1993(Ord.) I—VI 62-71—62-76
5-93 10- 7-1993 1—5 6-181—6-185
1-99  6- 3-1994 1.1 26-31
II 26-33
2.1—2.7 26-34—26-40
3.2 26-32
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
234/246
11- 3-1994(Ord.) 1—6 74-91—74-96
 8- 3-1995(Ord.) 7-31, 7-32 38-231, 38-232
7-33(A) 38-291
7-33(B) 38-262
38-292
7-33(C), 7-33(D) 38-293, 38-294
7-33(E) 38-265
7-34(A) 38-261
38-263, 38-264
7-35(A)—
7-35(C)
38-233—38-235
7-35(D),
(E)
38-236
7-36(A)—
7-36(D)
38-237—38-240
7-37(A),
7-37(B)
38-241, 38-242
7-38(C) 38-243
 6- 6-1996(1)(Ord.) 1 18-31
3 18-36
 6- 6-1996(2)(Ord.) 18-1
12- 5-1996(Ord.) 3—5 62-33—62-35
7 62-37
 5- 8-1997(Ord.) 62-76
78-33
2000  4- 6-2000 74-2
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
235/246
1-2000  4- 6-2000 art. I 18-251
art. II, 18-252, 18-253
art. III
art. IV, § 400— 18-254—18-268
art. IV, § 414
art. V 18-269
art. VI, §§ 600, 601 18-270
art. VII 18-271
art. VIII, § 800 18-272
art. VIII, § 802 18-273
3-2000 11- 9-2000 54-1
78-1
11- 9-2000(Ord.) 9-4—9-8 78-151—78-155
02-01  5- 2-2002 9-7—9-9 78-111—78-113
9-9 78-156
9-10 78-114
78-157
9-11 78-115
11-17-2002(Ord.) 18-1—18-4 86-31—86-34
18-5(A),
18-5(B)
86-51, 86-52
18-6 86-53
18-7 86-71
18-7(1)—
18-7(3)
86-72—86-74
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
236/246
18-8, 18-9 86-75, 86-76
18-10—18-18 86-101—86-109
18-19(1),
18-19(2)
86-131, 86-132
18-20—18-26 86-133—86-139
 1- 9-2003(Ord.) 66-3
04-02  3- 9-2004 1(2-111) 2-366
04-03  5- 6-2004 1(3-4) 38-34
04-06  9- 2-2004 II, III 38-231, 38-232
IV(A)—IV(C) 38-291—38-293
IV(D) 38-265
V(A)—V(D) 38-261—38-264
VI(A)—VI(D) 38-233—38-236
VII(A)—
VII(D)
38-237—38-240
VIII 38-244
IX(A)—IX(C) 38-241—38-243
04-05 10-17-2004 1(2-109) 2-364
04-10 11- 4-2004 1(2-91) 2-341
05-02  4- 7-2005 1 18-32
05-05  8- 4-2005 1-1—1-14 2-301—2-314
2-1, 2-2 2-321, 2-322
2-2-1—2-2-3 2-323—2-325
2-3 2-326
3-1—3-5 2-332—2-336
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
237/246
2005-06 10- 6-2005 1.1, 1.2 18-33, 18-34
2.1—2.6 18-61—18-66
3.1—3.8 18-91—18-98
4.1—4.10 18-121—18-130
5.1 18-151
6.1—6.6 18-171—18-176
6.7 18-176
6.8—6.11 18-178—18-181
 6- 7-2007(Ord.) 1—10.6     Added 46-101—46-256
Apps. A—C     Added Ch. 46, Apps. A—C
 3- 6-2008(1)(Ord.) 14-1—14-3
     Added 14-4
 3- 6-2008(2)(Ord.) 1     Added 54-4
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within this Charter (Reserved) and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the
Official Code of Georgia Annotated.
O.C.G.A.
Section
Section 
this Code
1-1-3 1-4
1-1-7 1-3
1-3-1—1-3-3 1-2
1-3-3 38-232
1-4-1 1-2
2-1
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
238/246
66-5
2-10-105 74-143
3-1-1 et seq. 6-31
3-1-2 6-111
3-3-40 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II
3-4-49 Ch. 6, Art. IV
3-4-80 Ch. 6, Art. IV
6-152
3-5-80 Ch. 6, Art. V
3-5-80 et seq. 6-151
3-6-40 6-77
4-3-1 et seq. 14-3
4-8-5 14-76
4-8-6 Ch. 14, Art. III
14-74
4-11-1 et seq. Ch. 14
5-3-2 34-12
8-2-1 et seq. Ch. 18
18-31
8-2-3 Ch. 18, Art. III
8-2-20(9)(B)9(i)(I)—
8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(VIII)
18-33
8-2-20(9)(B)9(i)(IX)—
8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(XIV)
18-33
8-2-25 18-31
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
239/246
8-2-25(a) Ch. 42
8-2-26(d) 18-1
9-11-4 34-4
9-11-65 38-31
9-13-1 et seq. 34-8
34-11
12-2-8 38-293
12-3-10 58-12
12-4-72 38-232
12-5-1 et seq. Ch. 82
12-5-20 et seq. 38-243
38-293
58-12
12-5-23(a)(5) 38-262
12-5-30(f) 38-292
12-7-1 et seq. 38-243
38-262
38-293
12-7-6 38-232
12-7-6(b) 38-231
38-292
12-7-7.1 38-232
12-7-17(9),
(10)
38-262
12-7-19 38-231
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
240/246
12-7-20 38-244
38-263
12-9-22 et seq. 38-31
13-10-1 70-48
15-6-1 et seq. 34-1
15-18-70 2-204
15-21-73 1-11
15-21-93 1-11
15-21-100 1-11
15-21-112 1-11
16-1-1 et seq. Ch. 54
16-5-60 58-12
16-6-6 10-42
16-6-8 10-38
16-6-17 Ch. 10, Art. II
16-7-40 et seq. 58-12
16-10-24 Ch. 50, Art. II,
Div. 3
50-36
16-10-27 42-1
17-4-3 Ch. 50, Art. II,
Div. 3
50-36
17-4-20 Ch. 50, Art. II,
Div. 3
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
241/246
50-36
17-6-10 34-7, 34-8
17-6-11 1-11
17-6-70 et seq. 1-11
17-10-3 1-11
17-10-3(e) 1-11
17-11-1 et seq. 34-9
17-11-4 34-10
21-2-265 Ch. 34
24-10-20 et seq. 34-5
24-10-25 34-6
25-2-1 et seq. Ch. 42
25-2-12(a)(7) 18-180
31-3-1 et seq. 14-73
31-3-5.1 18-41
31-19-1 et seq. 14-73
31-19-4 14-73
31-19-6 14-71
14-75
32-4-1 et seq. Ch. 70
32-4-90 et seq. Ch. 70
32-4-92 Ch. 70
32-4-94 Ch. 70, Art. III
32-6-1 et seq. Ch. 70
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
242/246
32-6-21 66-5
33-3-5(1) 74-95
33-8-4 74-94
33-8-8.1 74-94
33-8-8.2 Ch. 74, Art. IV
74-92
74-95
33-8-8.2(a) 74-95
35-8-1 et seq. Ch. 50
Ch. 50, Art. II,
Div. 3
50-36
35-8-8 Ch. 50, Art. II,
Div. 3
50-36
36-3-30 et seq. Ch. 2
36-10-1 et seq. 2-392
36-18-1 38-232
36-18-3 Ch. 26
36-32-1 et seq. Ch. 34
36-32-2 34-1
36-32-4 34-8
36-33-3 Ch. 50
36-34-1 et seq. Ch. 2
36-34-2 Ch. 2
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
243/246
14-75
74-1
36-34-3 Ch. 58
36-35-1 et seq. Ch. 2
36-35-4 2-4
36-35-6(5) Ch. 22
36-35-6(a)(2) Ch. 54
36-38-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V
36-39-1 et seq. Ch. 70, Art. III
70-81
36-39-7 Ch. 82
36-60-1 et seq. Ch. 2
36-60-3 Ch. 10, Art. II
36-60-6 Ch. 22
36-60-12 Ch. 38, Art. II
36-70-1 et seq. Ch. 62
36-80-1 2-311
36-80-2 et seq. Ch. 2
36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V,
Div. 2
2-204
Ch. 74
36-81-3 2-361
36-81-5 2-364
36-81-5 et seq. 2-362
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
244/246
36-81-7 Ch. 2, Art. V
36-82-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V
36-82-100 et seq. 70-48
40-6-1—40-6-395 78-1
40-6-370 78-1
40-6-371 Ch. 78
40-6-372 78-1
40-8-4 78-113
40-13-21(a) Ch. 78
41-1-1 38-131
41-2-5 38-135
41-2-7—41-2-17 18-266, 18-267
41-2-8—41-2-17 18-271
41-3-1 Ch. 10, Art. II
43-1-1 et seq. 74-144
43-6-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II
43-8-2 Ch. 14, Art. III,
Div. 2
43-8-15 10-1
43-17-1 et seq. 22-81
43-18-1 et seq. 78-73
43-47-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VI
22-233
43-47-2 22-251
43-47-13, 43-47-14 22-233
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
245/246
44-10.1—44-10.5 62-73
44-12-130 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IV
45-8-1 et seq. Ch. 74
45-10-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV
45-10-3 Ch. 2, Art. IV
45-11-1 1-10
46-3-1 et seq. 74-143
46-5-2 Ch. 26
46-5-120 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II
46-7-15 74-143
47-17-60 et seq. 1-11
48-2-40 74-151
48-5-354 22-172
48-5-355 74-143
48-5-356 Ch. 22
74-143
48-6-93 Ch. 74, Art. III
74-61, 74-62
74-143
48-6-93(d) 74-63
48-13-7 74-135
48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) 74-131
50-14-1 et seq. 2-33
2-311
5/14/2019 Hahira, GA Code of Ordinances
246/246
50-14-2, 50-14-3 2-38
50-18-70 2-1
50-18-70 et seq. 74-147
51-2-6 et seq. 14-2
51-7-1 et seq. 34-10