CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF TOCCOA, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted: September 28, 1992 
Effective: September 28, 1992 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Commission, 1992 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
TOCCOA, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Lamar Oliver 
Mayor 
____________ 
James Neal 
Vice-Mayor 
____________ 
Lee Bowen 
Bill Harris 
Winnie Zeches 
City Commissioners 
____________ 
James A. Calvin 
City Manager 
____________ 
John A. Dickerson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Josephine Gleason 
City Clerk 
  
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Toccoa, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1985 Code, as supplemented and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1985 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jan Shekitka, Supervising Editor, and Ron McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Jim Calvin, City Manager, and John Dickerson, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 92-017 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Toccoa; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Commission of the City of Toccoa: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Toccoa, Georgia," (sometimes referred to as "the Code") published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 24, each inclusive, is adopted by the Ordinance. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 25, 1992, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference in the Code, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. Ordinances previously repealed are not revived by this ordinance or by the Code. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment not exceeding six months. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City Commission may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, revocation of licenses or permits, or any other remedy allowed by law. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City Commission to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after March 25, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. A copy of the Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk of the Commission in such other form as the Clerk of the Commission may consider most expedient. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. This copy, as codified, with all duly enacted amendments and incorporations by reference will be considered the Official Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa, Georgia. 
Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective September 28, 1992. 
Read and adopted at a regular meeting of the City Commission of the City of Toccoa, Georgia, held at the City Hall on the 28th day of September, 1992. 
CITY OF TOCCOA, GEORGIA 

;b0; ATTEST: 

;p1; Read First Time: September 14, 1992 ;p1; Read Second Time and Adopted: September 28, 1992 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Toccoa, being Act No. 392 of 1975, adopted by the General Assembly on April 17, 1975. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the original Charter. A uniform system of punctuation and capitalization has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. Section catchlines have been inserted for ease of reference. 

Sec. 1. - City commission—Continuance as governing body. 
The City of Toccoa, Georgia, shall continue to be governed by the city commission created and established by an act approved August 24, 1931 (Georgia Laws 1931, page 994), as amended, except as otherwise provided in this act. 
Sec. 2. - Same—Qualifications; elections. 
Each commissioner shall have been a citizen of the City of Toccoa for at least one year next preceding his election and qualification. In all city elections, no candidate shall be nominated for public office in any primary or elected to public office in any election unless such candidate shall receive a majority of the votes cast to fill such nomination or public office. All city elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Code Title 34A, known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended, the commission shall have all powers and authority heretofore vested in the commission of the City of Toccoa, except as otherwise provided by this act, and such additional powers as are hereinafter provided by this act. 
Sec. 3. - Same—Membership; terms; dates of election. 
(a)  The city commission of the City of Toccoa shall consist of five citizens of the City of Toccoa who shall be elected at large by the electors of the entire city voting in the election therefor. 
(b)  (1)  The term of office of the commissioner serving in Post 2 in office on January 1, 1991, shall expire on December 31, 1991. On the first Thursday in December, 1991, a commissioner serving in Post 2 shall be elected and shall serve for a term of office which shall expire on December 31, 1995, and until his successor is elected and qualified. Such commissioner shall take office on the first day of January immediately following his election. On the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1995, and every four years thereafter, a commissioner serving in Post 2 shall be elected and shall serve for a term of office of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following his election. 
(2)  The terms of office of the commissioners serving in Posts 3 and 5 in office on January 1, 1989, shall expire on December 31, 1989. On the first Thursday in December, 1989, the commissioners serving in Posts 3 and 5 shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office which shall expire on December 31, 1993, and until their successors are elected and qualified. Such commissioners shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election. On the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1993, and every four years thereafter, the commissioners serving in Posts 3 and 5 shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election. 
(3)  The terms of office of the commissioners serving in Posts 1 and 4 in office on January 1, 1990, shall expire on December 31, 1990. On the first Thursday in December, 1990, the commissioners serving in Posts 1 and 4 shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office which shall expire on December 31, 1995, and until their successors are elected and qualified. Such commissioners shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election. On the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1995, and every four years thereafter, the commissioners serving in Posts 1 and 4 shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election. 
(Ga. Laws 1989, (Act No. 76), page 3928) 
Sec. 3-A. - Corporate limits. 
(a)  In addition to the present territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described roads, streets, and rights of way, all of which are located in Stephens County, Georgia: 
(1)  Andrews Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of the Westerly right of way line of Currahee Heights Road and the Easterly right of way line of Andrews Drive; thence in a Southwesterly direction 300 feet more or less to the intersection of Andrews Drive and Hilltop Lane; thence continuing through the intersection of Andrews Drive and Hilltop Lane 700 feet more or less to the end of Andrews Drive on the Easterly right of way that portion of Andrews Drive located within the corporate limits of the City of Toccoa, and containing all of the property within the right of way of Andrews Drive as described herein. 
(2)  Beaverbrook Circle. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at a point on the Southern right of way of Beaverbrook Drive at its intersection with the Northernmost right of way of Beaverbrook Circle, and this extending in a Southerly direction, bordering on the Western boundary Lots 55, 56, 57, and 58 of Foxdale Subdivision, bordering on the Southern boundary Lots 53 and 54 of the Foxdale Subdivision, and bordering on the Eastern boundary Lots 50, 51, and 52 of the Foxdale Subdivision and extending approximately 500 linear feet more or less to including the cul-de-sac at the Southernmost terminal of Beaverbrook Circle and all of the property within the right of way of Beaverbrook Circle. 
(3)  Beaverbrook Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the public road which begins at the Eastern right of way of Foxdale Drive and continues in a Southeasterly direction bordering Lots 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 58, 59, and 29 of the Foxdale Subdivision on the Southernmost right of way of Beaverbrook Drive and bordering Lots 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, and 44 on the Northernmost right of way of Beaverbrook Drive and extending from the beginning point in an Easterly and Southeasterly direction the distance of 1,700.0 feet more or less and ending at a cul-de-sac adjacent to Lots 44, and 45 of the Foxdale Subdivision, and being all that property in the right of way of Beaverbrook Drive from its point of beginning to its point of termination as described herein. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Brady Street. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at a point at the intersection of Brady Street and the Eastern right of way of Prather Bridge Road and thence in an Easterly direction along Brady Street 399.7 feet more or less to the intersection of Brady Street and Delores Avenue; thence continuing along Brady Street 320 feet more or less to the intersection of Brady Street and Irene Street; thence continuing 150 feet more or less to the intersection of Brady Street and Ethel Street Circle; and thence continuing 395 feet more or less to the intersection of Brady Street and the Eastern portion of Ethel Street; thence continuing 228.74 feet more or less to the end of Brady Street, containing all that property within the right of way of Brady Street from the beginning point to the end of Brady Street as described herein. 
(6)  Collier Road. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the point of the intersection of Collier Road and the present corporate limits of the City of Toccoa, said corporate limits being the centerline of Eastanollee Creek and thence continuing in a Southwesterly direction along Collier Road a distance of 2,600 feet more or less to the intersection of Collier Road and the Northeastern right of way of Georgia Highway 145 (Liberty Hill Road) and containing all that property between the Northwestern and the Southeastern rights of way of Collier Road from the point of its beginning to its point of intersection with Georgia Highway 145, as more particularly described herein. 
(7)  Collier Mill Road. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Collier Mill Road and the Western right of way of Fernside Drive and extending Northwesterly 500 feet more or less to the end of Collier Mill Road; said tract of land containing all of the property between the Northern and Southern rights of way of Collier Mill Road, and including all the property located in the cul-de-sac at the end of Collier Mill Road as more particularly described herein. 
(8)  Crestwood Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at a point on the Northern right of way of U.S. Highway 123 (West Currahee Street) and its intersection with the Eastern boundary of Crestwood Drive, said point of intersection being 180.34 feet West of the intersection of Georgia Power Company Transmission Line and U.S. Highway 123, thence extending in a Northerly direction 236 feet more or less; thence continuing along the curve of Crestwood Drive in a Northwesterly direction 340 feet more or less; thence in a Westerly direction 90 feet more or less; thence continuing in a Westerly direction 90 feet more or less; thence in a Southerly direction 370 feet more or less to a cul-de-sac marking the termination point of Crestwood Drive, and containing all of that property located in the right of way of Crestwood Drive from its point of beginning to its point of termination as more particularly described herein. 
(9)  East Currahee Street (U.S. Highway 123). All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of East Currahee Street and the present corporate limits of the City of Toccoa, thence continuing in an Easterly and Northeasterly direction along the right of way of East Currahee Street (U.S. Highway 123) 5,300 feet more or less to the intersection of East Currahee Street and Tugalo Street, said intersection being common to the lands of owned or formerly owned by LeTourneau. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Delores Street. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at a point on the Northern right of way of Patsy Drive; thence continuing in a Northeasterly direction 425 feet more or less to the intersection of Delores Street (Avenue) and the Southern right of way of Brady Street, and containing all the property within the right of way of Delores Street from its point of beginning to its point of ending as more particularly described herein. 
(12)  Dogwood Lane. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Dogwood Lane and the Northern right of way of Skyline Drive and extending in a Northwesterly direction 314.7 feet more or less to the intersection of Dogwood Lane and the Northern right of way of Cherry Street; thence continuing 304 feet more or less to the intersection of Dogwood Lane as it ends on the Western right of way of Louis Road, and containing all of that property within the right of way of Dogwood Lane from its point of beginning to its point of termination as described herein. 
(13)  Ethel Street Circle. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at a point on the Northern right of way of Brady Street, said point representing the Eastern right of way of Ethel Street Circle, and being 930 feet more or less along Brady Street to the Eastern right of way of Prather Bridge Road; thence continuing along Ethel Street Circle in a Northeasterly direction 495 feet more or less; thence in an Easterly direction 310 feet more or less; thence in a Southwesterly direction 470 feet more or less to the intersection of Ethel Street Circle and the Northern right of way of Brady Street, and containing all of that property within the right of way of Ethel Street Circle from its point of beginning to its point of termination as described herein. 
(14)  Fernside Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Fernside Drive and the Northern right of way of Big A Road (Georgia Highway 17); thence continuing in a Northwesterly direction to the intersection of Fernside Drive and Foothill Road; thence continuing in a Northeasterly curvature to the intersection of Fernside Drive and Brookdale Road; thence continuing in a Northwesterly direction to the intersection of Fernside Drive and the Southeastern right of way of East Curahee Street (U.S. Highway 123); and extending from its point of beginning to its point of termination 10,500 feet more or less, and containing all of the property within the right of way of Fernside Drive from its point of beginning to its point of termination as described herein. 
(15)  Fern Valley Circle. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the Northern right of way of Fern Valley Drive; thence continuing in a Northeasterly direction 950 feet more or less to a cul-de-sac, and containing all of that property within the right of way of Fern Valley Circle as described herein. 
(16)  Fern Valley Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING on the Northwestern right of way of Fernside Drive and continuing in a Northwesterly direction along Fern Valley Drive 400 feet more or less; thence continuing in a Westerly direction 390 feet more or less to the intersection of Fern Valley Drive and Fern Valley Circle; thence continuing along Fern Valley Drive 900 feet more or less to the point where the Westernmost point of Fern Valley Drive coincides with the Easternmost point of Malik Drive, containing in total along Fern Valley Drive 1,650 feet more or less, and containing all that property within the right of way of Fern Valley Drive from its point of beginning to its point of coincident with Fern Valley Drive as described herein. 
(17)  Foxdale Circle. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Foxdale Circle and the Southeastern right of way of Foxdale Drive, the Southwestern corner of Foxdale Circle being 589 feet more or less along Foxdale Drive to the Northeastern right of way of Fernside Drive; thence continuing along Foxdale Circle 213 feet more or less to the beginning of a cul-de-sac, the cul-de-sac being the termination point of Foxdale Circle and containing all that property within the right of way of Foxdale Circle from the beginning point to the point of termination as more particularly described herein. 
(18)  Foxdale Court. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING on the Northwestern right of way of Fernside Drive; thence continuing in a Northwesterly direction 306.3 feet more or less; thence continuing along Foxdale Court 300 feet more or less to a cul-de-sac which marks the end of Foxdale Court, and containing all that property within the right of way of Foxdale Court as the same is more particularly described herein. 
(19)  Foxdale Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the Southern most intersection of Foxdale Drive and the Eastern right of way of Fernside Drive and thence continuing along Foxdale Drive in a Southeasterly direction circling in a Northeasterly direction and in a Northwesterly direction to the Northern most intersection of Foxdale Drive and the Southeastern right of way of Fernside Drive and extending 1,900 feet more or less, and containing all of the property within the right of way of Foxdale Drive as more particularly described herein, said right of way being 60 feet more or less along the entire length of Foxdale Drive. 
(20)  Furman Street. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at a point on the Western right of way of Hilltop Lane and continuing in a Southwesterly direction along Furman Street 625 feet more or less; thence continuing in a Northwesterly direction 41.5 feet more or less to the intersection of Furman Street, Valley Drive and Madison Drive, and containing all that property within the right of way of Furman Street, as more particularly described herein. 
(21)  Garland Road. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Garland Road and the present corporate limits of the City of Toccoa, said corporate limits being 580 feet more or less from the intersection of Garland Road and the Northern right of way of Tugalo Street; thence continuing in a Northeasterly direction along Garland Road 300 feet more or less to the Northernmost intersection of Garland Road and the present corporate limits of the City of Toccoa, containing all that property within the right of way of Garland Road as described herein. 
(22)  Hillcrest Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Hillcrest Drive and the current corporate limits of the City of Toccoa, said corporate limits being located 340 feet more or less along Hillcrest Drive from the intersection of Hillcrest Drive and the Southern right of way of Tugalo Road, thence continuing in a Southeasterly direction along Hillcrest Drive 1,100 feet more or less to the Southernmost intersection of Hillcrest Drive and the current corporate limits of the City of Toccoa and containing all that property within the right of way of Hillcrest Drive as more particularly described herein. 
(23)  Hilltop Lane. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Hilltop Lane and the Southern right of way of Collins Road; thence continuing in a Southeasterly direction along Hilltop Lane 2,150 feet more or less to the end of Hilltop Lane common to the Northern boundary of the lands of Dodd, thence beginning again at the Southern boundary of the lands of Dodd and continuing along Hilltop Lane 2,000 feet more or less to the end of Hilltop Lane and its intersection with Collins Road, and containing all that property within the right of way of Hilltop Lane as more particularly described herein. 
(24)  Hilltop Lane Extension. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Hilltop Lane Extension and the current corporate limits of the City of Toccoa; thence extending in a Westerly direction along Hilltop Lane Extension 1,350 feet more or less to the point where Hilltop Lane Extension coincides with the beginning of Hilltop Lane, and containing all that property within the right of way of Hilltop Lane Extension as more particularly described herein. 
(25)  Irene Street. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Irene Street and the Northern right of way of Patsy Drive, the Western right of way of Irene Street being 700 feet more or less along Patsy Drive to the Eastern right of way of Prather Bridge Road; thence continuing in a Northeasterly direction along Irene Street 450 feet more or less to the intersection of Irene Street and the Southern right of way of Brady Street, and containing all that property within the right of way of Irene Street as more fully described herein. 
(26)  Reserved. 
(27)  Reserved. 
(28)  King Street. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of King Street and the Southern right of way of Collins Road; thence continuing in a Southeasterly direction 900 feet more or less to the end of King Street and containing all that property within the right of way of King Street as more particularly described herein. 
(29)  Lewis Street. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Lewis Street and the Northern right of way of Dogwood Lane; thence continuing in a Northwesterly direction along Lewis Street 1,100 feet more or less to the intersection of Lewis Street and the current corporate limits of the City of Toccoa, said corporate limits of the City of Toccoa, said corporate limits being 443 feet along Lewis Street to the Northern intersection of Rothell Road, and containing all that property within the right of way of Lewis Street as more particularly described herein. 
(30)  Reserved. 
(31)  Lovell Circle. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of the Southern right of way of Lovell Road and Lovell Circle; thence continuing in a Southerly direction 410 feet more or less along Lovell Circle; thence in an Easterly and Northeasterly direction along Lovell Circle 1,500 feet more or less to the Westernmost intersection of Lovell Circle and Lovell Road, containing all the property within the right of way of Lovell Circle as more particularly described herein. 
(32)  Lovell Road. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Lovell Road and the Western right of way of Georgia Highway 63 (Mize Road); thence in a Westerly and Southwesterly direction along Lovell Road 3,570 feet more or less to the intersection of Lovell Road and the Northwestern right of way of Lovell Circle and containing all that property within the right of way of Lovell Road as more particularly described herein. 
(33)  Lovers Lane. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Lovers Lane and the Northwestern right of way of Tugalo Street (formerly Georgia Highway 106 and 184); thence in a Northwesterly direction along Lovers Lane 6,200 feet more or less to the intersection of Lovers Lane and Eastern right of way of Prather Bridge Road, and containing all that property within the right of way of Lovers Lane as more particularly described herein. 
(34)  Madison Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Madison Drive and the Northwestern right of way of Hilltop Lane and extending in a Southeasterly direction 400 feet more or less to the intersection of Madison Drive and Valley Road, and include all the right of way of Madison Drive as more particularly described herein. 
(35)  Malik Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Malik Drive and the Southeasterly right of way of Currahee Street (U.S. Highway 123) and extending in a Southeasterly direction; thence in an Easterly direction along Malik Drive 1,850 feet more or less to the point where Malik Drive coincides with the beginning of Fern Valley Road, to specifically include all the right of way of within Malik Drive as more particularly described herein. 
(36)  Mize Road (Georgia Highway 63). All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Mize Road (Georgia Highway 63) and the current corporate limits of the City of Toccoa; thence extending in a Southeasterly direction; thence in a Southwesterly direction 8,800 feet more or less to the intersection of Mize Road and the Eastern right of way of Georgia Highway 13 (Toccoa By-Pass). 
(37)  Myrtle Street. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Myrtle Street and the Southeasterly right of way of Tugalo Street; thence in a Southeasterly direction 1,100 feet more or less to the beginning of Myrtle Street where it intersects with the Northwesterly right of way of Hayes Street, and containing all the right of way within Myrtle Street as more particularly described herein. 
(38)  Northside Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Northside Drive and the current corporate limits of the City of Toccoa; thence extending in a Northeasterly direction 269 feet more or less; thence continuing in a Northwesterly direction 280 feet more or less; thence continuing in a Southwesterly direction 210 feet more or less to the intersection of Northside Drive and the current corporate limits of the City of Toccoa, and containing all of the property located within the right of way of Northside Drive as the same is more particularly described herein. 
(39)  Patsy Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Patsy Drive and the Northeastern right of way of Prather Bridge Road and continuing in an Easterly direction along Patsy Drive 750 feet more or less to the end of Patsy Drive where it terminates with the Northeastern right of way of Irene Street, and containing all the property within the right of way of Patsy Drive as the same is more particularly described herein. 
(40)  Persimmon Street. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Persimmon Street and the current corporate limits of the City of Toccoa; thence continuing in a Southwesterly direction along Persimmon Street 700 feet more or less to the end of Persimmon Street, and containing all the property located within the right of way of Persimmon Street as the same is more particularly described herein. 
(41)  Rock Quarry Road. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Rock Quarry Road and the Northeastern right of way of Georgia Highway 17 (Falls Road); thence continuing in a Northeasterly direction 1,500 feet more or less to the intersection of Rock Quarry Road and the Southwestern right of way of Scenic Drive, and containing all that property within the right of way of Rock Quarry Road as the same is more particularly described herein. 
(42)  Scenic Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the Eastern right of way of Prather Bridge Road; thence continuing in a Southwesterly and Westerly direction to the intersection of Scenic Drive and Green Valley Drive; thence continuing in a Westerly and Northwesterly direction along Scenic Drive; thence in a Southwesterly direction continuing along Scenic Drive for a total distance of 9,000 feet more or less to the intersection of Scenic Drive with the Northeastern right of way of Rock Quarry Road and containing all the right of way within the Scenic Drive as the same is more particularly described herein. 
(43)  Skyline Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Skyline Drive and the Northwestern right of way of Rothell Road; thence continuing in a Southeasterly direction along Skyline Drive 5,800 feet more or less to the intersection of Skyline Drive and Rose Lane, and containing all that property within the right of way of Skyline Drive as the same is more particularly described herein. Additional references made to the plats of the Meadowbrook Subdivision contained in Plat Book 4, Page 140, and Plat Book 6, Page 33, Stephens County Records for a more complete and accurate description of the Skyline Drive and or Currahee Heights Road as the same is described. 
(44)  South Pond Street. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of South Pond Street and Mize Road (Georgia Highway 63) and continuing in a Northeasterly direction along South Pond Street 950 feet more or less to the intersection of South Pond Street and the current corporate limits of the City of Toccoa and containing all the right of way within South Pond Street as more particularly described herein. 
(45)  Sycamore Circle. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Sycamore Circle and the Northeastern right of way of Rothell Road, said intersection being the Northernmost intersection of Sycamore Circle and Rothell Road; thence continuing in an Easterly direction 327.3 feet more or less to a point where Sycamore Circle makes a turn in a Southeasterly direction; thence continuing still in a Southeasterly direction 270 feet more or less to the end of Sycamore Circle and continuing at the point where Sycamore Circle turns in a Southeasterly direction and Southwesterly direction a total of 1,100 feet more or less to the point where Sycamore Circle intersects with the Northeastern right of way of Rothell Road; this point being the Southern most intersection of Sycamore Circle and Rothell Road and containing all the right of way of Sycamore Circle as the same is described herein. Reference further made to a Survey of the Meadowbrook Subdivision recorded in Plat Book 4, Page 140, Stephens County Records for a more complete and accurate description of all or a portion of the Sycamore Circle as the same is described herein. 
(46)  Terrace Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Terrace Drive and the current corporate city limits of the City of Toccoa, said corporate limits lying 756 feet more or less East of the intersection of Terrace Drive and the Northeastern right of way of Boulevard Street; thence continuing along Terrace Drive in a Easterly direction 75 feet more or less to the intersection of Terrace Drive and the Southwestern right of way of Garland Drive, containing all of the property located within the right of way of Terrace Drive as the same is more particularly described herein. 
(47)  Reserved. 
(48)  Tugalo Street (f/k/a Georgia Highway 106 and 184). All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of the corporate limits of Tugalo Street and the corporate limits of the City of Toccoa; thence continuing in a Northeasterly direction along Tugalo Street adjacent to the lands of the Toccoa-Stephens County Airport; thence continuing in a Northeasterly direction to the right of way of the Southern Railway; thence continuing in an Easterly direction for a total of 20,130 feet more or less to the intersection of Tugalo Street and the Western right of way of U.S. Highway 123 (East Currahee Street) and containing all that property located within the right of way of Tugalo Street as the same is more particularly described herein. 
(49)  Reserved. 
(50)  Valley Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Valley Drive and the Northwestern right of way of Madison Drive and continuing along Valley Drive in a Northwesterly direction 350 feet more or less to the intersection of Valley Drive and the current corporate city limits of the City of Toccoa, containing all the property within the right of way of Valley Drive as the same is more particularly described herein. 
(51)  Vernon Road. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Vernon Road and the Southeastern right of way of East Currahee Street (U.S. Highway 123) and extending in a Southeasterly direction 700 feet more or less to the end of Vernon Road and containing all of the property located within the right of way of Vernon Road as the same is more particularly described herein. 
(52)  Wesley Circle. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Wesley Circle and the Eastern right of way of Fernside Drive; thence continuing in a Southeasterly direction along Wesley Circle 3,800 feet more or less to the end of Wesley Circle and containing all the property located within the right of way of Wesley Circle as the same is described herein. 
(53)  Wesley Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Wesley Drive and the Eastern right of way of Fernside Drive and extending 450 feet more or less to the intersection of Wesley Drive and the Northwesterly right of way of Wesley Circle and containing all the property located within the right of way of Wesley Drive as the same is described herein. 
(54)  White Pine Road. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of White Pine Road and the Westerly right of way of Big A Road (Georgia Highway 17) and extending in a Westerly direction along White Pine Road 4,300 feet more or less to the intersection of White Pine Road and the Eastern right of way of Rose Lane and containing all the property located within White Pine Road as the same is more particularly described herein. 
(55)  Woodlawn Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the Eastern intersection of Woodlawn Drive and the current corporate city limits of the City of Toccoa and extending in a Northwesterly direction 750 feet more or less to the Western intersection of Woodlawn Drive and the current corporate limits of the City of Toccoa, and containing all the property within the right of way of Woodlawn Drive as the same is described herein. 
(b)  All references to roads, streets, highways, drives, circles, and other references to public rights of way in subsection (a) of this section specifically include the current width of said public road, street, highway, drive, circle, or other rights of way and specifically includes the entire right of way. 
(c)  All references to roads, streets, highways, drives, circles, and other references to public rights of way in subsections (a) and (b) of this section specifically include those roads, streets, highways, drives, circles, and other public rights of way as the same currently exist in the City of Toccoa and Stephens County, Georgia, and as the same are a part of the City of Toccoa public street system, the public street and road system of Stephens County, Georgia, the public street and road system of the State of Georgia and/or the United States, and any other street or road which has been designated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section and which has been dedicated to public purposes. A map, designated as "Official Map of the City of Toccoa With Extended Boundaries—1989" is on file in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Stephens County and the office of the clerk of the City Commission of the City of Toccoa and is specifically incorporated by reference for a more complete and accurate description of the location of the extended corporate limits as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ga. Laws 1989, (Act No. 235), page 4523; Ga. Laws 1994, Act. No. 1126, § 1) 
Sec. 3-B. - Corporate limits extended. 
(a)  In addition to the present territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described roads, streets, and rights of way, all of which are located in Stephens County, Georgia: 
(1)  Hayes Street. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Georgia Highway 17 (Big A Road) and proceeding in a Southwesterly and a Southerly direction a total of 4,740 ft., more or less, to the end of McArthur Drive on the Easterly right of way of McArthur Drive, and containing all the property within the right of way of Hayes Street as described herein. 
(2)  Hemphill Street. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Hayes Street and Hemphill Street, said point beginning on the Easterly right of way of Hayes Street, and thence continuing in an Easterly distance of 770 ft., more or less, thence in a Northerly direction for a distance of 600 ft., more or less, to the intersection of Hemphill Street and Myrtle Street, said intersection being on the Southerly right of way of Myrtle Street, and containing all of the property within the right of way of Hemphill Street as designated herein. 
(3)  McArthur Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of McArthur Drive and Tugalo Street, and beginning on the Westerly right of way of Tugalo Street, thence proceeding in a Westerly direction 930 ft., more or less, to the intersection of McArthur Drive and the Easterly right of way of Hayes Street, containing all of the property within the right of way of McArthur Drive as described herein. 
(4)  Moreland Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Moreland Drive and Tugalo Street, and beginning on the Westerly right of way of Tugalo Street, thence continuing in a Southwesterly direction approximately 1,085 ft., more or less, to the intersection of Moreland Drive and Myrtle Street, said intersection being on the Northerly right of way of Myrtle Street, and containing all of the property within the right of way of Moreland Drive as described herein. 
(5)  Morningside Drive. All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 440th District, G.M., Stephens County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the intersection of Morningside Drive and Tugalo Street, and beginning on the Westerly right of way of Tugalo Street, thence continuing approximately 1,400 ft., more or less, to the intersection of Hayes Street, said ending point being the Easterly right of way of Hayes Street, and containing all of the property within the right of way of Morningside Drive as described herein. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(b)  All references to roads, streets, highways, drives, circles, and other references to public rights of way in subsection (a) of this section specifically include the current width of said public road, street, highway, drive, circle, or other rights of way and specifically includes the entire right of way. 
(c)  All references to roads, streets, highways, drives, circles, and other references to public rights of way in subsections (a) and (b) of this section specifically include those roads, streets, highways, drives, circles, and other public rights of way as the same currently exist in the City of Toccoa and Stephens County, Georgia, and as the same are a part of the City of Toccoa public street system, the public street and road system of Stephens County, Georgia, the public street and road system of the State of Georgia and/or the United States, and any other street or road which has been designated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section and which has been dedicated to public purposes. A map, designated as "Official Map of the City of Toccoa With Extended Boundaries—1991" is on file in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Stephens County and the office of the Clerk of the City Commission of the City of Toccoa and is specifically incorporated by reference for a more complete and accurate description of the location of the extended corporate limits as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ga. Laws 1991, Act No. 170; Ga. Laws 1994, Act. No. 1126, § 2) 
Sec. 4. - City commission—Oath. 
Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, each commissioner of the City of Toccoa shall take and subscribe, before some judge or justice of the peace, the following oath, which shall be entered on the minutes of the commission: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully demean myself as a commissioner of the City of Toccoa during my continuance in office; that I will discharge the duties of the office to the best of my ability; that in the enactment of legislation I will have due regard for the charter of the City of Toccoa, the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and of the United States of America; and I do further swear that I have not, either in the general election or party primary, in which I was a candidate, directly or indirectly expressed or implied any promise of support to any person for any office in the government of the City of Toccoa, nor have I influenced my election by the unlawful use of money or other things of value, or by the use of intoxicants. I do further swear that I will not knowingly permit my vote in the election or appointment of any person to a position in the city government or on the passage or adoption of any ordinance before the commission to be influenced by fear, favor, affection, reward or the hope thereof, but in all things pertaining to my said office I will be governed by my convictions as to public good. So help me God." 
Sec. 5. - Same—Election of mayor; powers and duties. 
At the first meeting held during each calendar year, the commission shall elect one of the commissioners as mayor of the City of Toccoa. The commissioner so elected shall continue to hold the title of mayor for one year thereafter, and successors shall be elected by the commission for each year. The mayor shall have no more authority than any of the other commissioners, except that he shall act as chairman at all meetings of the commission, shall, upon approval by the commission, sign the minutes of such meetings, shall act as mayor of said city on all ceremonial occasions, and shall have such other authority and duties as hereinafter provided. He shall be ex officio a member of all boards of which the mayor of said city is now ex officio a member. 
Sec. 6. - Same—Powers and duties; compensation. 
The city commission shall be strictly a legislative body. The said commission shall pass all the ordinances for the government of the city, fix the tax rate, license fees, and do and perform all necessary work of a legislative character for the successful government of the city. The mayor, vice-mayor, who shall be annually elected by the commission from its membership, and commissioners shall be compensated for their services as provided by the city commission consistent with general law. 
Sec. 7. - Same—Election of clerk; powers and duties. 
The commissioners shall elect a clerk of the commission, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the commission. Said clerk shall receive such salary as the commission shall fix, shall have charge and custody of the city records, shall attend all meetings of the commission, shall keep accurate minutes of all their proceedings, and said clerk shall keep in the office provided therefor all oaths taken by him and all bonds of officers and employees, shall keep a record of all elections and appointments to office, and shall perform such other duties as may be provided by this act, or as may be imposed by the commissioners, not inconsistent herewith. 
Sec. 8. - Same—Removal of members. 
Any or all of said commissioners may be removed from office at any time by recall by the following procedure: If as many as one-fourth of the qualified voters of the City of Toccoa, as shown by the voters' list of the last city election, shall present a written petition to the clerk, naming the commissioner or commissioners sought to be recalled and the reason for same, the clerk shall at once publish a notice in the official newspaper, stating that such a petition has been filed and that an election will be held on a named date in accordance with said petition. Such notice shall be published once a week for four (4) weeks, and said election shall be held as soon as the same can be legally done, but not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days after the filing of said petition for recall with the clerk. The existing laws of said city relative to the opening and closing of registration books, preparation of registration lists, selecting of managers, etc., shall apply in said election, except no person affected by said petition for recall shall take any part in naming any registrar, manager, or clerk for said election, the clerk of the commission naming said managers and clerks in the event all of said commissioners are sought to be recalled. The tickets for said election shall have printed thereon: "Shall Commissioner ____________ (naming the commissioner) be recalled?" To the left thereof there shall be placed the words "yes" and "no", together with appropriate squares to the left of each for the convenient insertion of a cross or check mark. The results shall be reported by the managers as in other elections; and if a majority of those voting in such election vote in favor of the recall, such office shall become vacant from the time the results are announced to the commission. The vacant office shall be filled at an election held as soon as the same can be legally done, and the successor shall serve the unexpired term of the party recalled. No person removed by recall, or who resigns after a petition for recall has been filed against him, shall be eligible for election to said commission or appointment to any city office until after the expiration of the term for which he was originally elected. In the event, however, that all commissioners shall be recalled at the same election, they shall nevertheless continue to hold office until their successors shall be elected and shall qualify. In the event that for any cause there shall be a vacancy in the office of one or more commissioners, the commissioner or commissioners remaining in office shall perform all the duties and shall possess all the power and authority of the commission until the vacancy or vacancies shall be filled. In the event, for any cause, there shall be a vacancy in the office of all of said commissioners, the governor of the state shall appoint all commissioners, who shall hold the offices until said vacancies shall be filled by an election as herein provided for. In case of death, resignation, removal from office or vacation from office by removal from said city (and removal shall operate to create a vacancy just as if there should be a formal resignation) of any commissioner, the clerk of the commission shall proceed to call an election to fill such vacancy, and such election shall be called and held as in the case of an election held to fill a vacancy caused by a recall election as in this act provided. 
Sec. 9. - City manager—Appointment. 
The commission shall select and appoint a manager for said city within thirty (30) days after their election and qualification, and fix his salary to be paid in monthly installments, which salary shall be fixed at the time of his qualification, but which may be changed at any time by the commission. Such manager shall be a citizen of the United States not less than twenty-five (25) years of age and shall have a bachelor's degree or equivalent in public administration. The city commission shall select and appoint such manager and shall perform such other duties as may be provided in this act or as may be imposed by the commission not inconsistent herewith. Said manager shall be subject to removal from office at any time by a vote of the majority of the commission. 
Sec. 10. - Same—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The manager must devote all his working time and attention to the affairs of the city. He shall not be interested directly or indirectly in any business enterprise in said city, or in any person or persons contracting with or making sales to said municipal corporation. He shall have the appointment, subject to confirmation by the commission, of all heads of departments of said city, except the clerk and the recorder [municipal judge]. The manager shall have the right, without the consent of the commission, to appoint employees below the grade of heads of departments. The manager shall be responsible for the efficiency of each department of the city government (except in the cases of the clerk and recorder), and shall from day to day inspect the workings of each department. He shall have an office at the city hall, and shall keep his office open at reasonable times to be fixed by the city commission, during which all residents of the city shall be free to appear and make complaints against the operation of any department of the city government. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  At least thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, which shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 from and after July 1, 1975, the manager must submit to the commission for its consideration a budget of proposed expenditures for that fiscal year, showing in as much detail as practicable the amounts allotted to each department of the city government, and the reason for such estimated expenditures. No part of any amount allotted to any department shall be expended on account of any other department, except upon the consent of the commission. The manager must make a full written report to the commission on the first of each month showing the operation and the expenditures of each department of the city government for the preceding month. The manager shall have the right to attend all meetings of the commission and to discuss with the commissioners all matters coming before the commission, but shall have no vote thereon. 
(Ord. No. 5-2005, § 1, 5-9-05) 
Sec. 11. - City commission meetings. 
The commission shall meet at least twice each month in the city hall, unless providentially prevented, at such hour as shall be fixed by it. The hour must be fixed, and shall not be changed except after ample notice stating the hour to which changed. The commission may meet more often as may be adjudged necessary for the public good. All such meetings shall be public and open to all the residents of the city except as otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 12. - Audit of city's books and records. 
The books and records of said city shall be audited at least once every twelve (12) months by a certified or registered public accountant employed for this purpose by the commission, and such auditors or accountants shall make written report of the results of such audits. The fees and expenses of such auditors and accountants shall be paid out of the city funds. A synopsis of such audit showing income and expenses shall be published in the newspaper in which sheriff's advertisements are published within two (2) weeks after the approval of such audit by the city commission. 
Sec. 13. - Code of ordinances. 
The commission shall keep the existing city code current by update supplements at least biannually. A copy of such code, duly certified as being a true copy by the clerk of the commission, shall be received in evidence in all courts of this state as if the code itself had been properly introduced in evidence. 
Sec. 14. - Nonapplicability of Charter. 
Ordinances now of force in said city shall not be affected by this act, except when any such ordinance shall be in conflict with any of the provisions hereof. 
Sec. 15. - Municipal court. 
The recorder's [municipal] court shall be presided over by a judge, who shall be designated as recorder [municipal judge], and who shall have all the power and authority in said court and in the conduct thereof, and in trying and punishing offenders against the laws or ordinances of said city, as now given the other presiding officers in said recorder's [municipal] court. The recorder [municipal judge] shall be a licensed attorney authorized to practice law in the State of Georgia. He shall be elected by the commission for a term of two (2) years, but shall be subject to removal at any time by a vote of the majority of the commission. Before removal, however, written charges must be preferred against him, setting out in detail the nature of the charges against him, which charges must be signed by one or more of the commissioners. The recorder [municipal judge] must be furnished with a copy of such charges, and of the time when same will be heard, which must not be less than five days after a copy of such charges shall have been furnished him. Such hearing shall be public, and the recorder [municipal judge] shall have the right to be present thereat and to call the witnesses in his own defense; but the action of the commission in removing or refusing to remove the recorder [municipal judge] after such hearing or after he is given the opportunity to be heard shall be final, and there shall be no appeal from the action of the commission. In case of the disqualification, illness, absence from the city or vacancy in office of the recorder [municipal judge], a judge of a state court of the State of Georgia or a licensed attorney, other than the city attorney who shall be disqualified, selected by the commission may act as recorder [municipal judge] and shall have all the power and authority of the recorder [municipal judge] while acting as such. The clerk of the commission shall be ex officio clerk of recorder's [municipal] court, and shall perform all the duties and have all the authority therein now possessed by the clerk of said city. At least two (2) sessions of the recorder's [municipal] court shall be held each month, and as often as the recorder [municipal judge] or acting recorder may see fit. The present law governing the taking of appeals and certioraries from the recorder's court shall continue of force. The recorder [municipal judge] shall receive such salary as the commission shall fix. Record keeping for the recorder's [municipal] court shall be the responsibility of the city clerk. 
Sec. 16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5-2005, § 1(b), adopted May 9, 2005, repealed former section 16 in its entirety which pertained to the sale of public property and derived from General Assembly Act No. 392 of 1975. 
Sec. 17. - Ad valorem taxes. 
All persons owning property within the city limits of the City of Toccoa shall be subject to pay an ad valorem tax to said city thereon, and the lien for said tax shall attach as of January first of each year. The present laws and procedure for the collection of taxes, the issuance of executions, and other provisions pertaining to taxes shall remain of full force and effect. 
Sec. 18. - City departments. 
(a)  The following shall constitute the various departments of the city government of said city and the titles of the heads thereof: 
[1]  Police department (including regulation and management of the city prison), the head of which shall be designated as chief. 
[2]  Department of finance, the head of which shall be designated as director of finance. 
[3]  Fire department, the head of which shall be designated as chief. 
[4]  Department of law, the head of which shall be designated as city attorney. 
[5]  Public works (including inspection of buildings, care of streets, drains, bridges, public buildings, and personal property belonging to the city, cemeteries, etc.), the head of which shall be designated as director of public works. 
[6]  Water and sewer, the head of which shall be designated as director of utilities. 
[7]  Gas, the head of which shall be designated as gas superintendent. 
[8]  Public records, the head of which shall be the clerk of the commission. 
(b)  The commission may from time to time on the recommendation of the city manager create other departments and may define the duties pertaining to each department. The commission may also reorganize any department or departments of the city and may alter the structure of departments or transfer functions from one department or subdivision thereof to another. 
Sec. 19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5-2005, § 1(c), adopted May 9, 2005, repealed former section 19 in its entirety which pertained to the city personnel board and derived from General Assembly Act No. 392 of 1975. 
Sec. 20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5-2005, § 1(d), adopted May 9, 2005, repealed former section 19 in its entirety which pertained to salaries and derived from General Assembly Act No. 392 of 1975. 
Sec. 21. - Bonds. 
The commission may from time to time require all of the officials and employees of the city to give bond for the faithful performance of their duties, and may require them to take proper oaths of office. 
Sec. 22. - Powers, duties of commission clerk. 
The clerk of the commission shall issue all executions for taxes and for other amounts owing to the city, and he shall keep a record thereof, and shall keep all other city records and perform such other duties as may be required of him by the commission. 
Sec. 23. - Chief of police. 
The chief of police shall be ex officio marshal of the said city, and shall perform all duties imposed on the marshal by law, and such other duties as may be required by the commission. 
Sec. 24. - Director of finance. 
(a)  The city manager shall nominate and the city commission shall confirm the appointment of a director of finance. Such director of finance shall have at least a bachelor's degree in business administration with a major in accounting or the equivalent experience in municipal finance. The director of finance shall serve under the supervision and direction of the city manager and shall hold office at the pleasure of the commission. He shall receive such salary as the commission shall fix. He shall see that the accounts of the city and its departments and other agencies are kept in accordance with generally accepted principles of governmental accounting. He shall see that all funds of the city and its agencies are properly received and deposited and properly disbursed in accordance with its budget and the provisions of this charter and general law. He shall see that available funds of the city and its agencies are profitably invested as directed by the city commission. He shall keep the commission, the city manager, the city clerk and the other officers of the city advised of the financial condition of the city and its agencies. The city commission shall require that the director of finance be bonded for the faithful performance of his duties in an amount to be determined by the city commission, the cost of which bond shall be paid out of city funds. He shall perform such other duties as may be provided by this act, or as may be imposed by the commission or the city manager, not inconsistent herewith. 
(b)  The following specific duties are also transferred to the director of finance: 
(1)  Charge of all purchases of every kind and description for the city, which shall be upon his written order. Any sales made to the city except upon such written order may be declared invalid by the commission. 
(2)  The making of all payment of city funds, by drawing a written request in duplicate, one of such request to be kept by the director of finance for his records and the other furnished to the clerk, who shall issue to the person designated a voucher check for the amount stipulated, such check to be signed by the clerk and the director of finance. In the absence or disability of the clerk, the mayor, or in his absence or disability the vice-mayor, shall sign such checks, and in the absence or disability of the director of finance, the city manager shall sign such checks, and in the absence of the city manager, the mayor, or in his absence, the vice-mayor, shall sign such checks. All voucher checks shall be signed by two (2) of the aforementioned persons and in no case shall the same person sign any voucher check twice. 
(Ord. No. 78-005, 3-13-78; Ord. No. 79-303, 8-27-79; Ord. No. 5-2005, § 1(e), 5-9-05) 
Sec. 25. - Quarantine power. 
The commission may by resolution or ordinance adopted at any meeting thereof, and to take effect at once if so provided in the resolution, exercise all power and authority in declaring a quarantine and in enforcing same. 
Sec. 26. - General city powers. 
(a)  The City of Toccoa, acting by and through its city commission, shall have the right, power and authority to construct, repair, maintain, install, distribute, sell and furnish water, water facilities, sewage service, sewer facilities, natural gas lines and mains and natural gas facilities to customers, persons, firms and corporations located without the corporate limits of the City of Toccoa. The City of Toccoa is hereby expressly authorized to exercise the power of eminent domain for the purpose of acquiring all rights, easements, and property necessary to furnish such facilities and services. 
(b)  The commission is authorized to assess the cost of laying water mains, pipes and appliances of its system of waterworks on each side of the road in which such mains, pipes and appliances are located outside the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 27. - Governmental immunity. 
Governmental immunity granted to agents, employees and officers of the City of Toccoa shall extend to acts of such agents, employees and officers that occur outside the corporate limits of the City of Toccoa if such acts are authorized under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 28. - Fire protection; fire department. 
(a)  The City of Toccoa may enter into agreements with the governing authority of Stephens County or with the owners of property outside the city whereby the city fire department will provide fire protection for property beyond the corporate limits of the City of Toccoa. 
(b)  In addition, in any case in which property within the city may be endangered by fire occurring outside the city, the City of Toccoa Fire Department shall be authorized to assist in extinguishing such fire. 
(c)  Any call from beyond the corporate limits of the city shall be answered by assistance from the fire department only upon the determination of the chief of the fire department or senior officer thereof present that the absence from the city of fire personnel and equipment will not constitute a hazard to the property within the city. 
(d)  The commission shall by ordinance establish procedures for the implementation of this section. 
Sec. 29. - Agreements, etc., with other governmental units. 
(a)  The City of Toccoa may enter into contracts or agreements with Stephens County in order to execute any joint exercise, or the contractual exercise by the city for the county or by the county for the city, of any administrative or governmental power, function, right, privilege, or immunity of local government, except where prohibited by law. 
(b)  The City of Toccoa shall likewise have the authority to enter into contracts and agreements with the State of Georgia and the United States Government or any agency or departments of said governments or any public agency, public corporation or authority now or hereafter created for future services or for the performance of any administrative or governmental power, function, right, privilege, or immunity of local government, except where prohibited by law. 
Sec. 30. - General legislative powers. 
The commissioners shall have authority to pass ordinances or resolutions, and impose penalties for the failure to comply with same, for the preservation of peace and good order, the prevention of vice and immorality; and shall have authority to disperse disorderly assemblages; to prevent and suppress all gaming and gaming houses, and places of ill fame or houses kept for immoral purpose, to license, tax, regulate, and restrain or prohibit all billiard rooms, pool rooms, tenpin alleys or other such alleys, inns, taverns, hotels, restaurants, lunch stands, or other places for public entertainment; to license, tax, regulate, and prohibit itinerant physicians and vendors of medicines or other articles; to direct the location and regulate the operation and maintenance and management of public bath houses or bathing pools or public playgrounds or other places of amusement, and require the same to be closed if deemed expedient; to preserve the health of the citizens of the said City of Toccoa by the adoption of such sanitary rules and regulations as may be proper and expedient; and to pass such regulations as are proper for the general welfare of the said city. 
Sec. 31. - Corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Toccoa shall remain as provided by existing laws, and the authority heretofore granted to the City of Toccoa not herein repealed shall continue of force, and the inhabitants of the City of Toccoa, Georgia, as its limits now are, or may hereafter be established, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate to be known and designated as the City of Toccoa, and the corporate existence, identity, present territorial limits, the jurisdiction of the City of Toccoa both within the corporate limits and beyond same, with the corporate rights, powers, and privileges conferred, and all duties, obligations, and liabilities imposed by law shall be preserved unto said city except as altered or amended by this act, and as such body politic said city shall have perpetual succession, have and use a corporate seal, and make and amend rules, regulations, bylaws, resolutions, and ordinances for its government and the exercise of its corporate powers, not in conflict with this act, the other acts granting authority to said city, the Constitution and laws of Georgia and of the United States of America. 
Sec. 32. - Regulations, licensing businesses, occupations, etc. 
(a)  The power is hereby granted to the city to provide by ordinance for the registration and licensing of any trade, business, occupation, vocation, profession, and any and every other undertaking pursued for the purpose of personal gain or profit of whatever nature, engaged in or carried on within the limits of the city, and regardless of whether or not the subject has an office or establishment within the city. 
(b)  The city commission is authorized to fix the amount, terms and manner of issuing and revoking licenses, provided that this authority is subject to the Constitution and laws of the United States and the State of Georgia. 
(c)  This power is conferred for the purpose of regulation under the police power of the city and for the purpose of raising revenue for the operation of the city government through the imposition of a tax or fee for the privilege of operating within the city. This authority extends over individuals, partnerships, associations and corporations, and their agents. 
Sec. 33. - Approval of Charter amendment. 
After the approval of this act by the governor, or after it otherwise becomes law, it shall be the duty of the election superintendent of the City of Toccoa to issue the call for an election for the purpose of submitting section 3 of this act to the electors of the City of Toccoa for approval or rejection. The superintendent shall set the date of such election for Thursday, June 12, 1975. The call for said election shall be issued at least thirty (30) days but not more than sixty (60) days prior to the date thereof. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two (2) weeks immediately preceding the date thereof, in the official organ of the City of Toccoa. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 

 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of section 3 of said act shall vote "Yes", and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of section 3 of said act shall vote "No". If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of section 3 of said act, it shall become of full force and effect, otherwise it shall be void and of no force and effect. 
The expense of such election shall be borne by the City of Toccoa. It shall be the duty of the superintendent to hold and conduct such election. It shall be his further duty to certify the results thereof to the secretary of state. 
Sec. 34. - Effective date. 
Except for the provisions of section 3 of this act, this act shall become effective upon the approval of this act by the governor or upon its otherwise becoming law. If section 3 of this act is approved, at the referendum election provided for in section 33, said section shall be effective for the purpose of the 1975 city election and shall be effective for all purposes on January 1, 1976. If said section 3 of this act is rejected at said referendum election, said section 3 shall be null, void and of no force and effect, and in that event, it is the intention of the General Assembly that the governing body [city commission] of the City of Toccoa shall continue in existence as heretofore provided by the charter of said city in the same manner as if said section 3 had never been enacted. 
Sec. 35. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this act, which shall remain of full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 36. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ACTS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto by Georgia Laws. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of any ordinances of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated, "Code of Ordinances, City of Toccoa, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
Words and phrases used in this Code shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Advice and consent. Whenever the term "advice and consent" of the city council is used in this Code, it shall be construed to mean an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire city commission. 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Toccoa, Georgia, as printed in Part I of this volume. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Toccoa, Georgia. 
City commission, commission. The words "city commission" or "the commission" shall mean the City Commission of the City of Toccoa, Georgia. 
Code. The words "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean and refer to the Code of Ordinances, City of Toccoa, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Stephens, Georgia. 
Court. The word "court" shall mean the municipal court of the city. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as they have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Governing authority, governing body. The words "governing authority" or "governing body" shall mean the City Commission of the City of Toccoa, Georgia. 
Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority. 
Municipality. The word "municipality" shall be construed as synonymous with the term "city," or "municipal corporation." 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" or "sworn." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Ordinance. The word "ordinance" shall mean a legislative act of the city commission of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The word "owner," when applied to a building or to land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as hereinafter defined. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or notice. Reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Resolution. The word "resolution" shall mean a legislative act of the city commission of a special or temporary character. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The phrase "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the office of the city clerk which contains rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city commission. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curblines and improved walkways. 
Signature, subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approaches thereto, within the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant", when applied to a building or to land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall mean seven days. 
Writing or written. The word "writing" or "written" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in bold-face type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amending Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In any case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as the Code and subsequent ordinances omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city commission. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of the City of Toccoa, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Toccoa, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or subsection or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows: …." The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, chapters, or provisions sought to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, chapter or provision number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section. 
(a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-6. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-5) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-7) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any 
provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is declared to be unlawful and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall subject the person committing the violation to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and costs, or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or to both such fine and imprisonment, any or all of such penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
(b)  The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the city's Charter or Code. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-8) 
State Law reference— Penalty to be imposed in certain criminal and traffic cases and upon violation of bond, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to confine persons convicted of violating ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; punishments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(c); limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Secs. 1-13—1-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 1-20. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
(a)  Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or mayor pro tem containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
(b)  Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(c)  Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any city commissioner of the city and any member appointed to any board or commission of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 1-21. - Prohibitions. 
No member of the governing authority shall: 
(a)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy his/her favor in the performance of official acts; 
(b)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for him/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; 
(c)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's private gain; 
(d)  Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
(e)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; 
(f)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a member of the governing authority; 
(g)  Use his/her position to request or require an employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
(2)  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
(3)  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
(4)  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation; 
(h)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; 
(i)  Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself/herself or persons having an interest. 
Prohibition (b) of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  An occasional non-pecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
(2)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
(3)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; 
(4)  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. 
Prohibition (e) of this section shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by Section 2-5-4 are made to the city commissioner 30 days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 1-22. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he/she has reason to believe may be affected by his/her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement 30 days prior to the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he/she has at the time such matter is presented to mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he/she has an interest. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 1-23. - Disqualification. 
A member of the governing authority shall disqualify himself/herself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he/she has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 1-24. - Prohibited contracts. 
(a)  The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: the designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
(b)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
(c)  Contracts entered into in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 16-10-6. 
(d)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency. 
(e)  Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority, or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city administrator following disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 1-25. - Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governing authority. 
The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding twelve-month period a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 1-26. - Complaints. 
Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the vice mayor. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the vice mayor shall appoint three members of the city commission, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 1-26.1. - Withdrawal of complaint and completion of investigation. 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary if a person institutes a written complaint as contemplated in section 1-26 above and that person withdraws in writing that complaint the member against whom the complaint was alleged may at the member's discretion insist upon the completion and report of the investigation authorized by section 1-26. 
(Ord. No. 18-2006, § I, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 1-27. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  Composition of the board of ethics: 
(1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this section. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(2)  The mayor and city commission shall each designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of ten individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
(3)  The city manager shall maintain a listing of these ten qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and city commission, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this ordinance; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article. 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; 
(7)  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 1-28. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
The board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 1-29. - Penalty and member rights. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this article shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. 
(b)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 1-30. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Stephens County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 7; administration of flood damage prevention ordinance, § 9-36 et seq.; municipal court, ch. 12; taxation and revenue, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Powers relating to administration of government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City commission, §§ 1—6. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - Mayor; duties. 
The city commission shall select one of its members to serve as mayor. The mayor shall serve as the presiding officer and shall perform such duties and responsibilities as authorized by the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-1) 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of mayor, § 5. 
Sec. 2-27. - Vice-mayor; duties. 
The city commission shall select one of its members as vice-mayor to act in the place of the mayor in the performance of official duties in the event the mayor is unable or unavailable to perform those official duties. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-2) 
Sec. 2-28. - City commissioners; duties. 
The city commissioners shall perform such duties as authorized by the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-3) 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of commissioners, § 6. 
Sec. 2-29. - Compensation; reimbursement for travel expenses; etc. 
(a)  Compensation to the mayor and city commissioners shall be the following: 
(1)  The mayor shall receive compensation for services to the city in the amount of $1,000.00 per month. 
(2)  The vice-mayor shall receive compensation for services to the city in the amount of $958.33 per month. 
(3)  Each commission member shall receive compensation for services to the city in the amount of $916.67 per month. 
(b)  In the event any one or more of the city commissioners, the vice-mayor or the mayor travels beyond the limits of the county in connection with the performance of his duty as commissioner, or vice-mayor or mayor he shall be reimbursed for all necessary expenses incurred for travel, lodging and meals. 
(c)  The contract between the City of Toccoa and GMEBS providing that the city pay premiums for health insurance for the city commissioners (including the mayor) as elected officials is hereby amended to delete said contract provision; provided nothing contained herein would prevent a city commissioner from otherwise personally paying the city the applicable premium to maintain coverage under the GMEBS group health plan, subject to any requirements or limitations established now or in the future by the city or GMEBS. This provision shall not be construed to establish a right to individual (i.e., non-group) health insurance coverage through GMEBS. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-4; Ord. No. 88-033, § 1, 9-12-88; Ord. No. 99-017, § I, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 2-2004, § 1, 3-8-04; Ord. of 6-21-16, § I ) 
Editor's note— The compensation of the mayor, vice-mayor and commission members set by an Ord. of June 21, 2016 , takes effect on Jan. 1, 2018. 
Charter reference— Compensation of commissioners, § 6. 
Secs. 2-30—2-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— City commission meetings, § 11. 

Sec. 2-41. - Dates, time. 
The city commission will meet on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at the city hall at 5:00 p.m. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-11) 
Sec. 2-42. - Call of special meetings. 
Special meetings of the city commission may be called by the mayor or any three members of the commission. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-11) 
Sec. 2-43. - Mayor to preside; power to vote. 
(a)  The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the city commission. 
(b)  The mayor, as a member of the city commission, shall have the right to vote on each question coming before the commission and shall have the right to second all motions. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-12) 
Sec. 2-44. - Quorum. 
Three city commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-13) 
Sec. 2-45. - Rules of order. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, Robert's Revised Rules of Order shall govern the procedures and meetings of the commission as far as they are applicable. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-14) 
Sec. 2-46. - Adoption of ordinances and resolutions; required readings; waiver; form and attestation. 
(a)  All proposed ordinances, before they are voted upon by the city commission, shall be read twice at separate meetings; however, the second reading may be waived and the ordinance passed at the first meeting, upon unanimous consent of the members of the city commission. 
(b)  All proposed resolutions may be passed with one reading at the first meeting. 
(c)  All adopted ordinances and resolutions shall be in writing, and shall be signed by the mayor or the officer presiding over the city commission at the time of their passage, and attested to by the clerk of the commission. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-15) 
Sec. 2-47. - Recording of vote. 
Upon the call of any member of the city commission, the yeas and nays on any question shall be taken and recorded in the journal by the clerk of the commission. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-16) 
Secs. 2-48—2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Clerk of the commission, § 7; appointment of manager, § 9; chief of police, § 23; director of finance, § 24. 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 8-31 et seq.; planning department, § 16-51 et seq.; police department, ch. 17. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-71—2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— City manager, § 9. 

Sec. 2-81. - Duties generally. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive officer of the city government and as such shall be responsible for the day to day operation of the city. His responsibilities shall include: 
(1)  Direct control of the activities of all department heads in conformance with the city Charter and this Code. 
(2)  Preparation and maintenance of an annual budget and capital improvements plan for all city functions and operations. 
(3)  Public relations and disbursement of public information. 
(4)  Development and maintenance of a personnel plan. 
(5)  Maintenance and enforcement of administrative procedures. 
(6)  Advise the city commission on a continuous basis as to the operation of the city government. 
(7)  Preparation of agenda for all meetings of the city commission. 
(8)  Execution of official contracts or agreements as approved by the commission. 
(9)  Perform all other duties in keeping with his position as city manager as authorized or instructed by the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 2-3-3) 
Secs. 2-82—2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Clerk of the commission, § 7. 

Sec. 2-91. - Duties generally. 
The clerk of the commission shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Issue summons, orders, notices, licenses or other instruments of writing required of him by the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Execute and collect all taxes levied on real and personal property in the city. 
(3)  Issue all fi fas required to be issued in the collection of taxes, fines and other sums due the city which shall bear teste in the name of the city. 
(4)  Attend the meetings of the city commission and keep an accurate record of the proceedings. 
(5)  Serve as chief registrar and election superintendent for the city. 
(6)  Sit as a permanent member on the city pension committee. 
(7)  All other duties authorized by the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 2-3-1) 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of commission clerk, § 22. 
Secs. 2-92—2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-101. - Duties generally. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city, and in that capacity shall: 
(1)  Prepare ordinances when so requested by the city commission or city manager. 
(2)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested and approve, as to form, all ordinances, bonds and city contracts. 
(3)  Render any other legal services as may be required by the commission or city manager. 
(4)  The city attorney shall work for the city manager at the pleasure of the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 2-3-2) 
Secs. 2-102—2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Personnel board, § 19. 

Sec. 2-121. - Authority to create. 
The city commission shall, unless otherwise provided by law, create all boards and commissions which shall perform the duties prescribed by ordinance, including, but not limited to, making studies, conducting research and investigations, holding hearings and preparing recommendations as to needed ordinances and resolutions and for any other purposes authorized. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-1) 
Sec. 2-122. - Composition; appointment. 
The city commission shall provide, unless otherwise provided by law, for the manner of appointment, makeup and composition of boards and commissions, their periods of existence, and for the compensation of their members and employees, in whole or in part. The city commission may provide for reimbursement of the actual and necessary expenses incurred by the members of boards and commissions in the performance of their official duties. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-2(A)) 
Sec. 2-123. - Removal of members, filling vacancies. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by law, any member of a board or commission may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of all the city commission members. 
(b)  Any vacancy in the office of any member of a board or commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-2(B), (C)) 
Sec. 2-124. - Compliance with policies, etc. 
All boards and commissions of the city shall be governed by, and shall comply with, all policies, rules, regulations, and administrative procedures of the city including, but not limited to, such matters as personnel, budgeting, accounting, purchasing, record keeping, reporting, equipment utilization and travel. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-2(D)) 
Sec. 2-125. - Rules, regulations, etc. 
Each board and commission may establish bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the city charter, the provisions of this Code, or applicable state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for its internal organization, election of officers and for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the commission and approved by the city commission prior to their being effective. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-2(E)) 
Secs. 2-126—2-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-146. - Purchasing criteria; authorization. 
All purchases by the city, regardless of price, shall be made on a competitive basis. The city manager shall be responsible for preparing and maintaining purchasing procedures and policies which shall incorporate, at a minimum, the following criteria: 
(1)  All purchases over $5,000.00, except as provided for herein, must be approved by the commission and shall require sealed bids to be opened and publicly read aloud at a regular or called commission meeting. 
(2)  The city manager shall be authorized to purchase any item or service specifically listed in the current approved budget of the city, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  At least three competitive bids/proposals must be received, if possible. 
b.  Prior to such purchases, the city commission must receive copies of the request for bids, a list of all bidders and their bid amounts, and the intended vendor and amount of purchase. 
c.  The actual purchase must not be made prior to seven days after the commission receives the information referred to in section 2-146(2)(b). 
(3)  The city manager shall be authorized to secure term bids for materials or products which are used on a repetitive basis, and to purchase such materials, provided that individual units of such purchases do not exceed $5,000.00. 
(4)  The city manager shall be authorized to make payments, regardless of amount, pursuant to a legally authorized contract, provided such contract has been publicly authorized by the city commission. 
(5)  The city manager shall be authorized to make all tax, FICA, insurance and utility payments, regardless of amount. 
(6)  The city manager shall be authorized to purchase budgeted items that are included in state government contracts awarded by the state department of administrative services through a competitive bidding process. 
(7)  In situations of emergency, which are defined as anything that would interrupt the normal operations of the city, the city manager is authorized to make necessary purchases, provided such purchases are ratified at the next commission meetings if they are over $5,000.00. 
(Code 1985, § 2-3-4; Ord. No. 88-012, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 88-026, § 1, 8-8-88) 
Secs. 2-147—2-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PERSONNEL[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Personnel board, § 19. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-166. - Personnel plan—Preparation; contents. 
A personnel plan shall be prepared and maintained by the city manager and shall include: 
(1)  Leaves and holidays to be provided to city employees. 
(2)  Objective standards to be used by the city when recruiting, selecting or advancing employees. 
(3)  Salary and pay classification schedules. 
(4)  Position classifications. 
(5)  Grievance and appeal procedures. 
(6)  Grounds and procedures for disciplinary action against employees. 
(7)  All other information necessary for the proper personnel administration of city government. 
(Code 1985, § 2-4-1) 
Sec. 2-167. - Same—Coverage; at-will employment. 
(a)  All offices and positions of the city shall be and are hereby allocated to the career service. The career service shall be a service to which the personnel plan shall apply and shall include positions in the city now existing or hereafter established, except the following: 
(1)  The members of the city commission and other elected positions. 
(2)  Members of boards and commissions, judges, the city manager and the city attorney. 
(3)  Persons employed to make or conduct a temporary or special inquiry, investigation, or examination on behalf of the city commission, a committee thereof, or the city manager. 
(b)  The city is an "at-will employer." All employees may be terminated with or without cause, except that nothing in this section or the personnel policies shall permit the city or any of its officials or officers to violate an employee's statutory or constitutional employment rights in an at-will employment situation. 
(Code 1985, § 2-4-2) 
Secs. 2-168—2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETIREMENT 

Sec. 2-181. - Plan established. 
There is hereby established the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System, the details of which are in an ordinance which is dated December 27, 1971, as amended. This retirement system is operated under the auspices of the Georgia Municipal Association and the city does hereby adopt such plan as the same exists or as may be amended. 
(Code 1985, § 2-4-11) 
Secs. 2-182—2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TOCCOA-STEPHENS COUNTY PROBATION DEPARTMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— A resolution, adopted May 4, 1993 did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, inclusion of §§ 1—17 as §§ 2-201—2-217 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Municipal court, ch 12. 

Sec. 2-201. - Creation and establishment. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-100, the county board of commissioners as the governing authority of the county, does approve the creation and establishment of a county probation system to provide general supervision and collection services for all moneys to be paid by a defendant according to the terms of the sentence imposed on the defendant as well as any monies which by operation of law are to be paid by the defendant in consequence of the conviction, to provide counseling and to provide other probation services for persons convicted of a misdemeanor in the state court of the county and placed on probation in the county. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-202. - Services to municipal court. 
The probation system established hereby shall likewise provide the same probation services to the municipal court of the city upon approval of this article by the city and upon the concurrence of the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 2) 
Sec. 2-203. - Services to the magistrate's court. 
The probation system established hereby shall likewise, with the concurrence of the chief judge of the magistrate's court of the county, provide the same probation services to the county magistrate court. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 3) 
Sec. 2-204. - Approval by county commissioners and city commissioners. 
This article shall not become effective and the probation system described herein shall not be created until and unless this article is approved both by the county board of commissioners and the city commissioners of the city. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 4) 
Sec. 2-205. - Period of existence of system. 
The probation system established hereby shall be effective July 1, 1993, and shall be initially created for a period of one year. The probation system established hereby shall continue in existence after the initial year on a year-to-year basis and until the occurrence of the earlier of the following events: 
(1)  The adoption of a resolution by the board of commissioners of the county terminating the probation system; or 
(2)  The adoption of a resolution by the city terminating the city's participation in the probation system created by this article. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 5) 
Sec. 2-206. - Cost of probation system. 
The cost of the probation system established hereby shall be paid by the county and the city in accordance with this article. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 6) 
Sec. 2-207. - Definition. 
The probation system created hereby shall be known as "The Toccoa-Stephens County Probation Department" (herein referred to as "the department"). 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 7) 
Sec. 2-208. - Chief probation officer—Employee of county. 
(a)  The department shall initially be staffed by one employee who shall be known as the chief probation officer of the department. The chief probation officer shall be an employee of the county, and except as may be inconsistent with this article, shall be subject to the general personnel policies established for county employees by the county board of commissioners and shall be entitled to the same employee benefits, such as health insurance, as made available to the employees of the county. 
(b)  The county board of commissioners shall furnish a suitable office and utilities, telephone, desk, typewriter and appropriate chairs for the use of the department which office will be located, if at all possible, in the county courthouse annex. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 8) 
Sec. 2-209. - Same—Filling of position. 
The position of chief probation officer shall be filled as follows: 
(1)  The chief judges of the affected courts shall establish a procedure for advertisement and solicitation of applications of persons interested in the position of chief probation officer. From the applications submitted, the chief judges of the affected courts shall establish a procedure for selection of that person deemed best qualified. 
(2)  The chief judges of the affected courts (or a majority thereof) shall select the person deemed best qualified and shall submit the name of the person recommended for appointment as chief probation officer of the department along with a proposed salary and method of computation of salary for approval to the county board of commissioners. The recommendation shall also propose an effective date of employment. 
(3)  Upon approval by the county board of commissioners, the person nominated by the majority of the chief judges of the affected courts, shall be elected to the position of chief probation officer whose term of employment shall initially be for a period of one year or until June 30, 1994, whichever first occurs. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 9) 
Sec. 2-210. - Same—Chief judges as supervisors. 
(a)  The chief judges of the affected courts shall coordinate court schedules so that, if possible, the chief probation officer may be in attendance at all sessions of the court from which the department receives probationers. The chief judges shall cooperate in an effort to avoid conflicting court schedules. In the event of a conflict regarding instruction to the chief probation officer regarding trial attendance at conflicting times, the chief judge of the state court of the county shall issue appropriate directions to the chief probation officer to resolve the conflict. 
(b)  The chief probation officer shall consider each of the judges of the affected courts to be the chief probation officer's supervisor in regard to cases originating from the court of that particular judge. In the event of conflicting instructions from two or more judges, the chief judge of the state court of the county shall resolve the conflicting instructions and the chief probation officer shall act in accordance with instructions of the chief judge of the state court of the county. 
(c)  The chief judges of the affected courts shall develop and approve uniform written forms for use by the chief probation officer as well as guidelines for the handling of probation services to the end that all cases handled by the department shall be uniformly administered and the chief probation officer shall administer all cases, as uniformly as possible, regardless of the court from which the case originated. 
(d)  If the chief judges, or a majority thereof, of the affected courts become dissatisfied with the chief probation officer of the department, the chief judges or a majority thereof, may relieve the chief probation officer from his or her duties in such courts, in which event the majority of such judges shall immediately recommend to the county board of commissioners that such chief probation officer be discharged, giving reasons therefor, whereupon the board of commissioners shall immediately discharge the chief probation officer. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 10) 
Sec. 2-211. - Duties. 
The chief probation officer shall have such duties, responsibilities and authority as a probation officer of the department of corrections under existing Georgia law, except as may be inconsistent with this article or except as may be specifically modified, from time-to-time, in writing by the majority of the chief judges of the affected courts. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 11) 
Sec. 2-212. - Same—Job description. 
The chief judges of the affected courts shall prior to July 1, 1993, establish a job description for the chief probation officer, which job description shall set out in such detail as such judges may deem appropriate, the duties, responsibilities and authority of the chief probation officer. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 12) 
Sec. 2-213. - Probation supervision fee. 
The department shall not have jurisdiction to supervise any defendant from the affected courts, unless, as a part of the sentence of probation, the defendant is ordered to pay a probation supervision fee of not less than $15.00 per month and not more than the maximum amount authorized by law, such amount to be established, from time-to-time, by the majority of the chief judges of the affected courts. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 13) 
Sec. 2-214. - Budget. 
At such time as requested by the board of commissioners of the county, the majority of the chief judges of the affected courts shall submit a proposed budget for the forthcoming fiscal year, which budget shall be subject to approval by the board of commissioners of the county. In submitting the proposed budget, the judges shall realistically assess the projected collection of probation supervision fees for the forthcoming fiscal year and shall not, except in unusual circumstances, submit a proposed budget wherein the projected anticipated collection of probation fees shall be less than the proposed budget. In the event a budget is submitted greater than the projected probation supervision fees collected, the judges shall specify the reasons for the anticipated shortfall. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 14) 
Sec. 2-215. - Chief probation officer—Bonded. 
The chief probation officer shall be bonded in an amount not less than the annual budget of the department. The cost of the surety bond shall be an expense of the department. The bond shall be approved by the chief judge of the state court of the county and thereafter filed with the clerk of the county board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 15) 
Sec. 2-216. - Same—Collection of probation supervision fees. 
The chief probation officer shall collect all probation supervision fees assessed defendants given probated sentences and shall deposit such fees in a separate account daily as received. The chief probation officer shall remit to the county board of commissioners at least monthly a check representing all probation supervision fees collected during the second preceding month. For example, on September 1, the chief probation officer shall remit all fees collected during the month of July. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 16) 
Sec. 2-217. - Same—Accounting of probation supervision fees. 
(a)  The chief probation officer shall maintain an accurate accounting of all probation supervision fees collected. The accounting shall include the total fees collected from defendants sentenced by the municipal court of the city, defendants sentenced by the magistrate court of the county and defendants sentenced by the state court of the county. 
(b)  Within one month following the close of the fiscal year of the county board of commissioners, the chief probation officer shall prepare a summary accounting reflecting thereon the entire cost of the operation of the department, including salary, fringe benefits, office overhead (such as telephone, stationery, long distance telephone calls and support personnel, if any), as well as the employer's share of state and federal tax items (such as social security and unemployment tax) and worker's compensation insurance. The cost of utilities, equipment and supplies provided by the county board of commissioners shall be added as a cost of operation of the department, provided however, that the value of the office space (rental value) shall not be considered as a cost of the department. 
(c)  From the total cost of the operation of the department as determined in accordance with subparagraph (b) hereof, the chief probation officer shall allocate the cost between the city and the county according to the percentage of the fees collected from the respective courts of such governmental entities. The cost allocated to the city shall be in direct proportion to the fees collected from the defendants sentenced by the municipal court of the city. 
(d)  From the total fees collected during the preceding fiscal year from defendants sentenced by the municipal court of the city, the total cost allocated to the city shall be deducted. If the resulting balance is a positive amount, the county board of commissioners shall remit a check to the city for the positive amount of the balance within 30 days after receipt of the accounting by the chief probation officer. If the resulting balance is negative, the county board of commissioners shall submit a bill to the city upon receipt of the accounting of the chief probation officer. The city shall pay to the county board of commissioners the balance of any such bill within 30 days after the receipt thereof. 
(Res. of 5-4-93, § 17) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An Ord. of Dec. 8, 2008, §§ 1—49, has been treated by the editor as superseding former Ch. 3, Arts. I, II, in its entirety. Former Ch. 3 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from the Code of 1985 and following; Ord. No. 86-008, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 86-014, 6-30-86; Ord. No. 86-015, 6-30-86; Ord. No. 88-024, § 2, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 88-025, § 1, 7-15-88; Ord. No. 94-001, 1-31-94; Ord. No. 97-002, § II, 2-10-97; Ord. No. 97-003, § I, 2-10-97; Ord. No. 1-2005, § I, 1-10-05. 
Cross reference— Public drunkenness, § 14-10; alcoholic beverages prohibited in public places, § 14-12; alcohol in public parks, § 15-7. 
State Law reference— Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. 3, sec. 9, par. 6; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Sale in city; license a privilege. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold at retail and for consumption on the premises in the City of Toccoa under a license reviewed by the alcoholic beverage control board (hereinafter "ABCB") granted by the city commission upon the terms and conditions provided in this section. 
(b)  All licenses in this chapter shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this Code and state law. 
(c)  All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any further ordinances which may be enacted." 
(d)  Any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the state before any sales commence. Additionally, city licensees are required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 1) 
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Applicant means the person, partner, firm, or corporation, as owner, or other entity authorized to represent the business making application for the license. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than 9.5 percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. Also included are beverages known as "non-alcoholic" beer," which is made by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or other products, and containing less than three percent, but more than 0.1 percent alcohol by volume. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble religious worship and shall be publicly designated as a church, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor, means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines and any ready to drink beverages which are made from or contain distilled spirits or spirituous liquors. 
Eating establishment or restaurant, means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full service kitchen. A full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments. An eating establishment will be prepared to serve food every hour they are open and will derive as least 30 percent of its annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. A restaurant shall provide at least 50 seats for customers. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Fortified wine includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
License means an authorization granted by the city to operate as a retail consumption dealer or retail package dealer. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation. 
Liter means metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. Manufacturer also means: in the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; in the case of malt beverage, any brewer; in the case of wine, any vintner. 
Minor is defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as enacted or amended. 
Owner means any person, corporation, or partnership or any other entity having a financial interest in the income of the business. Owner shall also include any person, corporation, or partnership operating a business under a management contract. 
Package means a bottle (to include a mini bottle), can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. Retail package alcoholic beverages shall include all alcoholic beverages in their original container, sold at retail to the final consumer, and not for resale. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi public. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased and/or controlled by the licensee and used by him for the purpose of operating under the license; except that in the case of hotels and motels, "premises" shall include only the portion of the property where alcoholic beverages are sold. "Premises" is further defined as one physically identifiable place of business consisting of one room or patio, or two or more contiguous rooms operating under the same trade name where alcoholic beverages are sold. Any premises outlets which cannot be determined as one identifiable place of business shall require additional licenses regardless of such establishment having the same trade name, ownership, or management. 
Private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Georgia, like fraternal or veterans' organizations, having bylaws and being a part of a national organization in existence for at least one year immediately prior to the application for any license hereunder, having at least 75 members, regularly paying dues, organized and operated exclusively for fraternal brotherhood, pleasure, recreation and other non-profitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any stockholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space herein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining space and equipment, and maintaining and using a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of distilled spirits or any beverage licensed hereunder to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail package dealer means any person who sells unbroken packages, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this ordinance. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Wine includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 2) 
Sec. 3-3. - Alcoholic beverages control board (ABCB). 
(a)  There shall be established an ABCB (alcoholic beverages control board) in and for the city. This board shall be composed of citizens of the city appointed by the city commission. The board shall consist of no fewer than five members. These members shall serve three-year terms or until their successors in office are appointed. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the ABCB to review all applications for alcoholic beverage licenses and to make recommendations to the city commission as to whether or not alcoholic beverage licenses shall be issued. It shall also be the responsibility of the ABCB to hear complaints from any person to include law enforcement personnel or code enforcement personnel concerning any violation of this chapter. The board will informally try to resolve or adjudicate any complaints with recommendations to the city commission as to how to treat any complaints regarding violation of this chapter. The ABCB will make recommendations to the city commission regarding whether or not an alcoholic beverages license will be issued and whether or not any alcoholic beverage licensee will continue to hold an alcoholic beverage license. The ABCB shall make no recommendations concerning the guilt or innocence of any person accused of violating an ordinance of the city or of a state law. 
(c)  Complaints regarding violation of this chapter shall be heard by the ABCB at the earliest possible date but no later than fourteen days from the occurrence of the alleged violation or complaint unless the time is extended by written agreement of the license holder and the ABCB. If there is no hearing as set forth within the fourteen-day period or any agreed upon extended period, the city commission shall hear the alleged complaint at the next regular or called meeting of the city commission. 
(d)  The ABCB may act in any capacity designated by the commission that is consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 3) 
Sec. 3-4. - Penalty for violations. 
(a)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by a holder of a license, or his agents or employees, shall be unlawful, and shall be punishable as provided in this Code and shall also subject the holder of such license to suspension or revocation of such license as the Commission deems proper. 
(b)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by a holder of any alcoholic beverages license shall be subject to the following punishment: 
(1)  First violation. Minimum fine of $500.00 and possible license suspension of up to 30 days. 
(2)  Second violation. Minimum fine of $1,000.00 and minimum license suspension of not less than ten days or more than 30 days. 
(3)  Third violation. Minimum fine of $1,000.00, permanent license revocation and minimum waiting period of 90 days for any new owner/applicant at that location. 
"Violations" used in this section refers to cumulative violation during the period of time the license is issued to the licensee. 
(c)  The provisions of this section are in addition to and not in lieu of other provisions of this chapter, specifically including the provisions of section 3-5. 
(d)  In the event the license holder voluntarily ceases to permit the sale of alcoholic beverages at its licensed establishment, such action of the license holder shall not be considered by the city or the alcoholic beverages control board in dealing with any violation of the alcoholic beverage ordinance and in dealing with any penalty, suspension, or a revocation of any licensing to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 4; Ord. of 12-9-13, § I ) 
Sec. 3-5. - Reporting, and acting on violations. 
(a)  The chief of police shall have the authority to close any location holding a license issued hereunder for a period not in excess of 24 hours in the event there shall occur on the premises any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, or other occurrence which is contrary to the public health, welfare, safety or morals, when in the judgment of the chief of police such action is necessary to protect the public health, welfare, safety, or morals. 
(b)  The city commission shall have the right to suspend any alcoholic beverage license pending the hearings provided for in Section 3-3 where in the judgment of the city commission, such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and morals. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 5) 
Sec. 3-6. - Classification of licenses. 
(a)  The following classifications of licenses shall be issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(1)  Malt beverages—Package. 
(2)  Wine—Package. 
(3)  Distilled spirits—Package. 
(4)  Malt beverages—Consumption on the premises. 
(5)  Wine—Consumption on the premises. 
(6)  Distilled spirits—Consumption on the premises. 
(b)  A package license prohibits consumption on the premises. A consumption on the premises license prohibits package sales. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 6) 
Sec. 3-7. - Application for license, disclosure of interest. 
(a)  No license shall be granted under this chapter to any applicant who is not a citizen or resident legal alien of the United States. 
(b)  Corporations shall apply for a license in the name of the corporation, and the license shall be issued to the corporation. Corporate applicants shall attach to the application a certificate showing compliance with the annual registration requirements from the secretary of state, corporate division, and showing the name and address of a registered agent for service within the state. Partnerships shall apply for a license in the name of one of the partners, who is a resident of this state, and the license shall be issued in the name of the applicant. In the case of corporate applicants whose primary business is the operation of an alcoholic beverage package store, the majority stockholder must meet the requirements of individual applicants under this subsection at the time application is made and at all times during which the license is in effect. Where the applicant is a corporation whose primary business is other than the operation of an alcoholic beverage package store, an agent involved in the active management of the business to be licensed, as designated by corporate resolution, shall meet the requirements of individual applicants under this subsection at the time application is made and at all times during which the license is in effect. 
(c)  In addition to meeting all qualifications of a license under state law, all applicants for licenses, whether original or renewal, must attach to their applications evidence of their good character. In addition to meeting state qualification standards, no license, whether original or renewal, shall be issued to any person, partnership, or corporation organized for pecuniary gain if any individual having an interest either as owner, partner or stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, or such person's spouse shall have been convicted of or shall have taken a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, once, within five years immediately prior to filing, or twice, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application, any felony or any violation of any law or administrative regulation regulating the sale, manufacture, or distribution of alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics. Where the application, whether original or renewal, is for a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, conviction of an offense for or the taking of the plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, once, within five years immediately prior to filing, or twice, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application, any sex offense shall also disqualify the applicant for license under this section. No license, whether original or renewal, shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation where an individual having an interest as owner, partner or stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted of or shall have taken a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, once within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application, or twice within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application, the offense of driving a motor vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs. The restrictions of this subsection as to stockholders shall apply only to stockholders of privately owned corporations and to stockholders of publicly owned corporations who hold in excess of ten percent of outstanding stock. 
(d)  On-premises consumption licenses shall be issued only to applicants who meet the definition of a publicly owned golf course, restaurant, or private club. 
(e)  Applicants for renewal licenses must meet all qualifications of applicants for original licenses. Loss of qualifications during the term of a license shall be grounds for revocation or for denial of renewal. 
(f)  Any license issued under the charter must be in the exact name as contained on the State of Georgia license and the manager/licensee must be the same as the manager/licenses on the State of Georgia license. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 7) 
Sec. 3-8. - Application submission; basic information. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall make written application to the city manager on forms furnished by the ABCB. The applicant shall answer all questions on the application, under oath, and shall supply all information and furnish all certificates, affidavits, bonds and other supporting data or documents as required by this chapter. 
(b)  Each application shall state the name and address of each application; the place where the proposed business is to be located; and the type license applied for, whether for malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits; and whether for wholesale, package sale or on-premises consumption. The application shall also contain a beginning balance sheet showing the proposed original capitalization of the business and its source. If an applicant is a corporation whose primary business is the operation of an alcoholic beverage package store, the application shall state the names of all officers and stockholders of the corporation and the percentage ownership of each. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the names of all partners therein, whether general or limited. All applications shall include the names of all persons that have or will have a direct financial interest in the business for which the license is sought. Each application shall also contain such additional information as the ABCB prescribes, shall be verified as true by the applicant before filing and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable deposit of $100.00 to cover the cost of investigating the applicant and processing the application. If granted, the application fee shall apply against the license fee. 
(c)  In reviewing an application under this chapter, the ABCB may utilize the chief of police and other city officials with respect to matters within their areas of expertise. All applicants shall furnish such additional data, information and records as may be requested of them by the ABCB, chief of police or other city officer such as would be useful in determining whether to approve or reject such application. By filing an application, the applicant agrees to produce for oral interrogation any person who is to have a financial interest in the business for which the license is sought or who is to be employed by such business. The failure to provide requested data, information and records or to make those persons specified available for interrogation within a reasonable time shall be grounds for denial of an application. 
Prior to reviewing any application for an alcoholic beverage license, the ABCB shall give notice of the date, location, and time when said application will be reviewed. (This notice requirement does not apply to a license renewal.) 
(d)  Unless the applicant under this chapter will own the premises from which the business will be conducted, the application shall also disclose the name of every person owning a beneficial interest in the premises and shall state the amount of rental to be paid, the manner in which the rental is to be determined, and to whom and at what intervals the rent is to be paid. The applicant shall also attach a copy of the lease or proposed lease with the verified statement of the applicant that such lease contains the entire agreement between the parties. No license shall be issued to an applicant who leases premised under a variable rent system whereby the landlord shares in the profits from selling alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 8) 
Sec. 3-9. - Licensing qualifications and initial licensing. 
(a)  All applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses must be lawful citizens of the United States or legal resident aliens. If the applicant is a foreign corporation (a corporation not organized under the laws of Georgia), the corporation must be authorized to do business in the State of Georgia. 
(b)  If the alcoholic beverage license applicant is not a legal resident of Stephens County, Georgia, the applicant must designate one or more residents of Stephens County as a managing officer or managing agent. In addition the managing officer or managing agent must be a lawful citizen of the United States or a legal resident alien. 
(c)  Every applicant for a city alcoholic beverage license shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(d)  No person shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless it appears to the satisfaction of the city commission that such person, partners in the firm, or officers and directors of the corporation have not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere, and have been released from parole or probation, for any crime involving moral turpitude, tax law violation, illegal gambling, illegal possession, manufacture, or sale of controlled substances, the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexually related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application, whether a misdemeanor or felony. At the time an application is submitted for any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant may be required to submit a sworn affidavit certifying to this information. Not withstanding the foregoing, an applicant's first time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a city ordinance shall not, by itself, make an applicant ineligible for an alcoholic beverage license. Notwithstanding the above, the commission may also deny a license for any other misdemeanor conviction, except traffic violations, if the conviction tends to indicate that the application will not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformance with all applicable laws. 
(e)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, within ten years prior to the filing of application for such license. 
(f)  All applications required by this chapter shall be investigated by the police department or code enforcement officer of the City of Toccoa, which shall report its recommendation to the ABCB by attaching the report to the license application. As a prerequisite to the issuance of such permit or license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which shall search the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for any instances of criminal activity during ten years immediately preceding the date of the application. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The Federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the governing authority submitting the fingerprints. 
(g)  Any application shall have attached thereto a fee in addition to the license fee, in the amount of $100.00 for the investigation of the application and the proposed location and the processing of the application. 
(h)  (1)  All applicants for licenses shall furnish plans and renderings of the proposed premises. Such premises shall be constructed, renovated, or built so as to be equal to or compatible with surrounding neighborhoods, or better and shall comply with any and all state, county and city laws. The exterior shall be of finished building materials. No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete, and detailed plans of the building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. 
(2)  The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval, by the building inspector, when completed. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building, or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building, unless applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. 
(3)  All premises for which an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued for consumption on the premises shall afford adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways, and open areas may be seen by the customers. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any city employee, or his spouse or minor child, directly involved in the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses under this chapter to have any whole, partial, or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(j)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of any jurisdiction within the State of Georgia previously revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(k)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in Stephens County a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the commission. 
(l)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license. 
(m)  A license application may be denied where there is evidence that an individual who fails to qualify is using his or her spouse or any other person as a guise or dummy to obtain a license. 
(n)  No person may hold or have beneficial interest in more than two licenses for the package sale of distilled spirits. 
(o)  The ABCB and city commission, in its discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application, or the proposed location of the business, and if in its judgment, circumstances are such that granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to effect on property, whether there is difficulty in police supervision, whether adequate parking exists, the number of existing licenses, etc. 
(p)  For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty of nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which a defendant who was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act, as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime, and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant previously had been sentenced as a first offender. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 9; Ord. of 12-15-14, § I ) 
Sec. 3-10. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale. 
Separate applications must be made, and separate licenses must be issued for each sales location. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 10) 
Sec. 3-11. - Withdrawal of application. 
Any license application made pursuant to this chapter may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the application is withdrawn before the license is issued, any sums deposited as license fees will be refunded. After issuance of the license, no refunds will be made. No refunds shall be made under any circumstances for incurred investigative and administrative expenses required in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 11) 
Sec. 3-12. - Period of coverage. 
All new licenses issued prior to July 1 of any calendar year shall be effective for the entire calendar year. If a new license is issued after July 1, it shall be effective for the remainder of the calendar year in which issued, and shall be subject to a one-half fee proration. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 12) 
Sec. 3-13. - License fees. 
(a)  The applicant for a malt beverages-package license, a wine-package license, wine-consumption license, a malt-beverage consumption license, distilled spirits-package license, or an distilled spirits-consumption license shall pay to the clerk of the city, at the time his application is submitted, the currently required sum as authorized by the city commission as an annual license fee for operation for one year at one location or business where the products will be sold. The license fees shall be in addition to any excise tax lawfully imposed and in addition to the fee imposed for investigation of the application. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, posts, charters, and clubs of nationally chartered veterans and fraternal organizations shall be eligible to apply for alcoholic beverage licenses for consumption on the premises. The annual license fees for these organizations shall be as follows: 
(1)  On the premises consumption of malt beverages ..... $200.00 
(2)  On the premises consumption of wine ..... 100.00 
(3)  On the premises consumption of distilled spirits ..... 300.00 
Provided however, the posts, chapter, and clubs of nationally chartered veterans and fraternal organizations must submit with the annual request for on the premises consumption licenses a summary of its annual charitable contributions and activities for the previous year. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 13) 
Sec. 3-14. - Performance bond. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, all persons obtaining a distilled spirits-package license or a license for the consumption of distilled spirits on the premises shall post a performance bond in an amount set by the commission to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 14) 
Sec. 3-15. - Transfer. 
(a)  No city license issued under this chapter may be transferred from one licensee to another or from one location to another without first requesting in writing to the ABCB followed by consideration of the city commission. Approvals as to any change shall be at the discretion of the city commission. 
(b)  Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at some other location must make a new application for such new location. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 15) 
Sec. 3-16. - Termination of business. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only so long as the licensee is actively engaged in such business, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration, and in the event the licensee shall cease to be actively engaged in such business, for a period of three months or in the event of the sale of the business, the license shall be invalid and the licensee of such business shall immediately notify the city commission and return the license. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 16) 
Sec. 3-17. - Expiration; non-renewability of license. 
All licenses granted under this chapter shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and shall expire on December 31 of each year at 12:00 midnight. All renewals must be approved by the city commission. Licensees seeking renewal shall be required to file a renewal application, with the license requisite fee(s) with the city on the form provided for a renewal license for the ensuing year. Such application must be filed on or before November 15 of each year. Any applications received after November 30 shall pay in addition to the annual fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If an application for renewal of a license application is received after January 1, it shall be treated as a new application subject to all the provisions of this ordinance. Investigative and administrative costs will be assessed as may be prescribed from time to time by the commission. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 17) 
Sec. 3-18. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the commission where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license and for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license shall thereupon be revoked. The chief of police, upon notice of this revocation from the commission, shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease. 
(c)  The city shall revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period. 
(d)  The city shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(e)  The city may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications or any term, condition, or provision set forth in this chapter at any time such knowledge becomes known. 
(f)  A license may be suspended or revoked whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city. 
(g)  Unless otherwise provided herein, a license may be suspended or revoked for the violation by the license holder or his employee of any state or federal law or regulation, or a license may be suspended or revoked for violation of any ordinance of the city or state law, other than traffic violations. For the purpose of suspension or revocation of a license, the determination of whether any such violation has occurred shall be made by the commission, and an actual conviction in a court for such offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. For misdemeanor violations, the commission may consider whether the conviction tends to indicate that the licensee will not continue to maintain the operation for which he is licensed in conformance with all applicable laws. 
(h)  A license may be suspended or revoked for the failure of the license holder or his employee to promptly report to the police department any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance, or altercation resulting in violence occurring on the premises. 
(i)  A license may be suspended or revoked for any conduct on the part of the license holder or his employee contrary to the public welfare, safety, health, or morals. 
(j)  A license may be suspended or revoked for operating or conducting the business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health, or morals, or in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(k)  A license may be suspended or revoked for the violation of any state law or regulation or municipal ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages. 
(l)  Wherever this chapter permits the commission to suspend any license issued under this chapter but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised within the guidelines of this subsection. 
(1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such license. 
(2)  The following factors shall be considered on any revocation or suspension as set out above: 
a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this chapter and those set by the city. 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing. 
c.  Impact of the offense on the community. 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by licensee. 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the licensee to take remedial or corrective steps. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 18) 
Sec. 3-19. - Hearings. 
(a)  Except as might otherwise be authorized by this ordinance, no license shall be denied, suspended, or revoked without the opportunity for hearings as provided in this chapter to include a hearing before the ABCB followed by a hearing before the Toccoa city commission. 
(b)  In addition to the hearing before the ABCB, the commission shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of the proposed denial suspension. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to a hearing under the provisions of this chapter. The hearing shall be not less than ten days nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the notice. 
At the hearing before the ABCB, the city commission, the applicant, or licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause why such application should not be denied or why such license should not be revoked or suspended, after which the ABCB and the city commission shall take such action as provided in this ordinance that it in its judgment shall be deemed warranted by the facts. The parties may be represented by an attorney and may present evidence and cross examine witnesses. 
(c)  The findings of the commission shall not be set aside unless found to be (1) contrary to law or ordinances, or (2) unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole, or (3) unreasonable. 
(d)  The findings of the city commission shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 19) 
Sec. 3-20. - Notice. 
For the purpose of this chapter, notice shall be deemed received if delivered personally, or served by certified mail within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 20) 
Sec. 3-21. - Distance requirements. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or offered for sale in violation of O.C.G.A, § 3-3-21, as amended, which section is adopted and incorporated herein by reference. Provided pursuant to O.C.G.A. §3-3-21 (b)(3), there shall be no distance requirement for restaurants, public golf courses, and private clubs which have duly approved consumption on the premises licenses. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 21; Ord. of 9-28-15(2) ) 
Sec. 3-22. - Signs; display of license. 
(a)  Retail package licensees shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the edge of the shelf immediately below or above where the containers are placed, the price of an alcoholic beverage exposed or offered for sale. No other sign may be exposed within or without the retail establishment showing prices or indicating that alcoholic beverages are for sale on the premises. 
(b)  All licensees shall post in a conspicuous place a sign which clearly reads: "WARNING: Drinking alcoholic beverages during pregnancy can cause birth defects." 
(c)  Each licensee shall also post in a conspicuous place a sign with letters at least two inches in size stating: "The sale of alcoholic beverages to persons under the age of 21 years is strictly prohibited". Each licensee shall post the provisions of the laws of this state which deal with the unlawful sale of such items to underage persons and the penalties for violating such laws as is required by state law. 
(d)  Each licensee shall also post in a conspicuous place a sign of no less than 8½ × 11 inches in size stating: "The City Commission of the City of Toccoa requires proof (identification) of age for all alcohol purchases regardless of age." 
(e)  Any license obtained under this chapter shall be displayed on the licensed premises in public view. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 22) 
Sec. 3-23. - Audits of licensees. 
(a)  If the city deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, the licensee shall be notified of the date, time and place of the audit. The city may designate the city's internal auditor or other designated person to perform any audit authorized in this ordinance. The licensee shall cooperate with the audit or an license(s) issued under this chapter will be subject to suspension or revocation. 
(b)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements; 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees); 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets; 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports; and 
(5)  Federal income tax return with all Form 1099s. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 23) 
Sec. 3-24. - Storage. 
All alcoholic beverages shall be stored only on the premises for which the license is issued. No licensee shall be permitted to enter into any type of arrangement whereby alcoholic beverages ordered by a licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 24) 
Sec. 3-25. - Addition to contents of alcoholic beverages or misrepresentation prohibited. 
No one shall add to or permit the adding to any alcoholic beverage or refill any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's container in any manner or to misrepresent the quantity, quality, or brand name of any beverage licensed hereunder. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 25) 
Sec. 3-26. - Licensees to maintain a copy of this chapter; employees to be familiar with terms; licensee responsible for violations. 
Each alcoholic beverage dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep a copy of this chapter in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms of this chapter, and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 26) 
Sec. 3-27. - Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his/her employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets or convenience stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(c)  Any person under the age of 18 years of age may not work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed under this chapter without written consent from parents or guardian. 
(d)  No licensee shall employ on any premises for the retail package sale of malt beverage, wine, or distilled spirits, or premises for the retail sale of malt beverages or wine at restaurants for consumption on the premises any person in any capacity whatsoever who has been convicted in this or any other city or state of any felony within five years immediately prior to the application for employment or during the period of employment. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 27) 
Sec. 3-28. - Failure to require and properly check identification. 
It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure that an underage person is not sold, served, or does not have in his possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. Identification in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 28) 
Sec. 3-29. - Prohibited activities. 
No holder or employee of the holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wines, beer or malt beverages, or any other alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years. 
(2)  The prohibition in subsection (1) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of distilled spirits to a person when such person has furnished proper identification showing that the person to whom the distilled spirits are being sold is 21 years of age or older. For the purposes of this subsection, proper identification means any document issued by a government agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, including but not limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under an act to require the department of public safety to issue identification cards to persons who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(3)  Sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is noticeably intoxicated. 
(4)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises, or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(5)  Every licensee or any employee of any licensee has a duty and responsibility to request identification in each and every instance of sale of alcoholic beverage in order to verify the age of such person and the failure to make such request and verification in any case may be considered by the ABCB and the city commission in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly. 
(6)  No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall allow any minors to be in, frequent, or loiter about the licensed premises of the establishment unless such minors are accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian; provided, however, that such minors shall be permitted in eating establishments, or private clubs as defined in this chapter without being accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian and provided further that this section shall not apply to minors who are employees under the terms of this chapter. 
(7)  No holder of a license issued under this chapter, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
a.  Sell individual cans or bottles of malt beverages in containers of less than 20 ounces, unless the licensee has a license for consumption of malt beverages on the premises. Individual cans or bottles of malt beverages containing less than 20 ounces shall only be sold as packaged by the manufacturer. 
b.  Permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practice on the licensed premises. Such misconduct shall be immediately reported to the city police department. 
c.  Sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages by use of vending machines. 
d.  Receive or cause to be delivered at the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages by any means other than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the city to make such deliveries. Transportation of alcoholic beverages by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of all licenses concerned. 
e.  Permit the sale of alcoholic beverages through a drive-in window or permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to a purchaser who has not actually entered the premises. The intent of this provision is to prohibit drive-through sales of all alcoholic beverages. 
f.  Curb service sales of alcoholic beverages is prohibited. 
(8)  No licensee under this chapter may make deliveries of any alcoholic beverage by the package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by this license. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 29) 
Sec. 3-30. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a consumption on the premises licensee in a patio/open area type environment. 
(b)  The patio/open area must be enclosed by structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises, and through an approved fire-exit, not for public use unless an emergency exists. An alarm should sound in case of unauthorized use. 
(c)  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of three feet above ground level. The structure does not have to be solid nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. The structure must be permitted and approved by the city's building inspection department and the city's fire department as required by governing regulations or codes. 
(d)  If a licensee desires a patio/open sales area inside an existing structure, plans will be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by the commission. Interior type patio/open sales areas must also meet the requirements of the city's building and fire codes. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 30) 
Sec. 3-31. - No consumption outside premises. 
(a)  Customers may not leave the premises of a licensed facility or licensed premise with open alcoholic beverages, and the licensee has responsibility to ensure that no open beverages are sold and carried out. 
(b)  Customers are prohibited from gathering outside an alcoholic beverage establishment to consume alcoholic beverages, and the manager or employees of the establishment shall not allow such gathering and outside consumption. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 31) 
Sec. 3-32. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the police department. 
Sworn officers of the City of Toccoa Police Department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverages ordinances of the city during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall he made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 32) 
Sec. 3-33. - Establishment can be closed in cases of emergency. 
The chief of police, or his designee, may immediately suspend the sales of all alcoholic beverages licensed under this chapter in case of emergency, for the safety of the public or to investigate a crime, for a reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 33) 
Sec. 3-34. - Bring your own bottle (brown bagging) prohibited. 
No person may bring his own alcoholic beverage (brown bag) in any establishment either licensed or unlicensed to serve alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 34) 
Sec. 3-35. - Types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to regulate activities on premises licensed for the sale of alcohol, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments. This article is not a defacto prohibition of legal expression but requests a balancing of the rights of the community and the adult entertainment establishments. This article does not allow any business or activity that is otherwise unlawful. 
(b)  Pursuant to The Constitution of the State of Georgia, Article 3, Section 6, Paragraph VII: 
(1)  No person shall perform on a premise licensed hereunder acts of or acts which constitute or simulate: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing, or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or the displaying of any portion of any person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals. 
(2)  No person shall use on licensed premises artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform, simulate, or depict any of the prohibited conduct or activities described in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to show, display, or exhibit, on licensed premises, any film, still picture, electronic reproduction, or any other visual reproduction or image of any act or conduct described in subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section. 
(4)  No erotic entertainment/dance establishment business shall serve, sell, distribute or offer for consumption or possession any alcoholic beverages or controlled substances on the premises. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 35) 
Sec. 3-36. - Hours, days of operation. 
(a)  Except as provided in Article V of this chapter, Sunday Sales/Consumption on Premises, the hours of sale of alcoholic beverages are as follows: 
(1)  Retail sales not for consumption on premises: 7:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. Monday through Saturday, except where contrary to state regulations for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Consumption on the premises: 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight Monday through Thursday; 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. Fridays, and from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Saturdays. 
(3)  Businesses, including restaurants and private clubs, issued an alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises shall close and have all patrons out of the premises within 30 minutes after the times specified in this paragraph. 
(4)  Retail sales not for consumption on the premises: 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail on Christmas Day. 
(c)  The sale of alcoholic beverages at any other time other than described herein is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 36; Ord. of 12-14-15 ; Ord. of 6-11-18 , §§ I—III) 
Cross reference— Sunday sales/consumption on Premises, § 3-151 et seq. 
Sec. 3-37. - Happy hour prohibited. 
(a)  No holder of any license for consumption on the premises shall engage in any one of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages. 
(1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages during any special period of the day at prices lower than customarily charged at the premises for alcoholic beverages during the remainder of the day. 
(2)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all alcoholic beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price. 
(4)  The sale or serving of two or more alcoholic beverages at substantially the same price customarily charged for one. 
(5)  Requiring or encouraging the purchase of a second alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed. 
(6)  The sponsoring, conducting or allowing of contests or other promotions on the premises which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(7)  Allowing alcoholic beverages purchased on the premises to be removed from the premises without having been consumed. 
(8)  Selling alcoholic beverages in pitchers or in jumbo or extra-large containers for less than the normal retail price charged for an equivalent volume of alcoholic beverages in a normal size glass or pitcher. 
(9)  This section shall not apply to private functions not open to the public. "Private function not open to the public" shall mean any function wherein the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person, firm or organization for a set period of time for valuable consideration. 
(b)  The intent of this section is to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour." 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 37) 
Sec. 3-38. - Type of retail establishment where permitted. 
(a)  No beer or malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits shall be sold for consumption on the premises where sold except: 
(1)  At a restaurant as defined in this chapter; or 
(2)  At a publicly owned golf course; or 
(3)  At a private club as defined herein. 
(b)  All consumption on the premises license holders in the city including the consumption on the premises of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits shall maintain at least 30 percent of their annual gross income from the sale of foods. Authorized officials of the city may examine the records of businesses licensed hereunder at any reasonable time to ascertain that the requirements of this and other provisions of this chapter are met; or 
(c)  Within 120 days after having been issued a consumption on the premises license, the licensee shall submit to the city a statement from a certified public accountant or a registered public accountant that the income requirements set forth in the above provision have been met for the first 90 days after the applicant received his license for on the premises consumption. Thereafter, at the time of the license renewal, each consumption on the premises license holder shall submit, to the city an annual statement from a certified public accountant or a registered public accountant that the income requirements set forth in the above provision have been met. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 38) 
Sec. 3-39. - Products offered for sale restricted. 
(a)  No retail dealer who has a license for the package sale of distilled spirits shall sell or offer for sale or display or keep in stock at his place of business where distilled spirits are offered for sale: Products or commodities not authorized by the regulations of the Department of Revenue of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  No retail dealer who has a license for the package sale of distilled spirits, packaged malt beverages, or packaged wine shall permit on the licensed premises any paid video or electronic games of chance played for prizes or any type of electronic gaming which would be defined as gambling by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 39) 
Secs. 3-40—3-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 3-61. - Rate of taxation—Malt beverages. 
In addition to the annual license fees imposed and required by section 3-13, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city an excise tax on malt beverages so sold, as follows: 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, such excise tax shall be computed at the rate of $0.4366 per ounce. 
(2)  All malt beverages, sold in or from a barrel or bulk container and being commonly known as tap or draft beer, shall not be subject to the excise tax provided for in subsection (1) of this section, but there is hereby imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling such malt beverages within the city an excise tax of $6.00, for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of 15½ gallons sold by such wholesale dealer within the city and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 40) 
Sec. 3-62. - Wine. 
In addition to the annual license fees imposed and required by Section 13, an excise tax is hereby levied computed at the rate of $0.22 per wine liter, which shall be paid to the city on all wine sold, displayed or stored in the city. Such tax shall be prorated on miniatures, half pints, fifths, half gallons and other quantities and on wine gallons so that each bottle shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per wine liter. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 41) 
Sec. 3-63. - Distilled spirits by the drink. 
An excise tax hereby is levied upon the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the amount of three percent of the charge for the beverage to the public. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 42) 
Sec. 3-64. - Package sale of distilled spirits. 
An excise tax hereby is levied on all package sales of distilled spirits in the amount of $0.22 per liter. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 43) 
Sec. 3-65. - Method of payment. 
The tax levied by this article shall be paid to the city by each wholesale dealer on all beverages coming under this article sold within the city by each wholesale dealer selling, shipping or in any way delivering malt beverages or wine to a retailer in the city, who shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery, and shall remit the same together with a summary of all such deliveries on or before the 10th day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 44) 
Sec. 3-66. - Payment of tax; report. 
The summary report made by each wholesale dealer in the city shall show the exact quantities of taxed beverages, by size and type of container and the amount of excise tax collected. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 45) 
Sec. 3-67. - Right of audit. 
The city shall have the right to audit, and to require production of records from each wholesaler supplying retailers in the city and each retailer so supplied. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 46) 
Sec. 3-68. - Failure to make timely report; penalty. 
(a)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of five percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 25 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(b)  Such failure to make a timely report or remittance, or the filing of a false or fraudulent report shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of the business license issued by the city to the wholesale dealer. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 47) 
Sec. 3-69. - Sale prohibited when tax not paid. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the city any beverage taxed by this article on which the required tax has not been paid. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 48) 
Sec. 3-70. - Catering. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary the city does hereby adopt by reference the state statute pertaining to sale off premises for catered functions. In this regard, the City of Toccoa adopts current O.C.G.A. §§ 3-11-1 through 3-11-5 as amended or as may be amended. The fee for an off-premises catering license shall be $50.00 or such other fee currently authorized by the city commission as a license fee for one catered event. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 49) 
Secs. 3-71—3-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WINE TASTING 

Sec. 3-91. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Farm winery means a winery which makes at least 40 percent of its annual production from agricultural produce grown in the state where the winery is located and: 
a.  Is located on premises, a substantial portion of which is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of grapes, berries, or fruits to be utilized in the manufacture or production of wine by the winery; or 
b.  Is owned and operated by persons who are engaged in the production of a substantial portion of the agricultural produce used in its annual production. (To be determined by the Georgia Revenue Commissioner.) 
(2)  Georgia farm winery means a farm winery which is licensed by the Georgia Revenue Commissioner to manufacture wine in Georgia. 
(3)  Tasting room means an outlet for the promoti on of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such, wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine can be given free of charge or for a fee. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 1; Ord. of 10-31-14, § I ) 
Sec. 3-92. - License required. 
(a)  There is hereby created a license for the business of operating a Georgia Farm Winery Tasting Room at other locations in conformance with the laws of the State of Georgia and the City of Toccoa, Georgia. It shall be unlawful to operate a farm winery tasting room within the city for any domestic wine manufactured in a farm winery or otherwise without having the appropriate license for such farm winery tasting room, or to carry-on such activities in violation of any term of such license or this article. 
(b)  Under this article, the licensee shall be authorized to carry on the business of operating a farm winery tasting room which includes retail sales of wine produced at the farm winery by the package, and providing samples of wine for tasting, within the licensed tasting room premises or other locations authorized by law, so long as the location of the tasting room is in compliance with any zoning or land use requirements as on the date of the issuance of the license. 
(c)  Any license under this article must meet all of the requirements of any alcoholic beverage license of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 2) 
Sec. 3-93. - State licensing. 
The farm winery tasting room allowed by this article is limited to farm wineries licensed, by the State of Georgia which allows the licensee to deal in its farm winery products pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 3; Ord. of 10-31-14, § II ) 
Sec. 3-94. - Automatic revocation of license. 
When any state license issued by the State of Georgia is revoked by the state revenue commissioner, the permission given by the city herein shall automatically become invalid. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 4) 
Sec. 3-95. - Incorporation by reference. 
Except where there is a specific conflict in this article to the contrary the qualification for licensing and license application contents and terms of the alcoholic beverage ordinances (Chapter 3) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa is incorporated herein by reference. Any conflict will be governed by this article. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 5) 
Sec. 3-96. - Annual fee. 
A license shall be issued for each location of a farm winery tasting room or other locations as authorized, and an annual fee shall be paid to the City of Toccoa in the amount of $50.00 for each license. This fee shall be paid to the Toccoa City Clerk, and shall expire at midnight on December 31st of the year in which issued. For the renewal of a license the applicant shall be required to follow the same rules and regulations as defined by the City of Toccoa alcoholic beverage ordinance(s). All new licenses issued prior to July 1st of any calendar year shall be effective for the entire calendar year. If a new license is issued after July 1st it shall be effective for the remainder of the calendar year in which issued and shall be subject to a one-half annual fee proration. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 6) 
Sec. 3-97. - Initial license application. 
The initial application for a farm tasting room license shall be as follows: 
(1)  The application shall be made in writing on a form provided by the Toccoa City Clerk. The applicant shall provide all information required on the form. 
(2)  The application shall be filed with the Toccoa City Clerk with the fee per the fee schedule for processing of the application. 
(3)  There shall be attached to the application a copy of the farm winery tasting room license from the state or other licensing entity, if applicable. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 7) 
Sec. 3-98. - Food sales. 
Any provisions concerning the requirement that a specified percentage of gross sales be derived from the sale of food with alcoholic beverages shall not apply to farm winery tasting rooms or other authorized locations. A farm winery tasting room may engage in incidental food sales subject to applicable food service laws. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 8) 
Sec. 3-99. - Hours of operation. 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, duly licensed farm wineries are authorized to have wine tastings, and to sell their wines at retail in tasting rooms or other licensed farm winery facilities for consumption on the premises, and enclosed package sales for consumption off the premises, Monday through Saturday, beginning at 10:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m., and on Sundays, from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight, as authorized by the law of Georgia, and as regulated by the Georgia Revenue Commissioner. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 9; Ord.of 10-31-14, § III ) 
Sec. 3-100. - Limitation on samples. 
No complimentary samples may be provided to any patron or guest, if in the discretion of tasting room management or employees or law enforcement, the patron or guest appears intoxicated. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 10) 
Sec. 3-101. - Transferability or change in location. 
Any licensee, whether individual or corporate, who attempts to transfer ownership in whole or in part shall have their license revoked. The license is valid only for the premises described in the application, and change in premises shall cause the license to be revoked. The license or potential new licensee shall attempt to obtain a new license through the application procedure in the event of a revocation under this section. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 11) 
Sec. 3-102. - Excise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the first sale or use of wine by the package and wine sold for consumption on the premises an excise tax in the sum of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The wine excise tax shall be paid by each licensed farm winery tasting room licensee in wine in the city. 
(c)  Due date, required report. The wine excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of wine sold for the preceding calendar month by size of container. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from the due date shall be delinquent. 
(d)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforceable by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the power to: 
(1)  Examine, or authorize the examination of, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any person subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any report made, or if no report is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)  Require the filing of reports by any person having possession or custody of information relating to the tax herein levied; and 
(3)  Allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(e)  Deficiency. 
(1)  Determination of deficiency. If the city has cause to believe that the report of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
(2)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 0.75 percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(3)  Notice of determination and service. The city shall give to the person written notice of the determination. The notice may be serviced personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the person at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when mailed with a certificate of service stamped thereon and a copy retained in city files or when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the month following the calendar month for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 12) 
Sec. 3-103. - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 13) 
Sec. 3-104. - Penalty. 
The penalty for violation of this article shall be $500.00 for the first offense, $1,000.00 for the second and subsequent offenses and termination of license after the third offense. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13, § 14) 
Secs. 3-105—3-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MANUFACTURE OF DISTILLED SPIRITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Sept. 28, 2015(1), § I, amended the Code by adding provisions numbered as Article III, §§ 3-81—3-89. In order to avoid conflicts in article numbering the editor has redesignated the provisions added by said ordinance as Art. IV, §§ 3-121—3-129. 

Sec. 3-121. - Permitted with proper license. 
As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-24.1, the manufacture of distilled spirits shall be permitted, if properly licensed, in the City of Toccoa. 
( Ord. of 9-28-15(1), § I ) 
Sec. 3-122. - Definition of manufacturer. 
Manufacturer shall mean any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also includes, in the case of a manufacturer of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying or blending any distilled spirits. 
( Ord. of 9-28-15(1), § I ) 
Sec. 3-123. - License; fee. 
The applicant for a manufacturer's license shall pay to the city at the time the application is submitted $3,000.00 as an annual license fee for one calendar year at one location where the products will be manufactured. 
( Ord. of 9-28-15(1), § I ) 
Sec. 3-124. - Applicable state and federal licenses and permits required before city license granted; provisional license. 
Prior to issuing a final license to manufacture distilled spirits the applicant must have all applicable State of Georgia and federal licenses and permits. A provisional license may be issued pending the licensee obtaining federal and state licensing and permitting, 
( Ord. of 9-28-15(1), § I ) 
Sec. 3-125. - Sale at retail prohibited. 
A manufacturer of distilled spirits licensed pursuant to this article shall not sell at retail any alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. of 9-28-15(1), § I ) 
Sec. 3-126. - Promotional activities. 
Any promotional efforts, to include promotional samples, tastings and other promotional efforts shall be governed by the regulations promulgated by the Department of Revenue and/or the Department of Agriculture of the State of Georgia. 
( Ord. of 9-28-15(1), § I ) 
Sec. 3-127. - Compliance with city alcoholic beverage regulations required. 
The applicant for a license to manufacture distilled spirits must comply with all requirements of the Toccoa ordinances regulating alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. of 9-28-15(1), § I ) 
Sec. 3-128. - Compliance with state and federal regulations required. 
A manufacturing licensee must comply with all, state and federal regulations, and the failure to comply with any state or federal regulation shall be considered a violation of this article and a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa, which license and regulate alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. of 9-28-15(1), § I ) 
Sec. 3-129. - Compliance with the Code of Ordinances. 
Except as provided in this article the licensee for manufacturing distilled spirits shall be subject to all provisions of the Code of Ordinances regulating and licensing alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. of 9-28-15(1), § I ) 
Secs. 3-130—3-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUNDAY SALES/CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 12-14-2015 , § I, amended the Code by adding provisions numbered as Art. III, §§ 3-80—3-84. In order to avoid conflicts in article numbering, the editor has redesignated these added provisions as Art. V, §§ 3-151—3-155, as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Hours, days of operation, § 3-36. 

Sec. 3-151. - License for Sunday sales for on premises consumption. 
A license may be issued by the City of Toccoa to allow the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 11:00 p.m. in any licensed establishment which: 
(1)  Derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served; or 
(2)  In any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
( Ord. of 12-14-15, § I ) 
Sec. 3-152. - Compliance with other requirements. 
Any licensee seeking a license under this article shall fully and completely comply with all other requirements of licensees for a consumption on the premises license as are applicable in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa. 
( Ord. of 12-14-15, § I ) 
Sec. 3-153. - Annual verification of eligibility for license. 
(a)  Any person obtaining a license under this section shall be required to submit to the city on an annual basis verification by, certified public accountant or a registered public accountant of compliance with section 3-151 above. 
(b)  The certification from a registered public accountant, or certified public accountant must be made within six months of the initial granting of the license provided herein and shall thereafter be required annually when each license granted herein is renewed. 
( Ord. of 12-14-15, § I ) 
Sec. 3-154. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
Any provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa inconsistent with the provisions of this article are null and of no effect solely as it would pertain to a license sought under this article. Nothing in this article has any intent to amend or repeal any portion of the City of Toccoa's alcoholic beverage ordinance, except to the extent as is applicable under this particular article. 
( Ord. of 12-14-15, § I ) 
Sec. 3-155. - Annual license fee. 
The annual license fee shall be $500.00 or such other license fee as may be established by the city commission. This fee is payable in advance with the application for the issuance of a Sunday sales license or any renewal of such license. For any applicant seeking a Sunday sales license after June 30th the license fee for that part of the year shall be $250.00. 
( Ord. of 12-14-15, § I ) 
Secs. 3-156—3-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COMPLIMENTARY ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 3-171. - Terms and conditions for service. 
(a)  Businesses that hold a valid business license in the City of Toccoa shall be authorized to provide complimentary beer and wine on an occasional basis pursuant to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The business owner must file a registration with the City of Toccoa confirming the following: 
a.  The business is duly registered to do business in the City of Toccoa. 
b.  All current city taxes are paid. 
c.  The business wishes to provide complimentary beer and wine Monday through Saturday during regular business hours. 
d.  The business may provide complimentary beer and wine only. The business will not be allowed to provide complimentary distilled spirits. 
e.  If the business is a lessee the business/lessee must provide evidence that the lessor consents to the licensing. 
f.  The business may only provide 12 ounces of beer or one six-ounce glass of wine per customer per day. 
g.  The business owner must certify that the business owner and all employees of the business have read an reviewed the alcoholic beverages ordinance of the city. 
h.  Complimentary drinks will only be provided to those customers receiving service from the business. 
i.  The business owner and all those persons who have provided complimentary beer and wine must file a registration with the city. 
j.  The business must require and properly check identification to ensure that an underage person is not served. 
(b)  The cost of a license to provide complimentary beer and wine is $250.00 per calendar year which must be paid in advance. There will be no proration of the license fee for any portion of a calendar year. 
( Ord. of 12-11-2017, §§ I, II ) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, adopted Oct. 22, 2007, restated and amended Ch. 4 in its entirety. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide for animal control, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, para. 3(a)(3); animals generally, O.C.G.A. title 4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - City designated as a bird sanctuary; prohibited acts enumerated. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, shoot, trap, snare, poison or otherwise maim or injure any bird within the city, or to attempt to do any of these things or otherwise do any act which would destroy or diminish bird life in the city, including the destruction of nests, feeding places, housing facilities or other places of habitation for birds. 
(Code 1985, § 4-4-1; Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-2. - Livestock restricted in city. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any hogs, cattle, sheep, goats, horses, mules, poultry or any other such animals for commercial purposes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any hogs, cattle, sheep, goats, horses, mules, poultry or any other such animal in a shed, pen, stall, or other such enclosure within 400 feet of any residence or within 500 feet of any public street in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 4-4-2; Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-3. - Impoundment; notice; redemption prohibited in certain instances. 
(a)  The following animals shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the city, its agents and employees: 
(1)  All dogs upon which a valid unexpired tag indicating inoculation against rabies is not appropriately attached as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(2)  Any animal which, in the opinion of the animal control officer, creates a public nuisance by offensive noise, offensive odors, destruction of property or landscape, vicious or intimidating behavior, and excrement that remains uncollected by the dog's owner on property other than that belonging to the owner of such dog. 
(3)  All female dogs found roaming at large in violation of section 4-34. 
(4)  All animals determined to be a public nuisance under this chapter. 
(5)  Any dog whose ownership is unknown. 
(6)  Any dog running at large. 
(7)  Any animal determined to be improperly cared for, abandoned, abused, or neglected as described in sections 4-66 through 4-67. 
(b)  Notice of the impoundment shall be given immediately by mail or telephone call to the owner of the impounded dog, if such owner may be ascertained. 
(c)  The notice of impoundment shall contain a general description of the animal impounded, including color, sex and breed, if discernable. 
(d)  Any dog or other animal impounded for being a public nuisance may be temporarily redeemed subject to a permanent ruling from the court having jurisdiction. Animal control should be prepared to show the court why the animal should remain in custody. 
(e)  When, in the judgment of the city or its agents, an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be redeemed. 
(Code 1985, § 4-4-14; Ord. No. 91-008, 3-25-91; Ord. No. 94-021, § I, 9-12-94; Ord. of 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07; Ord. of 9-26-16, § I ) 
Sec. 4-4. - Disposal; redemption; costs and expenses. 
(a)  If, following impoundment, a dog or other animal is not claimed or redeemed by its owner after three full days of impoundment, animal control may dispose of such animal by any of the following methods: 
(1)  The animal may be placed in an adoptive home. 
(2)  The animal may be sold. 
(3)  The animal may be destroyed by such humane method as animal control may deem appropriate. 
(b)  The owner of any impounded dog or other animal may claim the dog or other animal and it may be redeemed by its owner upon payment to the city the cost and expense of impounding and keeping the dog or other animal, such costs and expenses to be determined from time to time by animal control with the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 4-4-16; Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07; Ord. of 9-13-10) 
Secs. 4-5—4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner of the animal shall mean a person who owns, harbors or keeps or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept or has an animal in their care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about their premises. 
Premises shall mean a parcel of land and the structures thereon. 
Registered dog shall mean an animal licensed by the city as provided in this article. 
Running at large shall mean any dog that is not: 
(1)  Under the control of its owner or other responsible person by means of a leash, cord, rope, strap, chain or lead held by such owner of person and securely fastened to the collar or harness attached to the animal; or 
(2)  Securely enclosed, confined or restrained on premises where it lawfully may be so as to be unable to enter upon the public way or to molest persons lawfully using the public way; or 
(3)  Accompanied by a responsible person and obedient to that person's voice commands. 
Vaccination shall mean protection against rabies by inoculation with anti-rabies vaccine, given in an amount sufficient to provide immunity from rabies for a minimum of one year. 
(Code 1985, § 4-4-11; Ord. No. 94-021, § II, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-32. - Rabies inoculation. 
All dogs and cats over 90 days old within the city shall be inoculated annually so as to provide immunity from rabies for a period of at least one year. All inoculations shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian or an authorized representative of the city or county. 
(Code 1985, § 4-4-12; Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07; Ord. of 9-26-16, § I; Ord. of 9-26-16, § I ) 
Sec. 4-33. - Rabies tags required. 
A valid rabies vaccination tag shall be securely attached to the dog's collar or harness, which collar or harness must be secured to and on the dog at all times and it shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner to see that the same is so attached and secured at all times. 
(Code 1985, § 4-4-13; Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
State Law reference— Dog tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6. 
Sec. 4-34. - License fee required. 
Owners are required to register their dogs annually with the City of Toccoa and to attach registration tag to dog's collar or harness and pay a fee of $5.00 to animal control. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-35. - Female dog in heat. 
Every female dog in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in such manner that the female dog cannot come in contact with another animal, except for breeding purposes. 
(Code 1985, § 4-4-15; Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Note— Formerly numbered as § 4-34. 
State Law reference— Permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free prohibited, § 4-8-6. 
Secs. 4-36—4-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPER CARE OF ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The sections of this division have been renumbered by the editor to avoid conflicts in section numbering and to reserve sections for future use. 

Sec. 4-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate food means sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate outside shelter means a protective covering for an animal that is of adequate size and provides adequate protection to maintain the animal in a state of good health, and that prevents pain, suffering, or significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four (4) sides with a door opening, a constructed floor, and a roof. It should also be clean, dry and provide protection from current weather conditions, in addition to age, size, species and condition of the animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down and go in and out of the structure comfortably. To be adequate, some type of bedding that is quick drying, such as hay, cedar chips or pine straw, must be provided to maintain comfortable temperatures within the structure during times when the ambient, outside temperature is below freezing. From April through October, the structure shall either be shaded or moved out of direct sunlight. If the shelter is made of wood, it shall be raised at least two inches off the ground to prevent seepage or rotting. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, pet carriers, boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate space means a sufficient safe space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal. For dogs, adequate space means an enclosure with a minimum of 150 square feet per dog. 
Adequate water means clear, drinkable water in adequate supply. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to: snow, ice and rancid/contaminated water. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure that meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  A structure which is suitable to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping; 
(2)  A structure with secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides; 
(3)  A structure whose sides are so constructed at the bottom so as to prevent the dog's escape by digging under the sides. The sides must either be buried two feet into the ground or sunken into a concrete pad; 
(4)  A structure which provides appropriate protection from the elements for the dog. The structure must contain adequate shelter inside it; 
(5)  A structure which is inside a perimeter or area fence; 
(6)  The gate to the structure shall be of the inward-opening type and shall be kept locked except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water. 
Proper tethering device means that the length of any rope, cord, cable or chain used to restrain an animal is a minimum length of 15 feet, no heavier than one-eighth of the weight of the animal, allows at least two adult fingers between the collar and the neck, and is attached to an in-ground swivel or runner, not objects such as trees, etc. Choker chains are not proper tethering devices. 
Permanent restraint means restraining for longer than 45 days. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-62. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Any person violating this article may be deemed guilty of violating a city ordinance and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and by imprisonment in the common jail of the city not to exceed six months, or both fine and imprisonment. Each act or omission in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the court, as part of the sentence, may prohibit the offender from owning, possessing, or having on the offender's premises in the City of Toccoa any animal during the term of the sentence, may order for the animal to be removed from the county or humanely euthanized, and may order restitution. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-63. - Improper care of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or keeping an animal to fail to provide it with adequate food, water, space and shelter. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-64. - Restraint. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any dog to fail to keep the dog under restraint or control as provided for in this section. 
(b)  A dog is considered not under restraint or control when it is running at large, whether wearing a collar and tag or not. Reasonable care and precautions shall be taken to prevent the dog from leaving the real property limits of its owner, possessor, or custodian, and ensure that: 
(1)  It is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other enclosure out of which it cannot be expected to climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape from on its own volition; and that such enclosure is securely latched at any time the animal is left unattended; or 
(2)  It is securely and humanely restrained by an invisible containment system. If using an invisible containment system, a sign must be posted on the property indicating that the system is in place and in operation; or 
(3)  It is on a leash and under the control of a competent person; or it is off leash and obedient to and under voice command of a competent person who is in the immediate proximity of the dog any time it is not restrained. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or possessor of any animal to permanently restrain or anchor an animal by means of a tether, chain, cable, rope or cord. Temporary restraint by use of a proper tethering device must not restrict the dog to free access of adequate food, shelter and water. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-65. - Abandoned animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon or to aid in the abandonment of any animal. An animal relinquished through written agreement with animal control, licensed rescue group, licensed shelter, licensed veterinarians, individual, or other entity shall not be deemed abandoned but shall be considered relinquished to the entity. Any citizen may contact the city for the purpose of voluntarily relinquishing their animal which they can no longer provide for to the custody of animal control. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-66. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of cruelty towards any animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally train, breed, possess, harbor, keep, or have custody or control of an animal for the purpose of fighting said animal. It shall be unlawful to be a spectator at or bet on any form of animal fighting activity. The intentional fighting of dogs, dog and hog, and cocks is expressly prohibited. 
(c)  Licensed veterinarians who perform surgery or euthanasia and animal control officers who euthanize animals under the direction of animal control per the guidelines of the Georgia Veterinary Medical Association, Georgia Department of Agriculture, and this article shall not be liable in any manner or guilty of cruelty to animals. 
(d)  A person shall not be guilty of cruelty when the person is protecting his/her life, the life of another person or animal that is being attacked by an animal that puts any person in fear of receiving a violent or deadly injury to themselves or or another person or animal provided that the person being attacked is not committing a crime or is not aggravating or inciting the animal to attack, and has not aggravated, injured, abused, or assaulted the animal in the past. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-67. - Animal neglect. 
(a)  Any animal or livestock owner or possessor who fails to provide adequate drink, adequate food, adequate space, adequate shelter, sanitary conditions, necessary veterinary care, and/or who causes unnecessary suffering of any animal or livestock shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to leave animals unattended in a parked vehicle without proper ventilation to prevent the animal from suffering physical distress from heat exhaustion. 
(c)  Any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law may impound any animal found to be neglected, as defined by this section. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-68. - Duty of animal owners to be responsible owners. 
It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any animal to exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and animals from injuries or damage which might result from their animal's behavior. If the owner or custodian of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-69. - Hoarders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect animals and fail to provide them with humane/adequate care, collect dead animals that are not properly disposed of as required by this article, or collect, house, or harbor animals in filthy, unsanitary conditions that constitute a health hazard to the animals being kept, and/or to the animals or residents of adjacent property. Animal control officers shall make an on-site determination as to what constitutes hoarding; the officer shall specify the conditions that existed at the time, the number and description of animals hoarded and include a statement of the unreasonableness of the hoarder's action on the citation issued at the time of arrest. No person shall possess by confinement any species of wildlife indigenous to the State of Georgia without the required permits from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or other state and federal agencies having applicable regulatory mandates. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-70. - Right of entry. 
A law enforcement officer may use any force necessary to remove any animal in distress left unattended without proper ventilation in a closed vehicle when the ambient temperature is eighty (80) degrees Fahrenheit or above outside the vehicle. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, the law enforcement officer shall not be personally liable for any action taken when acting in good faith. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-71. - Animals transported in vehicles. 
No animal shall be transported on a public road in an open vehicle including an open top vehicle or open truck bed unless the animal is adequately protected from any and all elements and its safety is provided for. No animal shall be transported in the closed trunk of a vehicle or under a pick up truck's hard or soft cover with a solid tailgate raised and fully closed. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-72. - Limitation on ownership. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted of cruelty, neglect, abandonment or hoarding of an animal as provided in this Code, or other counties or states, or has been required to or voluntarily relinquished ownership of such animal, may not own, possess, or have on his premises in the City of Toccoa any animal for one year from the date of conviction. A nolo contendere plea is considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the court from imposing a greater length of time. 
(b)  Any person who has been convicted of failure to keep an animal under restraint while on the owner's property as provided in this Code and has been required to provide additional confinement requirements and has not complied with the court's order, may not be allowed to own a pet in their City of Toccoa household for one year from the date of conviction. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-73. - Backyard breeders. 
It is unlawful for any person required to be licensed by the Georgia Department of Agriculture for animal breeding purposes to breed any animal for commercial purposes without such required license being predominantly displayed in an area accessible to animal control officers. In addition, any person engaged in the business of commercial, for profit, breeding shall obtain a business license from the Clerk of the City of Toccoa. Said license shall also be displayed in an area accessible to code enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-74. - Nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner of an animal to allow their animal to become a public nuisance by offensive noise, offensive odors, destruction of property or landscape, vicious or intimidating behavior, and excrement that remains uncollected by the animal's owner on property other than that belonging to the owner of such animal. 
( Ord. of 9-26-16, § I ) 
Secs. 4-75—4-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ESTABLISHMENTS MAINTAINING ANIMALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions of this division derive from the Rules of the Georgia Department of Agriculture Animnal Protection Division, §§ 40-13-13-.01—40-13-13-.09. 

Sec. 4-91. - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions set forth in the "Georgia Animal Protection Act", the following definitions shall apply to this division: 
Adequate food and water means food and water which is sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from a lack of food or water. 
Adequate food means palatable, non-contaminated, and nutritionally adequate food that is fed according to the species requirements or is fed as directed by a veterinarian. Adequate food does not include garbage. 
Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water offered to pets at suitable intervals according to the species requirements, or as dictated by naturally occurring states of hibernation normal for the species, or as directed by a veterinarian. 
Adequate temperature control means indoor housing facilities for pets are sufficiently heated and/or cooled when necessary to protect the animals from excessive heat or from chilling, freezing or from any physical damage. Except for equines, the ambient temperatures should not be allowed to fall below 45° Fahrenheit degrees or rise above 85° Fahrenheit, for animals that are not acclimated. 
Adequate ventilation means indoor housing facilities for pets are adequately ventilated to provide for the health of the animals at all times. Such facilities must be provided with fresh air either by means of windows, doors, vents, fans, or air conditioning and should be ventilated so as to minimize drafts, odors, and moisture condensation. 
Adult as it applies to dogs and cats in this chapter means a domestic canine over 12 months of age and a domestic feline over eight months of age. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by or under contract for the state, county, municipal corporation, or any other political subdivision of the state for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, and other animals; any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians which operates for such purpose in addition to its customary purposes; and any facility operated, owned, or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, or other nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. 
Association means an unincorporated society, or body or persons united and acting together with a common purpose, operating without a corporate charter. It is not a legal entity separate from the persons who comprise it. 
Aviary means any place where birds are kept confined for breeding, boarding, or similar purposes. 
Dead animal means any carcass or parts of a carcass of any animal. 
Equine means any member of the equidae species, including horses, mules, and asses. 
Establishment means an established fixed or mobile unit, such as a pet shop, pasture, barn, kennel, cattery, warehouse, building, vehicle, residence or parts thereof to carry out a business or to conduct any activity for which a license is required. 
Facility means the physical aspects of a building or premise that is maintained, installed, or established to carry out a particular purpose. 
Foster home means any place routinely or in the practice of providing temporary care for animals, except equine. A foster home must be under a written contract with a licensed animal shelter. A foster home will be considered an agent for the animal shelter, and not an animal shelter itself. 
Garbage means all refuse matter, animal or vegetable; by-products of a restaurant, kitchen, or meat/poultry processing establishment; and every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that is normally discarded. For the purposes of this chapter, garbage shall not include home prepared food given to an animal living on the property of the person caring for the animal. 
Humane care of animals means, but is not limited to, the provision of adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, and wholesome and adequate food and water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species, and breed. Inhumane care includes any act, omission, or neglect, which causes unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death to any living animal. 
Incubate means to sit upon and hatch eggs, or to maintain eggs as embryos in a favorable environment for development and hatching. 
Indoor housing facility for the purposes of this chapter, means an establishment within the interior of a building wherein all activity is conducted for which the license is issued. 
Kennel means any establishment, other than an animal shelter, where dogs or cats are maintained for boarding, holding, training, or similar purposes for a fee or compensation. Similar purposes include, but are not limited to, activities of a breeding establishment, cattery, or grooming shop. 
(1)  Breeding establishment means any establishment where pets are bred and a fee or compensation is received for the breeding and maintenance of such pets, such as stud service. 
(2)  Cattery means any establishment where a cat is maintained for breeding, boarding, training, holding, or similar purposes for a fee or compensation. 
(3)  Grooming shop means any establishment, other than an animal shelter, where a person maintains a dog or cat for bathing, dipping, clipping, trimming, brushing, or similar care of the appearance for a fee or compensation. 
Litter means the young born to a pet animal at one time or a clutch of nesting eggs produced and incubated by a female bird at a single sitting, or a brood of chicks incubated by mechanical means. 
Maintain means to keep or keep up, or to keep in a certain condition. 
Minimum age to sell means at an age that no longer requires parental nurturing for survival, or at an age that can be sustained from appropriate and nutritional food given by persons who are knowledgeable in the feeding needs and eating habits common to the breed, size and age of the species. 
Outdoor housing establishment for the purposes of this division, means an establishment outside a building and in the open air. 
Person means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other legal entity, any other entity, or private institution, the State of Georgia, or any county, municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state. 
Pet for the purposes of this division means any animal that is customarily obtained as a pet and includes, but is not limited to, the following: dog, cat, bird, equine, fish, reptile, rodent, chinchilla, rabbit, hamster, guinea pig, or miniature pig. Any animal described in O.C.G.A. sections 27-1-2, General Provisions, and 27-5-5, Wild Animals, are not considered a pet for the purposes of this division, except where specifically mentioned herein. 
Pet breeder means a pet dealer who sells, offers to sell, exchanges, or offers for adoption only pets they have produced, except equine. This includes those produced for hobby, show purposes, breed improvement, or stock replacement. 
Pet dealer means a person who sells, offers to sell, exchanges, or offers for adoption pets they have produced, bought, or otherwise obtained, except equine. Equine dealers require a livestock dealers license from the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
Premise means any establishment, facility, land, or parts thereof. 
Primary enclosure means any structure or device used to restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a building, room, pen, run, cage, aquarium, hutch, stall, paddock, pasture, or animal transfer vehicle. 
Produced means to have propagated or generated the progeny of a female. 
Proper animal health care means a program of disease control and prevention, veterinary care, and humane euthanasia. The animal health care should be sufficient to prevent unnecessary physical pain or suffering. 
Rescue group means any association or corporation operated as a non-profit organization and for the purpose of providing care and shelter to animals. Except rescue groups for equine, a rescue group that takes possession of animals and provides care and shelter must be licensed as an animal shelter or under written contract with a licensed animal shelter, in which case it will be considered an agent for the animal shelter and not an animal shelter itself. An equine rescue group operating for that purpose and maintaining any facility (including, without limitation, providing temporary care at a person's private property) must meet all the requirements of a licensed stable. 
Sanitation means the maintenance of conditions conducive to health and involves bedding changes (as appropriate), cleaning, and disinfection. Cleaning removes excessive amounts of dirt and debris, and disinfection reduces or eliminates unacceptable concentration of microorganisms. To sanitize, therefore, means to make physically clean, and, to the maximum degree practical, remove and destroy agents injurious to health. 
Stable means any establishment, or other enclosure where equines are maintained for boarding, holding, training, breeding, riding, pulling vehicles, or other similar purposes and a fee is charged for maintaining such equines or for the use of such equines. (Authority Ga. L. 4-4-20, 27-1-2, 27-5-5) 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-92. - Licenses. 
(a)  The commissioner shall license animal shelter, pet dealer, kennel, and stable operators under the applicable provision of Chapter 5 of Title 2, "Department of Agriculture Registration, License, and Permit Act" on a form obtained from the Georgia Department of Agriculture. Additionally, a City of Toccoa business tax registration is required and shall be shown to animal control or police office of the city upon their request. To obtain the business tax registration requires a notarized approval from the property owner to use the property for this purpose. 
(1)  No pet dealer shall be on the premises other than the premises of the pet dealer, except with the express written consent of owner of the property. This written consent must be presented to animal control or police officer of the city upon request. 
(b)  The license shall be issued for a period of one year and shall expire twelve months from the date of issue. The license is issued for the person and premise stated on the license and is not transferable. The annual fee will be determined by the gross dollar of animal sales, the capacity of the facility or the number of animals present. The annual fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Animal shelter: Fee based upon the holding capacity (to include foster homes) at the time of license application or renewal; 
a.  Capacity for up to and including 20 animals—$100.00 fee. 
b.  Capacity for over 20 animals—$200.00. 
(2)  Kennel: Fee based upon the holding capacity at the time of license application or renewal. 
a.  Capacity for up to and including 20 animals—$100.00 fee. 
b.  Capacity for over 20 animals—$200.00 fee. 
(3)  Pet dealer: Fee based only upon gross volume of animal sales or set fee. 
a.  Up to $1,000.00 gross—$50.00 fee. 
b.  $1,000.00 to $10,000.00—$100.00 fee. 
c.  $10,000.00 and over—$200.00 fee. 
d.  Pet dealers not having a permanent fixed facility in Georgia— $200.00. 
(4)  Stable: Fee based on number of equine present at the time of license application or renewal; provided that if the number of equine present at any time during the license period exceeds the minimum for the next class of fees, the stable operator must file an amendment to the application and pay the higher fee. 
a.  Up to and including 20 equine—$100.00 fee. 
b.  Over 20 equine—$200.00 fee. 
(c)  Any person who maintains a combination of businesses which conducts two or more activities at the same location (i.e. kennel and pet dealer or kennel and stable) shall be required to obtain the license which generates the largest annual license fee. The records of each business will be subject to inspection to determine the appropriate license fee. Each business or activity of the combination is subject to inspection and compliance according to this chapter. 
(d)  Applications for licenses shall be on a form furnished by the Commissioner and shall state: 
(1)  The name of the applicant; 
(2)  The business address of the applicant; 
(3)  The complete telephone number of the applicant; 
(4)  The location of the licensable premises; 
(5)  The type of ownership of the pet dealership, kennel, stable, or animal shelter; 
(6)  The name and address of the owner or, if a partnership, firm, corporation, association, or other entity, the names and addresses of the officers, registered agents, partners, stockholders, and/or members. 
(e)  The signature(s) of the owner(s), partners, or officers of a corporation or association, attesting to the fact that the information documented on the application is correct, the regulations have been read and the premise that is subject to be licensed meets all the requirements of this division. 
(f)  The license must be prominently displayed at each licensed place of business. 
(g)  Animal shelters may contract with off-site foster homes and individual members of rescue groups to serve as agents of the animal shelter. The animal shelter is considered the license holder and is responsible for assuring that foster homes and rescue group members are under written contract to comply with the provisions in this chapter and submit to inspection by the animal shelter. Animal shelters must keep a copy of all current foster home and rescue group member contracts. 
(h)  Any person licensed by the department as a bird dealer shall not be required to obtain a license under this division if such person does not deal in pets other than birds. If however, a licensed bird dealer sells, offers to sell, exchanges, or offers for adoption pets, other than birds, then such dealer shall be subject to licensing under this chapter. 
(i)  Any person who is not a resident of this state but who engages in this state in any activities for which a license is required by this division or O.C.G.A Chapter 40-13-12 pertaining to bird dealer licensing shall be subject to this chapter for such activities. As a condition of licensure, each non-resident must execute a consent to the jurisdiction of the courts of this state for any action filed under this chapter, and service of process in any such action shall be by certified mail by the commissioner. 
(j)  The commissioner may refuse to issue or renew or may suspend or revoke a license on any one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Material misstatement in the application for the original license or in the application for the renewal license under this division; 
(2)  Willful disregard or violation of any rule or regulation of this division; 
(3)  Willful aiding or abetting another in any violation of this division; 
(4)  Allowing a license issued under this chapter to be used by an unlicensed person; 
(5)  Violation of any law of this state or any rule of the Commissioner related to the disposition of, dealing in, or handling of dogs, cats, equine, and other pets; 
(6)  Making substantial misrepresentations or false promises in connection with the business or activity of a licensee under this division; 
(7)  Pursuing a continued course of making misrepresentations or false promises through advertising, salesmen, agents, or otherwise in connection with the business or activity of a licensee; 
(8)  Failure to possess the necessary qualifications or meet the requirements for the issuance or holding of a license; 
(9)  failure to provide proper facilities. 
(k)  License fees shall be increased by 100 percent for the renewal of any license that is not renewed within ten days following the expiration date of the license. License fees shall be increased by 100 percent for the issuance of a new license to any person who has failed to apply for a license within ten days following notice of the need to obtain such a license has been given to such person in writing by the commissioner or his authorized representative. 
(l)  The commissioner or his duly authorized representative is authorized to issue and enforce written or printed stop sale, stop use, or stop movement orders to the owners or custodians of any pets, ordering them to hold such animals at a designated place, when the commissioner or his duly authorized representative finds such animals: 
(1)  To be held by a person who is required to be licensed under this chapter and whose license has expired; 
(2)  To be held by a person who is required to be licensed under this chapter and who has failed to obtain a license within ten days of the date on which notice of the need to obtain a license was given in writing to such person by the commissioner or his authorized representative. 
(m)  A separate license is required of each person and is not transferable, except for foster homes and rescue group members operating under an animal shelter's primary license. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07; Ord. of 9-26-16, § I ) 
Sec. 4-94. - Premise requirements and performance standards for owner and/or operator. 
(a)  General requirements and standards: 
(1)  Classification and separation: Animals exhibiting a vicious disposition must be housed individually. Animals suspected of having a communicable or infectious disease must be separated from other animals and other susceptible species of animals in such a manner as to minimize dissemination of such disease. Pets housed in the same primary enclosure should be maintained in compatible groups. Females who are sexually receptive should not be housed in the same primary enclosure with males, except for breeding purposes. 
(2)  Drainage: A suitable method must be provided to rapidly eliminate excess water and avoid foul odors therefrom. If closed drainage systems are used, they must be equipped with traps and so installed as to prevent any backup of sewage onto the surface of the primary enclosure. 
(3)  Housekeeping: Premises (buildings and grounds) must be kept clean and in a state of repair in order to prevent injury or disease. Premises must remain free of accumulations of trash, weeds, debris, and other vermin harborage areas. 
(4)  Humane care: Humane care must be provided in all facilities anytime an animal is present. 
(5)  Interior surface: The interior surfaces of indoor housing facilities must be constructed and maintained so they are substantially impervious to moisture and may be readily cleaned and sanitized. 
(6)  Lighting: General lighting in indoor housing facilities should be diffused throughout the animal holding area and provide sufficient illumination to protect animal health, allow adequate housekeeping practices, and adequate inspection. 
(7)  Pest control: An effective program for the prevention, control, and elimination, of vermin, insects, ectoparasites, and avian and mammalian pests must be established and maintained. Vegetation must be manicured to prevent vermin harborage. 
(8)  Record keeping: Complete and accurate records must be maintained reflecting all acquisitions, purchases, sales, releases, natural additions, exchanges, adoptions, custodial care, and health records of all animals. Retail sale records for fish, rodents, and invertebrates are exempt from record keeping requirement. These records must be maintained for a period of twelve months and must be made available to the Commissioner or his authorized representative upon request. In addition, records for dogs, cats, birds, and equine shall include, but are not limited to, name, address, and phone number of individual(s) involved in the transaction, date of transaction or activity, type and number of animals, and Georgia Department of Agriculture animal protection/stable license number, if applicable. 
(9)  Sanitation of primary enclosures: Primary enclosures for pets must be cleaned at a frequency and intensity to provide a healthy and hygienic environment in order to prevent disease hazards. Excreta must be removed to prevent contamination of the animals contained therein and to reduce the spread of disease. Soiled bedding should be removed and replaced with fresh materials as often as is necessary to keep the animals clean and dry. For hard surfaces that are conducive to cleaning with water, frequent flushing with water and periodic use of detergents or disinfectants should be used to maintain sufficiently clean surfaces. When a hosing or flushing method is used for cleaning, animals contained in the enclosure must be removed unless the enclosure is large enough to ensure the animals would not be harmed, wetted, or distressed during the process. Animals in nearby enclosures must be protected from being contaminated with water and other wastes during the cleaning. Enclosures may be disinfected by using appropriate chemicals, hot water, or a combination of both. If hot water is used as a means of disinfection, the temperature of the water must be at least 145° Fahrenheit. Aquariums as a closed ecosystem have special needs and they must be maintained in a balance necessary for the health of its inhabitants by means of pH control, filtration, biodegradation and the like. 
(10)  Releasing of injured, diseased, or abnormal animals: Reasonable care must be taken to avoid releasing for sale, trade, or adoption any pet that has an apparent disease, injury, or has a health related malady. Any pet that has an apparent injury, disease, or health related malady can only be released for sale, trade, or adoption provided the person receiving the animal is made aware of the condition in writing at the time of transfer. 
(11)  Shelter from rain, snow or cold: Pets maintained in outdoor housing establishments must be provided with access to suitable shelter to remain dry during rain or snow and protect them from wind and excessive heat or cold. Sufficient and clean bedding material or other reasonable means of protection from the weather elements must be provided. 
(12)  Shelter from sunlight: When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or suffering, sufficient shade must be provided to allow all pets protection from the direct effects of the sun. 
(13)  Space requirements: Primary enclosures must provide sufficient space to allow each animal to turn about freely and to easily stand, sit, lie, perch, swim, etc. in a comfortable and normal position. 
(14)  Storage: Supplies, food, and bedding should be stored in an adequate manner to protect against infestation, contamination, or spoilage. Refrigeration should be provided for perishable items. 
(15)  Structural strength: Indoor and outdoor housing for pets shall be maintained in good repair. The primary enclosure should be of sufficient strength to contain the animals securely and restrict the entrance of unwanted animals. The walls and/or sides, roof and/or ceiling, and floors and/or bottoms of the primary enclosures must be constructed, so as to, protect the animals from injury or suffering. For primary enclosures, with granted or mesh bottoms housing dogs and cats, there must be a suitable resting surface that will allow the animal to sit and lie in a normal position. Vertically stacked enclosures must have receptacles to contain excreta between cages. 
(15)  Tethering of animals: It is presumed that tethering of animals for more than three consecutive days is considered permanent tethering and such permanent tethering as a means of a primary enclosure is prohibited. For temporary tethering of animals, such chains or other tethering devices must be of adequate length to satisfy the space requirements of a primary enclosure. Tethering devices must be of a type commonly used for the size animal involved and should be attached to the animal by means of a well fitted and appropriate device (i.e., collar, halter, or harness). 
(16)  Waste disposal: Provisions must be made for the regular and safe removal and disposal of animal and food wastes, bedding, dead animals, and debris, so as to minimize vermin infestation, contamination, odors, and disease hazards. Disposal of dead animals must be by burial or incineration. Legal permission from the appropriate authorities or landowner must be obtained, prior to, burial on any public or private land. Disposal of dead animals in wells, waterways, or wetlands of any kind is strictly prohibited. 
(b)  Pets that are sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for adoption must be at the minimum age to sell. Written recommendations for the appropriate feeding and care must be provided at the time of the transaction for those animals that are not independent of parental nurturing. 
(c)  A licensed stable shall maintain proof of a negative test for Equine Infectious Anemia within the past 12 months on all equine on the premise. 
(d)  Functional fire extinguishing devices shall be present in each facility of all license holders under this chapter. Operational smoke detectors are recommended. (Authority O.G.C.A §§ 4-11-1 et seq., 4-4-110) 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-95. - Control of disease. 
(a)  In the control, suppression, prevention, and eradication of animal disease, the Commissioner or any duly authorized representative acting under his authority is authorized and may quarantine any animal or animals, premises, or any area when he shall determine: 
(1)  That the animal or animals in such place or places are infected with a contagious or infectious disease; 
(2)  That the animal(s) has been exposed to any contagious or infectious disease; 
(3)  That the unsanitary condition of such place or places might cause the spread of such disease; 
(4)  Or that the owner or occupant of such place is not observing sanitary practices prescribed under the authority of this division or any other law of this state. 
(b)  The Commissioner or his duly authorized representative is authorized to issue and enforce written or printed stop sale, stop use, or stop movement orders to the owners or custodians of any animals, ordering them to hold such animals at a designated place, when the Commissioner or his duly authorized representative finds such animals: 
(1)  To be infected with or to have been exposed to any contagious or infectious disease; or 
(2)  To have been held by persons in violation of this division, until such time as the violation has been corrected, and the Commissioner, in writing, has released such animals. (Authority O.G.C.A § 4-11-1 et seq.; § 4-11-9.1) 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-96. - Interstate shipment. 
(a)  All animals entering Georgia must comply with the applicable health requirements of the U. S. Department of Agriculture, the U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, the Georgia Department of Agriculture, the Georgia Department of Human Resources, and/or the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(b)  All dogs and cats entering Georgia must have proof of a current and approved Rabies vaccination in accordance with the most recent Compendium of Animal Rabies Control published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc. 
(c)  All ferrets entering Georgia must have proof of a current and approved Rabies vaccination, in accordance with the most recent Compendium of Animal Rabies Control published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc. Ferrets seven months of age or older entering Georgia must be sexually altered, prior to entry, except those exempted by a license/permit issued by USDA, APHIS, Animal Care, and/or the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(d)  Except for fish, rodents and invertebrates, all animals entering Georgia for sale, trade, adoption, or exchange for a fee or other type of compensation must be accompanied by a Certificate of Veterinary Inspection issued within the previous 30 days and which records proof of the health requirements for each species. 
(e)  All pet birds entering Georgia are required to have a permit number issued by the Department prior to entry. Permit numbers may be obtained by calling the Georgia Department of Agriculture, Animal Health Section, during normal business hours. 
(f)  Equine entering Georgia must be accompanied by an official Certificate of Veterinary Inspection, shall originate from a premise free of any contagious or infectious disease, and shall not have been exposed to any contagious or infectious disease prior to or during shipment. 
(g)  All equine must be negative to an official test for equine infectious anemia within 12 months prior to entry with test results, test dates, accession numbers, and name and address of the approved testing laboratories recorded on the Certificate of Veterinary Inspection. Nursing foals under six (6) months of age will be exempt from the test requirement when accompanied by their dam which has a current negative test for equine infectious anemia. (Authority O.G.C.A, §§ 4-4-1, 4-10-1 et seq.; 4-10-7.1, and 7.2; et seq., 4-11-1 et seq., 4-11-11) 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-97. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Any person who raises, keeps, sells, or maintains animals solely for the purpose of human consumption shall be exempt from this division. 
(b)  Any person who sells only animals they have produced shall not be considered a pet dealer under this chapter unless such person: 
(1)  Is licensed for an animal related business by a local government; 
(2)  Is subject to a Georgia sales tax number for an animal related business; 
(3)  Is subject to the "Bird Dealers' Licensing Act"; 
(4)  Sells more than one litter in any 12-month period; 
(5)  Sells more than 30 adult animals in any 12-month period; 
(6)  Produces animals that pose a public health risk or exhibit illness or disease causing chronic pain and suffering; or 
(g)  Has been determined by the Department of Agriculture not to treat animals humanely or has been convicted of cruelty to animals. 
(c)  Operation of a veterinary hospital or clinic by a licensed veterinarian or veterinarians for its customary purposes shall not be considered a kennel, pet dealer, or stable under this chapter. 
(d)  Any animal shelter licensed under this chapter that is located in a county having a population of 25,000 or less according to the most recent decennial census is exempt from the requirements of section 3-98. However, the exempt animal shelter shall provide a humane method of euthanasia recommended by the American Veterinary Medical Association. (Authority O.G.C.A 4-11-1 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-98. - Euthanasia. 
(a)  The use of sodium pentobarbital or a derivative of it shall be used for euthanasia of dogs and cats by animal shelters or other facilities which are operated for the collection and care of stray, neglected, abandoned, or unwanted animals. A lethal solution shall be used in the following order of preference: 
(1)  Intravenous injection by hypodermic needle: Venipuncture of a superficial vein, preferably the cephalic or lateral saphenous, is the method to be used on all dogs and cats except for the following: 
a.  Animals too small to effectively perform a venipunture; 
b.  Intractable or dangerous animals; or 
c.  Animals in which superficial venous pressure is insufficient for effective venipuncture. 
If venipuncture cannot be performed for one of the above reasons, then the following method may be used. 
(2)  Intraperitoneal injection by hypodermic needle: Two to three times the recommended intravenous dosage should be injected into the abdominal cavity through the mid-abdominal region. Intraperitoneal injection may be the alternative method used for animals described in (1) a., b., and c. above. The time between injection and death is not immediate as with intravenous injection, therefore, a proper amount of time should be allowed for chemical absorption and action prior to an alternative method being used. 
(3)  Intracardial injection by hypodermic needle: Intracardial injection by thoracic cavity penetration is to be used on comatose animals only. 
(b)  A chamber using commercially bottled carbon monoxide gas which was used on July 1, 1990, for euthanasia of dogs and cats may continue to be used provided the Commissioner of Agriculture was notified in writing, on or before August 1, 1990, that such a chamber was in use by such animal shelter or facility on July 1, 1990. A chamber which causes a change in body oxygen by means of altering atmospheric pressure or which is connected to an internal combustion engine and uses the engine exhaust for euthanasia purposes shall not be permitted under any circumstances. 
(c)  Any substance which is clinically proven to be as humane as sodium pentobarbital, including an inhalant agent and injectable solution, and which has been officially recognized as such by the American Veterinary Medical Association may be used in lieu of sodium pentobarbital to perform euthanasia on dogs and cats. Succinylcholine chloride, curare, curariform mixtures, or any substance that acts as a neuromuscular blocking agent may not be used. The State Veterinarian will maintain a list of approved inhalants and injectable solutions that may be used for humane euthanasia. 
(d)  In cases of extraordinary circumstance where the dog or cat poses an extreme risk or danger to the veterinarian, physician, or lay person performing euthanasia, such person shall be allowed the use of any other substance or procedure that is humane to perform euthanasia on such dangerous dog or cat. 
(e)  A dog or cat may be tranquilized with an approved and humane substance before euthanasia is performed. 
(f)  Euthanasia shall be performed by a licensed veterinarian or physician or lay person who is properly trained in the proper and humane use of a method of euthanasia. Euthanasia, which is performed by a layperson, shall be observed by at least one other employee. 
(g)  A layperson performing euthanasia by injection must be under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian or physician. This shall not be construed, so as to require, that a veterinarian or physician be present at the time euthanasia is performed. 
(h)  A letter, stating which layperson(s) is properly trained for a method of euthanasia shall be on file at the animal shelter and with the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(i)  No dog or cat may be left unattended between the time euthanasia procedures are first begun and the time death occurs, nor may its body be disposed of, until death is confirmed by a qualified person. 
(j)  The supervising veterinarian shall be subject to all record-keeping requirements and inspection requirements of the State Board of Pharmacy pertaining to sodium pentobarbital and other drugs authorized under paragraph (3) of this rule section and may limit the quantity of possession of sodium pentobarbital and other authorized drugs to ensure compliance with the provision of this Code section. 
(k)  Euthanasia records shall be kept on forms approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture and the State Board of Pharmacy and shall be signed by the person performing euthanasia and the witness. 
(l)  Euthanasia records shall be maintained for a period of one (1) year and shall be made available to the Commissioner of Agriculture or his duly authorized representative for inspection upon request. 
(m)  The animal shelter must be registered with the Drug Enforcement Administration prior to the storage of any controlled substance. 
(n)  The storage of any controlled substance must be in an approved, secure safe or if a lockable storage container is used it must be approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture and be strictly maintained under double lock and key. 
(o)  The Commissioner or his authorized agent shall have the right to obtain a sample of the euthanasia agents for analysis. 
(p)  Species other than dogs and cats should be humanely euthanized by a method recommended by the American Veterinary Medical Association, when such recommendation exists. (Authority Ga. L. Sec. 4-11-1 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 4-99. - Violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to act as a pet dealer or operate an animal shelter, kennel, or stable unless such person has a valid license issued by the Commissioner of Agriculture. Any person acting without a license in violation of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, use, or move any animals in violation of any quarantine, stop sale, stop use, or stop movement order issued under this division. 
(c)  Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or other entity violating any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  The Commissioner may deny, suspend, or revoke any license required by this chapter, subject to notice and hearing, in any case in which he finds there has been a violation of this division. All proceedings for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license shall be conducted in conformance with Chapter 13 of title 50, the "Georgia Administrative Procedure Act". 
(e)  Not withstanding the existence of an adequate remedy at law and in addition to other remedies, the Commissioner may apply to the Superior Court for an injunction or restraining order. (Authority Ga. L. Sec. 4-11-1 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § I, 10-22-07) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 8; flood damage prevention, ch. 9; planning and development, ch. 16; soil erosion and sediment control, ch. 18; disposal of building debris, § 19-4; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; subdivisions, ch. 21; utilities, ch. 23; zoning, ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Governing body may enact standards to determine safety of buildings, Ga. Const. art. 1, sec. 4, par. 1; authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); adoption and continuation of state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; state-wide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 5-1—5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 5-26—5-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 5-36. - Adopted; scope. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building and structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures in the city, there is hereby adopted as the building code for the city the Standard Building Code, latest edition, as amended, which is published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning department. The building code is hereby adopted and incorporated and made a part of this Code, except where amended specifically herein, as fully as if set out herein. 
(Code 1985, §§ 7-4-1, 7-4-2) 
Sec. 5-37. - Permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees for the building code shall be set from time to time by the city commission and a schedule of such costs is on file in the planning department, and shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Sec. 5-38. - Amendments. 
The building code adopted in this article shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 7-4-3; Ord. No. 88-016, § 1, 6-20-88) 
Secs. 5-39—5-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 5-51. - Adopted; scope. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenants thereto in the city, there is hereby adopted as the electrical code for the city the National Electrical Code, latest edition, as amended, which is published by the National Fire Protection Association, a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning department. The electrical code is hereby adopted and incorporated and made a part of this Code, except where amended specifically herein, as fully as if set out herein. 
(Code 1985, § 7-4-21) 
Sec. 5-52. - Permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees for the electrical code shall be set from time to time by the city commission and a schedule of such costs is on file in the planning department, and shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Sec. 5-53. - Amendments. 
The electrical code adopted in this article shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 7-4-22; Ord. No. 88-017, § 1, 6-20-88) 
Secs. 5-54—5-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GAS CODE 

Sec. 5-66. - Adopted; scope. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as installed, replaced, maintained or repaired within the city or connected to the city gas system, there is hereby adopted as the gas code for the city the Standard Gas Code, latest edition, as amended, which is published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning department. The gas code is hereby adopted and incorporated and made a part of this Code, except where amended specifically herein, as fully as if set out herein. 
(Code 1985, § 7-4-33) 
Sec. 5-67. - Permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees for the gas code shall be set from time to time by the city commission and a schedule of such costs is on file in the planning department, and shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 7-4-40) 
Sec. 5-68. - Amendments. 
The gas code adopted in this article shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Secs. 5-69—5-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PLUMBING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Water, § 23-56 et seq. 

Sec. 5-86. - Adopted; scope. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures and appurtenances within the city or connected to the city water and wastewater system, there is hereby adopted as the plumbing code for the city the Georgia State Plumbing Code, latest edition, as amended, which is published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., as amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning department. The plumbing code is hereby adopted and incorporated and made a part of this Code, except where amended specifically herein, as fully as if set out herein. 
(Code 1985, § 7-4-51) 
Sec. 5-87. - Permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees for the plumbing code shall be set from time to time by the city commission and a schedule of such costs is on file in the planning department, and shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Sec. 5-88. - Amendments. 
The plumbing code adopted in this article shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 7-4-52; Ord. No. 88-019, § 1, 6-20-88) 
Secs. 5-89—5-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 5-101. - Adopted; scope. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations to provide minimum housing standards for the use, occupancy and maintenance of existing residential buildings, to maintain all residential units in the city in a decent, safe and sanitary condition, there is hereby adopted as the housing code for the city the Standard Housing Code, latest edition, as amended, which is published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning department. The housing code is hereby adopted and incorporated and made a part of this Code, except where amended specifically herein, as fully as if set out herein. 
(Code 1985, § 7-4-61) 
Sec. 5-102. - Permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees for the housing code shall be set from time to time by the city commission and a schedule of such costs is on file in the planning department, and shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Sec. 5-103. - Amendments. 
The housing code adopted in this article shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Secs. 5-104—5-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ENERGY CODE 

Sec. 5-111. - Adopted; scope. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage, and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, water heating and illumination systems and equipment which will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction in the city, there is hereby adopted as the energy code for the city the Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings, latest edition, as amended, which is published by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning department. The energy code is hereby adopted and incorporated and made a part of this Code, except where amended specifically herein, as fully as if set out herein. 
(Code 1985, § 7-4-71) 
Sec. 5-112. - Permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees for the energy code shall be set from time to time by the city commission and a schedule of such costs is on file in the planning department, and shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Sec. 5-113. - Amendments. 
The energy code adopted in this article shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Secs. 5-114—5-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 5-121. - Adopted; scope. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems in the city, there is hereby adopted as the mechanical code for the city the Standard Mechanical Code, latest edition, as amended, which is published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning department. The mechanical code is hereby adopted by incorporated and made a part of this Code, except where amended specifically herein, as fully as if set out herein. 
Sec. 5-122. - Permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees for the mechanical code shall be set from time to time by the city commission and a schedule of such costs is on file in the planning department, and shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Sec. 5-123. - Amendments. 
The mechanical code adopted in this article shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Secs. 5-124—5-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - DWELLING CODE 

Sec. 5-131. - Adopted; scope. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations to further standardize nationally recognized model codes to provide minimum requirements to safeguard life, health and public welfare and the protection of property by regulating and controlling the design, construction, prefabrication, equipment or appliance installation, quality of materials, use and occupancy location and repair of detached one- and two-family dwellings, excluding their plumbing provision, in the city, there is hereby adopted as the dwelling code for the city the One and Two Family Dwelling Code, latest edition, as amended, which is published by the Council of American Building Officials, a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning department. The dwelling code is hereby adopted and incorporated and made a part of this Code, except where amended specifically herein, as fully as if set out herein. 
Sec. 5-132. - Permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees for the dwelling code shall be set from time to time by the city commission and a schedule of such costs is on file in the planning department, and shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Sec. 5-133. - Amendments. 
The dwelling code adopted in this article shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Secs. 5-134—5-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - GRADING CODE 

Sec. 5-141. - Adopted; scope. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments in the city, there is hereby adopted as the grading code for the city the Standard Excavation and Grading Code, latest edition, as amended, which is published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning department. The grading code is hereby adopted and incorporated and made a part of this Code, except where amended specifically herein, as fully as if set out herein. 
Sec. 5-142. - Permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees for the grading code shall be set from time to time by the city commission and a schedule of such costs is on file in the planning department, and shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Sec. 5-143. - Amendments. 
The grading code adopted in this article shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Secs. 5-144—5-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - EXISTING BUILDINGS CODE 

Sec. 5-151. - Adopted; scope. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations to preserve existing buildings that might otherwise be destroyed, and at the same time satisfy basic structural and fire safety needs of the public while achieving a minimum level of occupancy safety in the city, there is hereby adopted as the existing buildings code for the city the Standard Existing Buildings Code, latest edition, as amended, which is published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning department. The existing buildings code is hereby adopted and incorporated and made a part of this Code, except where amended specifically herein, as fully as if set out herein. 
Sec. 5-152. - Permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees for the existing buildings code shall be set from time to time by the city commission and a schedule of such costs is on file in the planning department, and shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Sec. 5-153. - Amendments. 
The existing buildings code adopted in this article shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Secs. 5-154—5-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - SWIMMING POOL CODE 

Sec. 5-161. - Adopted; scope. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations to protect the public health, safety and welfare by prescribing minimum standards for the design, construction or installation, repair or alterations of swimming pools and equipment thereto in the city, there is hereby adopted as the swimming pool code for the city the Standard Swimming Pool Code, latest edition, as amended, which is published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning department. The swimming pool code is hereby adopted and incorporated and made a part of this Code, except where amended specifically herein, as fully as if set out herein. 
Sec. 5-162. - Permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees for the swimming pool code shall be set from time to time by the city commission and a schedule of such costs is on file in the planning department, and shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Sec. 5-163. - Amendments. 
The swimming pool code adopted in this article shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Secs. 5-164—5-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 8. 

Sec. 5-171. - Adopted; scope. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, repair, equipment, use and occupancy and maintenance of every building or structure and appurtenances thereto, and to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof through safety of life and property from fire, explosion and other hazard incident to the use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises in the city, there is hereby adopted as the fire prevention code for the city the Standard Fire Prevention Code, latest edition, as amended, which is published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning department. The fire prevention code is hereby adopted and incorporated and made a part of this Code, except where amended specifically herein, as fully as if set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 97-020, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 5-172. - Permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees for the fire prevention code shall be set from time to time by the city commission and a schedule of such costs is on file in the planning department, and shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Sec. 5-173. - Amendments. 
The fire prevention code adopted in this article shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made a part of this Code. 
Secs. 5-174—5-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIGN REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted on June 17, 2013 , has been treated by the editor as superseding former Art. III, §§ 5-180—5-189, in its entirety. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 98-009, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 2000-21, 10-23-00. 

Sec. 5-180. - Purpose and findings. 
The Toccoa City Commission finds that signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and as a detriment to property values and to the city's overall public welfare as an aesthetic nuisance. By enacting this article, the city commission intends to: 
(1)  Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(2)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(3)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
(4)  Maintain the historical image of the city; finding that the development in the historic district, Main Street district area and along Currahee Street from Hill Street to Nassau Street and along Tugalo Street from North Big A Road to Short Street and along Falls Road; the compactness of buildings and businesses in these districts; the geometry of public road intersections is unique from other areas of the city due to its history, architecture, cultural heritage and integrity; its substantial contribution to the economic vitality that these areas should be preserved and the appearance of the historic downtown and surrounding area, improved thereby assuring that signs are properly integrated with and harmonious to the buildings and sites in the historic downtown; 
(5)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(6)  Promote economic development; 
(7)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations; and 
(8)  Balance the commercial and public interest with the intent to maintain aesthetically pleasing thoroughfares in the city. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-181. - Definitions. 
Aggregate sign area shall mean the area of all signs on a parcel, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs. 
Animated sign shall mean a sign with animated characters and/or text that uses action, changing colors, flashing lights, changes in intensity, blinking, or video is prohibited. 
Area of a sign/sign area shall mean the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses one face of the entire sign, inclusive of any border, emblem, logo and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
Awning sign shall mean a sign located on a roof-like cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign. 
Banner means a sign, with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation, applied to cloth, paper, vinyl, or fabric of any kind with only such material for backing. Banners are to be considered temporary signs. Temporary signs are allowed 30 days in a six month calendar period. 
Billboard shall mean any sign with a sign area exceeding 150 square feet. Billboard signs are prohibited in the historic district, Main Street tax district and along Currahee Street from Hill Street to Nassau Street and along Tugalo Street from North Big A Road to Short Street and along Falls Road. 
Double-faced sign shall mean a sign which has two (2) display areas placed back to back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is sixty (60) degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Double-stacked billboards shall mean a billboard structure in which multiple display panels are set above one another and may also be known as stackmount billboards. 
Electronic Message Board Sign shall mean a sign that presents its message through illumination of intermittent or moving lights, forming letters, numbers or symbols of the message. The message may be static or move across the sign. See Section 13 for requirements to allow control of the installation of electronic signs. 
Flag shall mean any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used to signify a government or other entity or organization. Flags are exempt from regulation. 
Freestanding sign shall mean a sign securely affixed to a support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, such as monument or stanchion signs. A freestanding sign shall have a maximum of 150 square feet. 
Historic district means the city's zoning district historic district (B-III) and central business district (CBD) as established in the zoning ordinance of the City of Toccoa, as amended, and as such boundaries are established on the official zoning map, Toccoa, Georgia, as may be amended from time to time. 
Illuminated sign shall mean a sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign provided there shall be no signs containing flashing lights. 
(1)  Internally illuminated sign: Any sign that is illuminated by an artificial light source from within the sign structure or comprising any or all of its sign face. 
(2)  Externally illuminated sign: Any sign that is partially or completely illuminated at any time by an artificial light source that illuminates the face of the sign from outside the sign structure, i.e., the light source is separate from but directed toward the face of the sign. 
Main Street District Area means the city's Main Street District Area as established by the Toccoa City Commission by ordinance in June 1990 or as subsequently amended. 
Marquee sign shall mean a structure that typically is a covering with changeable advertising, such as the theatre marquee. 
Monument sign shall mean a freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to or be a part of or supported by the building in or to which the sign applies. Monument signs shall not exceed six feet in height. 
Multiple message billboard shall mean a billboard that is an automatic changeable copy sign and presents two or more displays on its sign face in alternating or random sequence by changing the message or copy on the sign electronically or by rotation of panels or slats. 
Mural shall mean a sign which is considered purely decorative in nature and content, and does not include advertising by picture or verbal message and is exempt from sign regulations, but requires a certificate of appropriateness (COA), if located in the historic district. 
Neon shall mean neon signs are luminous-tube signs that contain neon or other inert gases at a low pressure. Applying a high voltage (usually a few thousand volts) makes the gas glow brightly. They are produced by the craft of bending glass tubing into shapes. 
Non-conforming sign shall mean any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance that was legal at the time of its erection and is being properly maintained; which will be reviewed by the planning department. 
Parcel shall mean a separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records. 
Parapet wall shall mean an extension of the wall at the edge of a roof, terrace, balcony, or other structure. 
Portable sign shall mean a sign which is not permanently affixed. It is characteristic of a portable sign that the space provided for advertising messages may be changed at will by the replacement of lettering or symbols. Portable signs are prohibited except.in the industrial zoning districts MI and MII which are limited to 90 calendar days at a business address, no more than twice per year. 
Roof sign shall mean a sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building which extends above the immediately adjacent roof line of the building. Unless otherwise granted by a variance or a non-conforming sign, roof signs are not permitted within the city. 
Sandwich board signs shall mean a temporary A frame or easel sign mounted or attached back to back in such a manner as to form a triangular vertical cross section through the faces. The sandwich board sign lists specials or the menu of the establishment. Said sign must be located in front the business served. Sandwich board signs are allowed in B-III district and do not require a sign permit. The sandwich board sign cannot be greater than two feet wide and three feet high. 
Sign shall mean a device or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. Signs do not include the interior of buildings, but do include window signs visible from the exterior. Signs do not include merchandise and pictures or models of products incorporated in a window display; nor works of art painted on a window or wall which in no way identify a product located on the premises nor the posting of business hours. 
Sign board signs shall mean building identification signs that are permitted along the signable area of each building façade. The maximum aggregate size of such signs shall not exceed an area of one-half square foot of building frontage; provided however, that the aggregate size of such signs along a single façade shall not exceed an area of 30 square feet within the residential zoning districts nor 90 square feet for the balance of the historic district. 
Stanchion sign shall mean a freestanding sign mounted on one or more poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertisement portion of such structure which rests upon or is supported by such poles. A stanchion sign shall have a maximum of 150 square feet. 
Temporary sign shall mean a display or banner with or without a structural frame that is not permanently attached to a building, structure or the ground and is intended to be displayed for a limited time. Temporary signs are allowed 30 days in a 6 month calendar period. 
Trailer sign shall mean any sign mounted on wheels or designed to be mounted on wheels that may be moved from one location to another. Trailer signs are prohibited. 
Wall sign shall mean a sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear or side of the structure. 
Window sign shall mean a sign installed flush with or on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. Window signs shall be limited to one sign per window and shall exceed no more than thirty percent of the window area. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 2 ) 
Sec. 5-182. - Permits. 
All signs allowed by this article, except those exempted from obtaining a permit shall require a permit issued by the city prior to posting, displaying, substantially changing, or erecting a sign in the city. Substantially changing specifically includes any change of design, color, wording or logos (defined to mean signs that are changed on more than 50 percent of the total surface area). Signs that are substantially changed must obtain a new permit. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 3 ) 
Sec. 5-183. - Standards for approval (application information). 
Applications for sign permits required by this article shall be filed by the sign owner or the owner's agent with the planning department of the City of Toccoa. The application shall be for a specified location within the corporate limits of Toccoa and shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and a plat map of the property, drawn to scale, showing all existing structures, including existing signage and which bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign. 
(2)  The aggregate area for all signs on the parcel. 
(3)  The name(s) and address(es) of all of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(4)  Consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign. 
(5)  Name, address, phone number of the sign contractor. 
(6)  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected. 
(7)  The distance of the sign from the closest adjacent sign in either direction. 
(8)  The size of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed. 
(9)  The length of the building, if applying for a wall sign. 
(10)  GPS location. 
(11)  Rendering or scaled drawing of the proposed sign. 
(12)  Historic district requirements. If the property or business is located in the historic district then, historic preservation commission approval is required. All signs within the historic district shall require review and approval by the HPC through the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness (COA) prior to the issuance of a permit or the erection of said sign. 
(13)  If the plans, specifications, and intended use of the applied sign or part thereof conform in all respects to the applicable provisions of this article and the city building and electrical codes, where applicable, a sign permit shall be issued. 
(14)  A sign permit shall become null if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six months after the date of permit issuance. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 4 ) 
Sec. 5-184. - Time for consideration. 
The city shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the city's actual receipt of a completed application and accompanying sign permit fee. The planning department of the city shall give notice to the applicant of the decision of the city by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by first class mail, to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the completed application and fee. if mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the city fails to act within the 30 business day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 5 ) 
Sec. 5-185. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Procedure. The city shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this article, are incomplete applications, or applications containing any false material statements. Violation of any provision of this article will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, the planning department staff shall revoke the permit. Should the city deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and mailed by first class mail or via hand delivery to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later re-submitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of re-submission, instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and the applicant is granted a public hearing before the Toccoa Planning Commission. The applicant will be given at least ten days written notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the denial of the permit application, or the revocation of a permit. "Due cause" is the violation of the provisions of this article, state or federal law related to signage, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)  Appeal. If the permit is denied, the sign is not to be erected during the appeal process. An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the city commission upon filing of written notice of an appeal with the city clerk within ten business days of the planning commission's decision. Such appeal shall be considered by the city commission at the next commission meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that notice of appeal is received a minimum of five full business days before the meeting. If the appeal is not heard at such meeting, it shall be heard at the next regular meeting of city commission thereafter. The city commission shall make a final decision no later than 30 days from the date of the hearing. 
(c)  In the event an individual whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city commission, he or she may petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Stephens County as provided by law. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 6 ) 
Sec. 5-186. - Permit expiration. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed in accordance with the permit application within six months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
If the owner of the sign permit moves, the owner of the permit and/or the owner of the real estate must remove said permitted sign and all sign supports within 30 days, provided it will ultimately be the responsibility of the owner of the real estate to ensure the sign face and all posts, columns, or supports are removed from the property within 30 days of the permittee moving or closing business. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 7 ) 
Sec. 5-187. - Fees. 
The cost of a permit shall be $75.00 per business. The permit fees shall be amended from time to time by the city commission and such amendments shall be incorporated and made part of this Code. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 8 ) 
Sec. 5-188. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
(1)  Animated signs; 
(2)  Electronic message boatel signs are permitted only in the following areas: 
a.  Big A Road beginning at its intersection with Doyle Street and continuing in a southeasterly direction to the corporate limits of the City of Toccoa; 
b.  Currahee Street (U.S. Highway 123) from the eastern most corporate limit to the western most corporate limit, excluding properties located within the Main Street District area; 
(3)  Signs on public rights of way other than publicly owned or maintained signs; 
(4)  Window signs which exceed 30 percent of the window area; 
(5)  Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-12-80; 
(6)  Signs which simulate an official traffic control or warning sign or hide from view any traffic or street sign, signal or public service sign; 
(7)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing; 
(8)  Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the sate and orderly movement of traffic; 
(9)  Signs that are more than six square feet, attached to or painted onto a vehicle parked on or adjacent to and visible from a street for the purpose of advertising onto said street, except signs advertising the vehicle for sale; 
(10)  Roof signs; 
(11)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, post, curve, utility pole, or other structure except as set forth herein; 
(12)  Multiple message billboards; 
(13)  Double stacked billboards; 
(14)  Signs which emit smoke vapor, particles or odor; 
(15)  Portable signs; 
(16)  Trailer signs; 
(17)  Signs painted directly on exterior walls for a building or structure located in the historic district, provided that such signs may be allowed subject to the following condition: the sign is located and applied to the flat smooth façade of a building in a manner that permits removal or painting over, without defacing, obscuring or otherwise leaving an unsightly appearance; 
(18)  Signs with revolving or rotating beams of light located in the historic district; 
(19)  Flying Signs and paraphernalia or inflatable signs except as used by legally constituted governmental agencies and authorities are prohibited; 
(20)  Pennants and streamers; 
(21)  LED light strips around windows; and 
(22)  Hand written signs. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 9 ) 
Sec. 5-189. - Restrictions in residential zoning districts. 
Other than subdivision entrance signs allowed under section 5-190, parcels located in residential zoning districts shall not contain signs having an aggregate sign area greater than 15 square feet. No individual sign shall exceed six square feet in sign area in a residential zoning district. Signs having a height of greater than five feet above the grade level of the centerline of the adjacent street to which the parcel on which the sign is located shall not be located in residential zoning districts. Signs meeting the standards of this section are exempt from permitting requirements. Animated and electronic message board signs are prohibited in residential zoning districts. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 10 ) 
Sec. 5-190. - Residential subdivision entrance signs. 
Platted residential subdivisions consisting of more than two parcels may erect one monument sign at each entrance to the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed a height of six feet above the grade level of the center line of the adjacent street and shall not have a sign area greater than 25 square feet. Such entrance signs shall not count toward the maximum allowable signage on a residential parcel. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 11 ) 
Sec. 5-191. - Height requirements. 
The following height requirements shall be adhered to: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided, no sign in a commercial or industrial zoned district shall exceed 35 feet in height at the highest point on the sign as measured from grade level of the adjacent street. 
(2)  Monument signs shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(3)  All sign heights shall be measured from the grade level of the adjacent street to which the property on which the sign is located has access. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
(4)  Signs shall not be mounted higher than 18 feet in the historic district, Main Street tax district and along Currahee Street from Hill Street to Nassau Street and along Tugalo Street from North Big A Road to Short Street and along Falls Road. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 12 ) 
Sec. 5-192. - General size, sign characteristics, and location requirements in non-residential districts. 
(a)  Location. No freestanding sign may be located within 30 feet of the intersection of street right of-way lines extended. 
(b)  Location. No sign shall be located on any building, fence or other property belonging to another person without the written consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Billboard signs. 
(1)  Billboard signs shall not exceed 50 feet above road grade. Billboard signs shall not exceed 50 feet in height or maximum surface area is 160 square feet per side. Maximum height to top of billboard is 50 feet above existing road grade. 
(2)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels in commercial zoning areas (in B-II). 
(3)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels adjacent to designated state or federal highways and shall be oriented only towards those highways. 
(4)  No billboard sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of another billboard sign. 
(5)  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet of residential zoned parcels. 
(6)  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, historic district, or cemetery; provided, however, that such sign may be located within 500 feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery when the sign is separated by buildings or other obstructions so that the sign located within the 500 foot zone is not visible from the public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery. 
(7)  No billboard sign shall be erected to a height in excess of 50 feet above grade. 
(8)  One two-sided billboard is permitted per commercial lot (double stacked billboards are prohibited). 
(d)  Stanchion signs. 
(1)  Stanchion signs for parcels exceeding three acres shall not exceed a sign area of 150 square feet. 
(2)  Stanchion signs for parcels less than three) acres, but equal to or greater than 30,000 square feet shall not exceed a sign area of 150 square feet. 
(3)  Stanchion signs for parcels less than 30,000 square feet in size shall not exceed a sign area of l00 square feet. 
(4)  Stanchion signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas and shall be limited to one such sign per parcel per street frontage. 
(e)  Monument signs. Monument signs shall not exceed 50 square feet of total area, which shall include signage and structure, and shall be limited to one such sign per parcel per street frontage. Monument signs shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(f)  Wall and awning signs. 
(1)  Wall and awning signs shall not project above the surface of the parapet wall. 
(2)  Wall signs shall not project laterally beyond the exterior façade of the buildings. Awning signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than four feet. 
(3)  Wall and awning signs shall be regulated as follows: For single tenant and multi-tenant occupancy with less than 100 linear feet of building frontage, 1.5 square feet per linear foot of building frontage, to a maximum of 100 square feet per business. For multi-tenant (commercial shopping center with 100 linear feet or more of building frontage), each tenant, two square feet per linear foot of building frontage to a maximum area of 150 square feet per business. 
(4)  The maximum awning sign height shall be seven feet above the sidewalk or grade level. 
(5)  Wall signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoned areas. 
(6)  Each building tenant shall be limited to one wall or awning sign on each street facing the wall. 
(g)  Electronic Message Board Signs. Sign Characteristics. 
(1)  Electronic message board signs must be installed with a monument base. The monument base shall not exceed eight feet in height and ten feet in length, which includes the base. 
(2)  The message board portion of an electronic sign shall not exceed 20 percent of the monument sign face, limiting the maximum electronic screen area to 9.6 square feet. 
(3)  Pitch (resolution) will be limited to no more than 34mm, requiring the height of the letter size to be between 12 inches and 5½ inches. 
(4)  The words in the electronic message are limited to no more than two lines of text at a time. 
(5)  The electronic message may contain no video. 
(6)  The border of the sign may not have any changing effect unless the border is integrated with the static message. 
(7)  To prevent glare to oncoming traffic, all electronic signs shall appropriately adjust brightness by 30 percent as ambient light levels change. At all times, light intensity shall not be unreasonably bright to jeopardize the safety of the motoring public. 
(8)  Each fixed message displayed shall remain fixed for at least ten seconds. The transition from one display to another shall be accomplished in two seconds or less. 
(9)  Scrolling rate of electronic signs must travel at a rate between 16 and 32 light columns per second. 
(10)  Only one electronic sign shall be allowed to face the same direction. This allows back-to-back or V-type formation signs. 
(11)  Sign location distance from right-of-way. In order to facilitate visibility to vehicular traffic, no sign may be placed any closer than 10 feet from the highway right-of-way. 
(12)  Sign location restrictions. Changing signs, electronic message board signs and digital changeable copy signs shall be permitted solely in city districts zoned commercial. Such signs are restricted to the following locations: 
a.  Big A Road beginning at its intersection with Doyle Street and continuing in a southeasterly direction to the corporate limits of the City of Toccoa. 
b.  Currahee Street (U.S. Highway 123) from the eastern most corporate limit to the western most corporate limit, excluding properties located within the Main Street District area. 
(13)  This provision does not include rotating signs that revolve no faster than five revolutions per minute. 
(h)  Maximum aggregate sign area. Parcels may contain mote than one freestanding sign, provided that: 
(1)  Parcels exceeding three acres shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of 300 square feet for the entire parcel. 
(2)  Parcels less than three acres but greater than 30,000 square feet shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of 180 square feet for the entire parcel. 
(3)  Parcels less than 30,000 square feet in size shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of 100 square feet for the entire parcel. 
(4)  These limits shall include the area of any wall signs, window, free standing signs or billboard signs located on the parcel. 
(i)  Sign permits for liquor stores. Sign permits for liquor stores must comply with state/city alcohol regulations. 
(j)  Industrial zoning districts MI and MII—Portable signs. Portable signs in the industrial zoning districts are limited to 90 days at a business address, no more than twice per calendar year. 
(k)  Installation of signage. No sign or sign structure or support shall be placed onto or obscure or damage any significant architectural feature of a building, including but not limited to a window or a door frame, cornice, molding, ornamental feature, or unusual or fragile material of property located in the historic district, Main Street district area and along Currahee Street from Hill Street to Nassau Street and along Tugalo Street from North Big A Road to Short Street and along Falls Road. 
(l)  Door signs. Door signs are not to exceed one square foot and not more than one sign per door. Door signs do not require a sign permit. 
(m)  Marquee signs. Marquis signs "shall only announce existing or future entertainment events or attractions. New or remodeled marquee signs shall not extend greater than eight feet from the façade of a building nor exceed a sign area of greater than 45 square feet. The height of a new or remodeled marquee sign shall not extend above the parapet wall of the building and the lowest point of the marquee sign shall not be less than ten feet above the established grade. Provided however, that where documented historic precedent exists for a theater marquee, such a historic precedent may be permitted to be recreated. Marquee signs located in the historic district require certificate of appropriateness (COA) approval. 
(n)  Installation. Signs shall be mounted in such a way as to minimize damage to historic materials. On masonry buildings, bolts should extend through mortar joints and not through masonry units. On frame buildings, mounting brackets and bolts should be the minimal amount necessary to assure adherence to the surface and prevent excessive wood penetration. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 13 ) 
Sec. 5-193. - Construction standards. 
(a)  All signs for which a permit is required under this article shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the city building and electrical codes adopted by the City of Toccoa. 
(b)  Signs for which a permit is not required under this ordinance that is constructed of degradable material may be posted for a maximum of 30 days unless replaced with another sign of the same material. Any such replacement signs may be posted for a maximum of 30 days. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 14 ) 
Sec. 5-194. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Non-conforming signs shall be permitted until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or unsightly; or 
(2)  The sign has been damaged by circumstances beyond the control of the owner to the extent that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign; provided that signs damaged by Act of God and not due to the owner's action may be restored to their pre-damaged condition, provided that the useful life of the sign is not extended. 
(3)  Ten years from the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(b)  No structural repairs except those permitted pursuant to subsection (a)(2) above change in shape, size or design, shall be permitted except to make a non-conforming sign comply with all requirements of this article. 
(c)  A non-conforming sign may not be replaced by another non-conforming sign except where changed conditions beyond the control of the owner render the sign nonconforming or warrant the sign's repair. 
(d)  A nonconforming sign shall be removed or brought into conformance when a principal use existing at the time of the adoption of this section changes, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The sign shall be maintained in good condition. 
(2)  A nonconforming sign shall not be structurally altered except in conformance with the provision of this section and; 
(3)  A nonconforming sign shall not be re-established after damage exceeding 50 percent of the current replacement cost. After such damage, the owner of said sign shall bring the sign into conformance within one year after the damage or destruction occurs with the provision of this section or shall remove the sign. 
(e)  Illegal signs located within a public right-of-way or on public lands. 
(1)  Signs and their supports, braces, guys and anchors, located illegally within any public right-of-way or on other public lands shall be removed by the signs' owners within 30 calendar days of adoption the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(2)  A code enforcement law officer shall be authorized to remove and dispose of nonconforming signs from public rights-of-way and other public lands with or without notice to and at the expense of the owner, builder or other parties responsible for placement of said sign. 
(f)  Illegal signs not located within a public right-of-way or on public lands. 
(1)  A sign and its supports, braces, guys and anchors that did not lawfully exist under the city's regulations prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives shall, within 30 days of adoption the ordinance from which this article derives, either be removed or be brought into conformance with all provisions of this article. 
(2)  Failure to remove such illegal sign and its supports, braces, guys and anchors or bring it into conformance following 30 days' notice to the owner or occupant of the property by the planning director shall authorize the city to remove the sign at the expense of the owner or occupant of the property. 
(g)  Any sign and its supports that is located on property which becomes vacant and is unoccupied for a period of six months or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to be abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of 12 months or more. An abandoned sign is prohibited and is a violation of this article. 
(h)  When any sign constitutes an immediate peril or danger to persons or property, the city marshal may require the condition to be remedied immediately, including removal of the sign if that is necessary to remedy the condition. For the purpose of this article, the word "remove" shall mean that the sign face and sign structure, including all posts, columns, or supports shall be taken down and removed from the property. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 15 ) 
Sec. 5-195. - Variances. 
Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary. No variance shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. A variance from compliance with the sign regulations of this ordinance shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
(1)  Standards. 
a.  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the public street and within 50 feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, existing buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
b.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; and such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and the variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to traffic. 
(2)  Variance applications shall initially be submitted to the city planning commission and shall be heard under the same time frames and rules defined in subsection 5-185(a). The applicant for a variance shall also be entitled to appeal as authorized by subsection 5-185(b) and (c). 
(3)  The Toccoa Historic Preservation Commission, as established in the zoning ordinance of the City of Toccoa, shall have the authority given it by this article to review and make a recommendation to the city commission as to variance request for the erection of signs and other advertising devices within the historic district as established on the official zoning map, the Main Street district area and along Currahee Street from Hill Street to Nassau Street and along Tugalo Street from North Big A Road to Short Street and along Falls Road and as may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 16 ) 
Sec. 5-196. - Exemptions from permit requirements. 
The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of section 5-182 and shall not count towards the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in sections 5-189 and section 5-192(h): 
(1)  Non-illuminated signs, having a sign area of less than 15 square feet, provided they are not located in the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Window signs installed for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. However, such signs shall not exceed 30 percent of the available window space. 
(3)  Numerals displayed for purposes of identifying property location and not exceeding four inches in height in residential districts and ten inches in height in nonresidential districts. 
(4)  Seasonal displays located outside of the public rights of way that are erected for a maximum period of thirty days no more than twice a year. 
(5)  Temporary signs to include banners, promotional signs, cannot exceed 40 square feet and cannot be erected more than 30 days during a six month calendar period. 
(6)  Instructional/directional signs excluded must not exceed six square feet in area and three feet in height. 
(7)  Drive thru menu and gasoline signs. 
(8)  Kiosks. 
(9)  Holiday lights and decorations. 
(10)  Flags and insignia of any government religious, charitable, fraternal or other organizations. 
(11)  Signs on private premises directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property. 
(12)  Any sign with a total square area of two square feet or less. 
(13)  Sandwich board signs. 
(14)  Door signs. 
(15)  Any other sign exempted by law. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 17 ) 
Sec. 5-197. - Illumination. 
(a)  Illumination for signs shall not cast light on adjoining property or shine in such a manner as to cause traffic interference. Illumination shall be constant and shall not change, flash, scroll or stimulate movement. For the purposes of this section only, except as otherwise described, the City of Toccoa adopts the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Law as it exists or as otherwise amended. 
(b)  No sign shall be erected or maintained which: 
(l)  If illuminated, is not effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled way, which beams or rays are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interferes with the operation of a motor vehicle; 
(2)  If illuminated, is illuminated so that is obscures or interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device or signal; 
(c)  If it is found that an electronic sign or any display or effect thereon causes glare or impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or otherwise interferes with the safe operation of a. motor vehicle, then, the owner of the sign shall promptly and within not more than 48 hours reduce the intensity of the sign to a level acceptable to the planning department. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 18 ) 
Sec. 5-198. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The city may, after due notice, issue a citation to any permittee for any sign which shows neglect or becomes noncompliant. Such due notice shall be in writing, shall specify the sign and location, and shall state that the sign has not been properly maintained. The city shall give the permittee ten days to rectify the condition or remove the noncompliant sign before issuing a citation. 
(b)  The city may issue a citation for violation of this article by any sign erected, altered, converted, or used in violation of this article. 
(c)  If a person or business causes a sign to be erected without obtaining a permit, then that said person or business is in violation of this article and a citation can be issued. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be liable for a fine of $150.00 for each violation. Each day a sign is posted in violation of this article shall constitute a separate violation. 
( Ord. of 6-17-13, § 19 ) 
Secs. 5-199—5-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-211. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City of Toccoa is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; in order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and in order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; the Toccoa City Commission hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 20-2006, § I, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 5-212. - Definitions. 
Additions. An addition is an expansion of a building that increases the original size or footprint of the structure by constructing additional space. 
Building. A building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the city commission as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 5-214(b). 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city commission as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 5-214(c). 
Material change in Appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure with a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Object. An object is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site. A site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure. A structure is a work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. No. 20-2006, § II, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 5-213. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission: There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "The Toccoa Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within the city government: The commission shall be part of the general government of the city and the staff function shall be performed by the downtown development director. 
(c)  Commission members: number, appointment, terms and compensation: 
(1)  The commission shall consist of a minimum of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city commission. All members shall be residents of Toccoa and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
(2)  To the extent available in the city five members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions. 
(3)  Members shall serve three-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: two members for two years; and three members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)  Statement of commission's power. The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city commission specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review application for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of article; 
(4)  Recommend to the city commission that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act 1992 (O.C.G.A., Section 44-10-1 through 44-10-5) 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, the Toccoa City Commission or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city commission concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties of historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the Toccoa historic preservation program; 
(12)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
(13)  Review and make comments to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(14)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city commission, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards: The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of Interest: The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statutes and in the City of Toccoa Charter. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources: The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriate governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings: A public record shall be kept of the commission resolution, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. No. 20-2006, § III, 11-13-06; Ord. of 6-30-11, § I ) 
Sec. 5-214. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the commission: 
(1)  Commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within Toccoa. This can be done in conjunction with other interested organizations. 
(2)  The commission shall present to the Toccoa City Commission recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the Toccoa City Commission for designation, the commission shall present a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. contributing, non-contributing or historic, non—historic, vacant, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district: 
(1)  A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character of special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles, or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city, or in the absence of zoning, on an official map designated as a public record. 
(3)  Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Non-contributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in subsection 5-214(b)(1)) 
(c)  Designation of a historic property: . A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, the region or the State of Georgia for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, State of Georgia, or the region; or 
(4)  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties: 
(1)  Designations may be proposed by the Toccoa City Commission, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts—A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties—A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and be kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  The commission or the Toccoa City Commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three (3) consecutive issues in the principle newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  No less than thirty (30) days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in subsection 5-214(a)(3) to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
(5)  A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the Toccoa City Commission. 
(6)  Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the Toccoa City Commission may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Within thirty (30) days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the Toccoa City Commission, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the Toccoa City Commission, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States Mail shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(8)  The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the City of Toccoa of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. No. 20-2006, § IV, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 5-215. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties: After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission: An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans and documentation as may be required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations: In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice: The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard: 
(1)  The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
(2)  The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable Commission Reaction to Applications for Certificate of Appropriateness: 
(1)  Commission action: The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
a.  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
1.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation: The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setbacks and site features, and to the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
2.  Relocation: A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
i.  Whether the present setting of the building contributes to its historic character and aesthetic interest. 
ii.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
iii.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
iv.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
3.  Demolition: A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, or objects shall be guided by: 
i.  The historic, scenic or architectural/significance of the building, structure, site, or object. 
ii.  The importance of the building, structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
iii.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
iv.  Whether the building, structure, site, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
v.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
vi.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, or object from collapse. 
vii.  Whether the building, structure, site, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship: When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship: provided such variances, modifications, interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgement, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The commission and the Toccoa City Commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced: A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within 12 months of date of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and is renewable. 
(l)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness: The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(m)  Acquisition of property: The commission may, where such action is authorized by the Toccoa City Commission and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals: Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the Toccoa City Commission. Any such appeal must be filed with the Toccoa City Commission within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection 5-215(h)(1) of this article or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action, section 5-215(h)(2) of this article. Appeals for properties within the city shall be made to the city commission. The city commission may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the Toccoa City Commission may be taken to the Superior Court of Stephens County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the City of Toccoa ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 20-2006, § V, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 5-216. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair: Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on an historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair: Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect. 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors, and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 5-216 and, at the direction of the Toccoa City Commission; the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes: Nothing in this article shall be constructed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 20-2006, § VI, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 5-217. - Penalty provisions, 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 20-2006, § VII, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 5-218. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjunction shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 20-2006, § VIII, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 5-219. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 20-2006, § IX, 11-13-06) 
Secs. 5-220—5-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICTS 

Sec. 5-231. - Purpose. 
(a)  In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
(b)  In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
(c)  In accordance with the ordinance to establish a historic preservation commission in the city; to provide for the designation of historic properties of historic districts; to provide for issuance of certificates of appropriateness; to provide for an appeals procedure; to repeal conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes; 
(d)  The Toccoa City Commission hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this division to designate a historic district in a geographically definable area containing buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art or a combination thereof which have special historic and aesthetic value or interest in representing one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the City of Toccoa, Stephens County, Georgia; 
(e)  The Downtown Toccoa Historic District is significant in the area of architecture because the commercial and residential buildings are representative of architectural styles and types built in Georgia cities from the end of the 19th century through the middle of the 20th century. The historic district is significant in the areas of commerce because it represents the city's importance as a regional center of commerce from the late 19th to the middle of the 20th century. The Toccoa Historic District is also significant in the area of politics and government because Toccoa was the center of political and governmental activity in Stephens County as represented by the Stephens County Courthouse. 
(Ord. No. 26-2007, § I, 10-23-07) 
Sec. 5-232. - Designation of historic district and boundary description. 
There is hereby created and designated in and for the City of Toccoa the City of Toccoa Historic District with boundaries as follows: 
(1)  The City of Toccoa Historic District will encompass areas of the downtown and surrounding areas, including properties located along streets stated below, as well as the entirety of the Local Toccoa District. 
(2)  District boundaries will necessarily follow a mixture of street right-of-ways and legal property boundaries, as denoted on preliminary parcel map obtained from the GA Mountains Regional Development Center, as follows: 
From a point-of-beginning (P.O.B.) at the southeast corner of East Tugalo Street and Broad Street (Highway 106) move east on south side of Tugalo Street to a point adjacent to the corner of Parcel 23 (Tax Map 10), the southwest corner of the lot currently occupied by the Alexander Apartments. Turn north and follow this boundary to its intersection with Parcel 24. Turn east and follow the boundary between parcel 23 and 24 to the intersection of Alexander Street. From Alexander Street continue east along the north boundary of Parcels 72, 71, 70 and 69 (Tax Map 18) to Sage Street. Continue moving east along the north boundary of Parcels 64, 63 and 62 (Tax Map 18) to Pond Street. From the east side of Pond Street turn north to the intersection of Savannah Street, then east to Short Street. Turn south at the southwest corner of Short Street and continue south on the west side past the intersection of Tugalo Street to the southwest corner of the intersection with Doyle Street (Tax Map 19). Move west along the south side of Doyle Street to the west side of parcel number 227 (Tax Map 19), then south along property line to the southeast corner of parcel 225 (Tax Map 19). Turn west along the south boundary of parcel 225 (Tax Map 19) to the southeast corner of the intersection of North Hill Street and Foreacre Street. Continue south on the east side of North Hill Street (crossing the railroad) to the northwest corner of parcel 266 (Tax Map 19). Turn east along the boundary between parcels 265 and 266 then south along the boundary between 266 and 267 to the intersection with Currahee Street. Turn west along the north side of Currahee Street past the intersections of North Hill Street and Pond Street to Sage Street. Turn north along the east side of Sage Street to the intersection of Foreacre Street. Turn west and continue to the intersection of Alexander Street. Continue west along the Norfolk Southern R.O.W. to South Broad Street. Turn north along the east side of Broad Street past the intersection with East Doyle Street ending at the P.O.B., the southeast corner of the intersection of East Tugalo Street. 
(Ord. No. 26-2007, § II, 10-23-07) 
Sec. 5-233. - List of property in the historic district and ownership thereof. 
The attached list of properties is located within the City of Toccoa Historic District as created in section 5-231 hereof and the owner thereof is set forth beside the name of each property. 
(Ord. No. 26-2007, § III, 10-23-07) 
Editor's note— The list of properties of the historic district is not set out herein but available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 5-234. - Historic district boundaries on the official zoning map. 
Upon designation the City of Toccoa Historic District shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(Ord. No. 26-2007, § IV, 10-23-07) 
Sec. 5-235. - Certificate of appropriateness. 
Upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this division derives no material change in the appearance of any structure, site, object, or work of art within the designated City of Toccoa Historic District shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner of occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness (COA) has been submitted to and approved by the City of Toccoa Historic Preservation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 26-2007, § V, 10-23-07) 
Sec. 5-236. - Notification. 
(a)  Property owners within the City of Toccoa Historic District shall be notified by United States mail upon approval of said district by the city commission. 
(b)  City officials and agencies shall be notified of the designation of the City of Toccoa Historic District. 
(Ord. No. 26-2007, §§ VII, VIII, 10-23-07) 
Secs. 5-237—5-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS 

Sec. 5-241. - Residential dwellings in the historic district. 
The following will pertain to buildings in the Historic District of Toccoa as defined by the plat attached as Exhibit "A" and incorporated by reference to this section. 
(1)  In the historic district residential dwellings shall be permitted on the upper floors, basement and partial ground floor of existing buildings and any building hereafter constructed, in the historic district. 
a.  No dwelling unit shall exceed a maximum of three bedrooms. 
b.  Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area as follows: 
1.  Efficiency dwelling unit—360 square feet minimum; 
2.  One-bedroom dwelling unit—410 square feet minimum; 
3.  Two-bedroom dwelling unit—580 square feet minimum; 
4.  Three-bedroom dwelling unit—850 square feet minimum. 
c.  Ground floor residential developments shall be oriented to the rear and not exceed 40 percent of the total square footage on the ground floor. The ground floor of any development must dedicate a minimum of the first 60 feet (measured from the front door) of the building to commercial purposes. The development shall preserve ground level commercial utilization facing the street. 
d.  Residential developments containing more than nine bedrooms and/or occupying two or more floors must establish a centralized trash collection point within the physical limits of the project that is approved by the City of Toccoa. 
e.  All historic district residential dwellings must have independent entrances, exits and corridors that do not infringe upon the commercial areas and which creates a non-accessible buffer between the commercial area and the residential area. 
f.  Certified architectural drawings showing trash collection, independent residential entrances, exits, corridors, buffers, along with square footage of dwelling units and commercial areas shall be submitted to the building department prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: 
a.  A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided for each residential dwelling unit occupant. The required parking space(s) shall be provided as part of the private residential development and shall be located within the historic district, or as part of a general and/or permitted residential dwelling parking area(s) located within the historic district and designated as such by general ordinance. 
b.  Where provision of the required parking spaces is not on the lot on which the residential dwelling unit is located, the owner of said unit shall submit with his application for a building permit or other agreement that dedicates the required parking spaces to the principal use being served. Such instrument or agreement shall be in the form of a property deed, parking easement, lease agreement for a term of not less than 50 years, or: 
1.  City-issued parking permit. Such instrument or agreement shall be in recordable form and, the owner shall pay all necessary recording fees; 
2.  The City of Toccoa shall have the instrument or agreement recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court. Such parking spaces shall be located within the historic district. 
(3)  This division will not be applicable to any residential dwelling in the historic district existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this division derives. It is the intent of this division that all currently existing residential dwellings located in the historic district be grandfathered and not be subject to the terms and conditions of this division. 

( Ord. No. 2017-3, 4-10-17 ) 
Chapter 5.5 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 5.5-1—5.5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BASIC SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 93-019, adopted September 13, 1993 did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, inclusion of this ordinance as § 5.5-26 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 5.5-26. - Rate and charge regulations. 
(a)  The city will follow the FCC Rate Regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise. 
(b)  In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties; and 
(c)  The city manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC Rate Regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
(Ord. No. 93-019, 9-13-93) 
Chapter 6 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning and development, ch. 16; zoning, ch. 24. 
State Law reference— City as trustee of cemetery funds, property, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-37-4, 36-37-5; cemeteries generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Rules, regulations; map, development plan. 
The city will establish and maintain rules and regulations governing burial and grave digging in the city cemetery. The city will establish and maintain a cemetery map and development plan defining cemetery lots and future development. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-51) 
Sec. 6-2. - Burials in cemetery required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury or cause to be buried any dead person or persons in any place other than a designated cemetery. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-52) 
Sec. 6-3. - Permit required for grave digging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig a grave in the city cemetery without first obtaining permission from the city for such grave digging, such permission to contain the name of the deceased person to be buried in the city cemetery, the lot and grave to be used for such burial, the name of the person who is the owner of such lot, the date of burial, the name of the funeral home handling the arrangements and the name of the person digging the grave. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-53) 
Sec. 6-4. - Permit required for burial. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury or cause to be buried any dead person or persons in the city cemetery without first obtaining from the city a permit for such burial, such permit to contain the name of the deceased person to be buried in the city cemetery, the lot to be used for such grave where the deceased person is to be buried, the name of the person who is the owner of such lot, the date of burial and the name of the funeral home handling the arrangements. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-54) 
Sec. 6-5. - Damaging, defacing graves or cemetery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way disturb any grave or to deface, pull up or remove anything erected or placed to mark a grave, or to remove any plank, post or timber, or any piling or wall placed around a grave in the city cemetery. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or to remove any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure placed in the city cemetery, or to damage or remove any fence, railing or other work for the protection or decoration of any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structures aforesaid, or for the decoration or protection of the cemetery, or to destroy, cut, break, remove, or injure any tree, shrub or plant that may have been planted, or that may be growing in said cemetery, or to commit any other trespass within the city cemetery. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-55) 
Secs. 6-6—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOTS 

Sec. 6-31. - Nonmonument sections; authority to execute deeds; power to remove unauthorized monuments. 
(a)  All sections located in the recent addition to the city cemetery on the west side of Falls Road in the city are hereby designated as nonmonument sections to be maintained as a perpetual care cemetery, and the mayor and the clerk of the commission are hereby authorized to execute deeds on behalf of the city to the purchasers of lots to be used for graves. 
(b)  The city shall reserve the right to remove all markers erected in the nonmonument section. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-61) 
Sec. 6-32. - Lot prices. 
(a)  The term "taxpayer" as used in section 6-32(b) shall be defined as a person or entity paying ad valorem taxes on property located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  All grave spaces in the city cemetery of the city shall be sold at the following prices: 
(1)  Taxpayer: $500.00 per grave 
(2)  Nontaxpayer: $800.00 per grave 
(c)  The price scheduled established in this section may be hereinafter amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-62; Ord. No. 85-028, 10-28-85; Ord. No. 85-030, 11-11-85; Ord. No. 95-015, § II, 11-20-95; Ord. No. 9-2004, § I, 7-12-04) 
Sec. 6-33. - Payment of purchase price. 
No burial permit shall be issued unless the lot in which a deceased person is to be buried has been paid for in full. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-63) 
Sec. 6-34. - Deed restrictions and conditions. 
All conveyances of city cemetery lots shall be made upon the following conditions, restrictions, rules and regulations which shall be annexed to the deed of conveyance: 
(1)  All lots in the nonmonument section shall be conveyed on a perpetual care basis, and the owners of such lots shall not be permitted to erect any monument other than either a bronze or granite marker not more than ten inches wide and not more than 20 inches long to be set flush with the top of the ground, and all graves in such section shall be flat with no mounds. 
(2)  All lots in the monument section are to be conveyed on the basis of future care and maintenance by the owner, with the privilege of erecting monuments or markers as the owner may desire. 
(3)  All shrubbery planted in the cemetery shall be put out by and under the supervision of the city, and owners shall not plant shrubbery or plants on any lot. The city reserves the right to remove dead plants or shrubbery or any that may be growing too big or out of proportion to other shrubs and plants. 
(4)  The city reserves the right to open all graves at current charges for such services. 
(5)  No lot owner may sell his lot, or any part thereof, without first offering same to the city at a price not exceeding the original selling price. 
(6)  No half or part lots are to be sold anywhere in the cemetery with the exception of those lots which are laid out by the city, and the price of half lots are to be in accordance with the section of the cemetery in which they are located, and in proportion to the amount of a full lot located in that section. 
(7)  No boundary walls shall be erected in the cemetery. A white marble post will be furnished by the city for each lot corner at the prevailing prices. 
(8)  After the original investment of $20,000.00 is reimbursed to the general fund of the city, all funds received from the sale of lots in the nonmonument section shall be placed in a perpetual care and maintenance cemetery fund to be designated as "City of Toccoa Cemetery Trust Fund," the principal amount of which is to be invested and the income turned over to the city for maintenance, improvement and enlargement of the cemetery. 
(9)  All lots which are not sold for cash shall be sold on the basis of one-third of the sale price at the time of sale and the balance of the purchase price to be paid in four, five or six equal semiannual installments. No interest is to be charged on such deferred payments. 
(10)  All lots shall be sold with the provision that title to the property conveyed shall not pass until final payment shall have been made by the purchaser. 
(11)  All purchasers of cemetery lots shall agree to be subject to the rules, regulations, conditions and restriction placed on such deed. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-64) 
Chapter 7 - ELECTIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Voting and elections, Ga. Const. art. 2; elections generally, O.C.G.A. title 21; municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 7-1. - Application of state law. 
All elections in the city, including primary elections, shall be governed by the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
(Code 1985, § 2-2-1) 
Sec. 7-2. - Election officials. 
The clerk of the commission shall serve as the registrar and the municipal election superintendent. 
(Code 1985, § 2-2-2) 
Sec. 7-3. - Registration list. 
The city shall maintain its own registration list. 
(Code 1985, § 2-2-3) 
Sec. 7-4. - Polling places. 
The city shall consist of one voting district with the polling place being located at the city hall or at such other place as is duly authorized. 
(Code 1985, § 2-2-4) 
Sec. 7-5. - Expenses. 
The municipal election superintendent is authorized to incur expenses for the preparation and conduct of an election, including the cost of purchasing identification badges for poll officers, the printing of ballots and voters' certificates, and the purchasing of all other supplies necessary for the conduct of an election. The superintendent is further authorized to incur all necessary expenses to provide voting booths for the proper conduct of all elections. 
(Code 1985, § 2-2-5) 
Sec. 7-6. - Nonpartisan elections. 
All elections held for the purpose of filling city offices shall be nonpartisan, and no political party shall conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for such municipal elections. 
(Code 1985, § 2-2-6) 
Sec. 7-7. - Notice of candidacy. 
Each candidate for municipal office in the city shall qualify by filing a notice of candidacy with the municipal election superintendent. Qualifying dates are established by the Municipal Election Code of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 90-19A, § 1, 6-4-90; Ord. No. 97-008, § I, 6-23-97) 
Chapter 7.5 - ENVIRONMENT 
Appendix A: Basal Area Density Credit  Appendix B: Tree Protection Requirements  Appendix C: Tree Plan Requirements  Appendix D: Parking Lot Planting Requirements  Appendix E: Specimen Tree Credit  Appendix F: Tree Planting Specifications  Appendix G: Additional Definitions 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 7.5-1—7.5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING CRITERIA 
DIVISION 1. - CRITERIA FOR WATER SUPPLY WATERSHEDS 

Sec. 7.5-26. - Finding of fact and purpose; protection of water supply watersheds. 
In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the City of Toccoa and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted development. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients and sediments into drinking water supplies, making treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport and storage of hazardous or toxic waste material result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
The purpose of this division is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of the City of Toccoa; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply; and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This division shall apply to all existing and proposed water supply watersheds within the City of Toccoa. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, § 1, 8-13-01) 
Sec. 7.5-27. - Definitions. 
[Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this division its most reasonable application.] 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances located adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed and within other setback areas specified in section 7.5-28 of this division. 
Impervious surface means a man-made structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. 
Large water supply watershed means a watershed containing 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGS Quad map. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Small water supply watershed means a watershed that contains less than 100 square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Utility means a public or private water or sewer piping system, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater system and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multi-purpose reservoirs owned by Georgia Power, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the Tennessee Valley Authority. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, § 2, 8-13-01) 
Sec. 7.5-28. - Establishment of water supply watershed districts. 
The Cedar Creek Water Supply Watershed District is hereby designated and shall comprise of the land that drains to the Toccoa Water Works Reservoir. The boundary of this district is defined by the ridgeline of the watershed and the boundary of a radius of seven miles upstream of the Toccoa Public Water System intake. The district boundary shall be further delineated and defined on the water supply watersheds map (figure 4.1) in the Toccoa-Stephens County Comprehensive Plan. The map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this division by reference. 
The following water supply watershed district and reservoir are hereby defined and boundaries shall be identified on the water supply watershed protection map. 
(1)  The Cedar Creek Water Supply Watershed is a small water supply watershed (less than 100 square miles). An intake for the City of Toccoa is located on Toccoa Water Works Reservoir on this creek. 
(2)  Toccoa Water Works Reservoir: The normal pool level elevation is at the 1,231-foot contour line. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, § 3, 8-13-01) 
Sec. 7.5-29. - Protection criteria. 
The following regulations shall apply to the Cedar Creek Water Supply Watershed identified on the earlier referenced and adopted water supply watershed protection map as a small water supply watershed with a reservoir known as the Toccoa Water Works Reservoir: 
(1)  The corridors of all perennial streams within a seven mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir must be protected from the following criteria: 
a.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the highest edge of the stream banks. 
b.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the highest edge of the stream banks. 
c.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the 150-foot setback area. 
(2)  The corridors of all perennial streams outside of a seven mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir must be protected by the following criteria: 
a.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the highest edge of the stream banks. 
b.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the highest edge of the stream banks. 
c.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the 75-foot setback area. 
(3)  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire watershed shall be limited to 25 percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
(4)  New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resources Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the Standard Prevention Code. 
(5)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 150 feet from the reservoir boundary. The allowable buffer vegetation and disturbance is specified in the reservoir management plan. 
(6)  The Toccoa Reservoir is owned by the City of Toccoa and will be protected as described in the Toccoa Reservoir Management Plan. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, § 4, 8-13-01) 
Sec. 7.5-30. - Exemptions. 
The following uses shall be exempted from: 
(1)  Land uses existing prior to the adoption of this division. 
(2)  Mining activities permitted by the Department of Natural Resources and the Surface Mining Act. 
(3)  Utilities from stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions in accordance with the following conditions if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback area cannot feasibly be located outside these areas: 
a.  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible. 
b.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
c.  The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(4)  Specific forestry and agricultural activities in the stream corridor buffer and setback areas in accordance with the following conditions: 
a.  The activity shall be consistent with Best Management Practices (BMPs) established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
b.  The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, § 5, 8-13-01) 
Secs. 7.5-31—7.5-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 7.5-41. - Finding of fact and purpose. 
The wetlands in the City of Toccoa are indispensable and fragile resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the State of Georgia. 
The purpose of this division is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, § 6, 8-13-01) 
Sec. 7.5-42. - Definitions. 
[Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this division its most reasonable application.] 
Wetlands are those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
Generalized wetland map is the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for Toccoa, Georgia. (figure 4.2: Environmentally Sensitive Water Resource Areas Map from the Toccoa-Stephens County Comprehensive Plan) 
Jurisdictional wetland is an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination is a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C., 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity is any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S., excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, § 7, 8-13-01) 
Sec. 7.5-43. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Toccoa, Georgia that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps (Figure 4.2: Environmentally Sensitive Water Resource Areas of the Toccoa —Stephens County Comprehensive Plan). This map shall be referred to as the Generalized Wetlands Map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this division, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
The Generalized Wetlands Map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the City of Toccoa and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this ordinance does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, § 8, 8-13-01) 
Sec. 7.5-44. - Protection criteria. 
Requirement of local permit or permission: No regulated activity will be permitted within the Wetlands Protection District without written permission or a permit from the City of Toccoa. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the designated inspector of the City of Toccoa, using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, § 9, 8-13-01) 
Sec. 7.5-45. - Permitted Uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. (The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances.) 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of the State of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with Best Management Practices (BMPs) approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to Best Management Practices (BMPs) approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved Best Management Practices (BMPs) are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, § 10, 8-13-01) 
Sec. 7.5-46. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, § 11, 8-13-01) 
Sec. 7.5-47. - Administration, enforcement, penalties, variances, and appeals. 
The administration and enforcement of these regulations, as well as all penalties, variances and appeals shall follow the procedures identified and outlined in the City of Toccoa Code of Ordinances, Chapter 24, Zoning, Articles VI and VII. 
The City of Toccoa (acknowledging Section 404 of the Clean Water Act) does not have the authority to allow appeals or grant variances for proposed development within or adjacent to wetlands, as identified on the generalized wetlands map. No local permit for any proposed development activity occurring within a wetland shall be granted until a section 404 permit, or letter of permission, or determination, is issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, § 12, 8-13-01) 
Secs. 7.5-48—7.5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention, Ch. 9; zoning, Ch. 24. 

Sec. 7.5-61. - Title. 
This article will be known as "City of Toccoa Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 8-2004, § I, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 7.5-62. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): A collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission: The State Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Department of Natural Resources. 
Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
District: The Stephens County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan: A plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan". 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 19-63(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-today operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a storm-water pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the storm-water pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Qualified personnel: Any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Stephens County soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for storm-water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20 et. seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 8-2004, § III, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 7.5-63. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted subsection (6) of this section; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 7.5-64 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 7.5-64 of this article and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsection 7.5-64(c)(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 8-2004, § III, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 7.5-64. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 7.5-64(b) and (c). The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsection 7.5-64(b) and (c) shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subection 7.5-64(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this article shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 7.5-64(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 8-2004, § III, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 7.5-65. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Toccoa without first obtaining a permit from the local issuing authority to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 7.5-65(c). Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of subsections 7.5-64(b) and (c). Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
(3)  A fee, in the amount of $25.00 shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsection 7.5-64(c)(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per subsection 7.5-65(b)(7). have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the Local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(6)  If a permit applicant has two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subections 7.5-64(b) and (c). Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  Data required for site plan. 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
g.  Storm water and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." 
(3)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsection 7.5-64(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 7.5-65(b)(7) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 8-2004, § V, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 7.5-66. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The local issuing authority will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permitees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permitee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permitees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The board, on or before December 31, 2003, shall promulgate rules and regulations setting forth the requirements and standards for certification and the procedures for decertification of a local issuing authority. The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A 12-7-8 (a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7 (c), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 8-2004, § VI, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 7.5-67. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subection 7.5-65(b)(7). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county articles, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this ordinance under county ordinances approved under this ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 8-2004, § VII, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 7.5-68. - Education and certification. 
After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(Ord. No. 8-2004, § VIII, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 7.5-69. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the municipal judge within ten (10) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Stephens County. 
(Ord. No. 8-2004, § IX, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 7.5-70. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 24th day of May, 2004. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 8-2004, § X, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 7.5-71—7.5-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TREES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; subdivisions, ch. 21; zoning, ch. 24. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 7.5-91-7.5-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC TREES AND CITY TREE BOARD 

Sec. 7.5-111. - Definitions. 
Administrator: The planning director or his/her designee shall be responsible for the administration of the provisions of this division. 
Critical root zone: That area of tree roots around the tree measured to be no less than 1.3 ft. in radius for every inch of trunk diameter measured four feet above the ground. 
Park and public trees: Park and public trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks, on public property, public facilities, and all areas owned by the City of Toccoa. 
Person: An individual, partnership, corporation, associate or other legal entity to include all tree removal companies and persons removing trees on behalf of other persons. 
Public property: All streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, medians and public rights of way within the corporate limits of the city and all public parks and recreational areas owned or operated by the city. 
Street trees: Street trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or rights-of-way with the city. 
(Ord. No. 22-2005, § I, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 7.5-112. - Public tree protection and care. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, no person except a public utility shall cut, prune, injure or remove any living tree; or cut or disturb or interfere in any way with the roots of any tree on public property; or spray with any chemical insecticides or other oils or whitewash any tree on public property; or place any wire, rope, sign, poster, barricade, or other fixture on a tree or tree guard on public property; or injure; misuse or remove any device placed to protect any such tree; or place any sign, stationary or mobile, streamer, poster, bill, or other advertisement anywhere on public property. 
(1)  No person shall pile building material or other material, about any tree, plant or shrub in a street in any manner that will in any way injure such tree, plant or shrub. 
(2)  No person shall pave or place gravel, soil or other such material within 12 feet of any tree on public property, unless approved and permitted by the planning director. 
(3)  No person shall dump, pour or spill any oil, herbicide, pesticide or other deleterious matter upon any tree or tree space in any street, or keep or maintain upon any street, any receptacle from which oil or herbicide, pesticide or other deleterious matter leaks or drips, or said material onto any parking or concrete gutter so as to injure any tree on any public property. 
(4)  No person shall use the neutral grounds, parks, sidewalks, or public placed to dump grass clippings, tree trimmings, rocks or refuse of airy nature. 
(5)  No person shall decorate a tree or shrub on any public highway, neutral ground, park, triangle, or sidewalk, either with or without lights, or place advertising matter, posters or political placards on trees or in public properties. 
(b)  Notifications and penalties. 
(1)  Any person who shall injure, damage or destroy any tree, shrub, vine, hedge, or other plant situated upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public property within the city shall promptly notify the planning department of such fact and shall, within such reasonable time as specified by the city planning director, repair or replace the same pursuant to guidelines from the planning director and the city tree board. 
(2)  Should the person fail or refuse to repair or replace the damaged or destroyed trees or plants within such reasonable time, the planning department shall do or cause to be done the necessary repairing or replacement, and the costs of this work shall be recovered from the person responsible for the damage or destruction as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 22-2005, § II, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 7.5.113. - Requirements. 
(a)  Tree species to be planted. The city tree board will develop and maintain a list of desirable trees for planting along streets in three size classes based on mature height: small (under 20 feet), medium (20 to 40 feet), and large (over 40 feet). Efforts shall be made to ensure a sufficient diversity of tree species. Lists of native trees and trees not suitable for planting will also be created by the tree board. The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed above, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 15 feet; medium trees, 25 feet; and large trees, 36 feet. 
(b)  Distance from property lines. Newly planted trees shall have a ten-foot setback from the property line. 
(c)  Distance from street corners and hydrants. No street tree shall be planted within 35 feet of any corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs and curblines. No street tree shall be planted within ten feet of any fire hydrant. 
(d)  Utilities. No street trees other than those species accepted as small trees by the city tree board may be planted under, or within ten feet of, any overhead utility wire. 
(e)  Public tree care. 
(1)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, public grounds and public property, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(2)  The city may remove, or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition due to damage by injurious fungus, insect, or other pest or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements. 
(f)  Pruning standards. All tree pruning on public property shall conform to the state forestry commission standards for tree care operations. 
(g)  Tree topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any private person or firm to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Crowning of trees as directed by the tree board may be substituted, where appropriate. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this article at the determination of the tree board. 
(h)  Pruning and corner clearance. 
(1)  Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not severely obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 15 feet above street surface or eight feet above the sidewalk surface. Such owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or sight triangle at intersections. 
(2)  Tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors shall be maintained clear of such conductors by the electric utility company in compliance with any applicable franchise agreements. 
(i)  Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city tree board will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by such owners at their expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of the failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of the removal to the owner's property tax notice. 
(j)  Removal of stumps. All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 22-2005, § III, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 7.5-114. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The necessary removal of trees by a utility company within dedicated utility easements. 
(b)  The removal of trees on public rights-of-way conducted by, on behalf of, or for any activity to be dedicated to a federal, state, county, municipal or other government agency in pursuit of its lawful activities or functions in the construction or improvement of public rights-of-way. 
(c)  The removal of any tree which has become or threatens to become a danger to human life or property. 
(d)  The removal of trees from recreation areas such as public playgrounds, ball fields, golf courses and other such uses. 
(Ord. No. 22-2005, § IV, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 7.5-115. - Creation and establishment of a city tree board. 
(a)  Tree board—Establishment. There is hereby created and established a tree board for the city which shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the city commission of the City of Toccoa and who are residents of the city. 
(b)  Same—Terms of office. The term of the five people appointed under this article shall be three years. The term of two of the members of the first commission shall be for three years; the term of two members of the first commission shall be for two years; and the term of one member of the first commission shall be for one year. 
(c)  Same—Compensation. Members of the tree board shall serve without compensation. 
(d)  Same—Duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  It shall be the responsibility of the tree board to study, investigate, counsel, develop and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the city council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan. 
(2)  The board shall promote and supervise the establishment of a tree inventory for street and park trees. The inventory shall be updated with the results of ground inspections every three years. 
(3)  The board, when requested by the city commission, shall consider, investigate, make findings, and report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
(e)  Same—Operation. The tree board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep minutes of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 22-2005, § V, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 7.5-116. - Permit and bond. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees on public property within the City of Toccoa without first applying for and procuring a permit. No permit shall be required of any public service company including electric utilities and their agents and contractors or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. 
Before any permit shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $300,000.00 for bodily injury and $100,000.00 property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. 
(Ord. No. 22-2005, § VI, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 7.5-117. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this division shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, be subject to a fine and/or restitution for damages as provided by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa. 
(Ord. No. 22-2005, § VII, 11-28-05) 
Secs. 7.5-118—7.5-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSERVATION AND PROTECTION OF TREES IN NEW DEVELOPMENTS AND REDEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 7.5-131. - Applicability. 
This division shall apply to all new developments and redevelopments as defined herein unless otherwise excepted. The article incorporates by reference all of Division 2 of this article unless in specific conflict in which event this division will control. 
(Ord. No. 3-2006, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 7.5-132. - Definitions. 
Development: 
(1)  Any activity which requires the issuance of a development permit, grading permit, land use permit and/or land disturbance permit. 
(2)  The thinning and removal of trees from undeveloped land including thinning carried out in conjunction with an ongoing forest management program as defined by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(3)  The removal of trees incidental to the development of land or to the marketing of land for development. 
Overstory tree: Those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of 40 feet or more. 
Redevelopment: As the term "redevelopment" is used herein it refers to specific modifications or changed uses of parking lots or parking facilities in the following zoning districts: 
(1)  Multifamily residential; 
(2)  Manufactured home park; 
(3)  Commercial districts; 
(4)  Industrial districts. 
Redevelopment would include: 
(1)  Repairing of a parking lot; 
(2)  Reconfiguration of a parking lot for parking, traffic flow, or access; 
(3)  Replacing, altering or repairing after damage of a building, structure, or land use where the cost of replacing, altering or repairing exceeds sixty percent of the fair market value of the building, structure or land uses immediately prior to redevelopment; 
(4)  Improving in any manner building structures or land uses to the extent that such improvements equal or exceed twenty percent of the value of the building, structure, or use immediately prior to redevelopment. 
Understory tree: Those trees that grow beneath the overstory, and will generally reach a mature height of under 40 feet. 
(Ord. No. 3-2006, § I, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 7.5-133. - Exemptions. 
This division does not apply to: 
(1)  New and existing single-family residential and duplex lots under five acres except those lots in a new subdivision or development as defined by the ordinances of the City of Toccoa which would include single-family residences and multiple duplexes. 
(2)  Tracts on which city zoning ordinances impose no setback requirements and permit 100 percent coverage of the lot by buildings. 
(3)  Property already occupied by an owner as a single-family residence or duplex. 
(4)  Public utilities and government agencies conducting activities to ensure uninterrupted utility and government services and unobstructed passage on public streets because of an emergency only (submission of a tree plan by the utility or government agency is desirable when possible). 
(5)  Tree farms. 
(6)  Approved public recreation areas or private recreation areas which have been issued a business license. 
(7)  Any current or existing use of property is exempt provided such current existing use would be subject to the redevelopment requirements as described in this division. 
(Ord. No. 3-2006, § II, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 7.5-134. - Redevelopment parking lots. 
(a)  All redeveloped parking lots must meet and maintain at least one tree for every ten parking spaces. No less than one overstory tree for every two understory trees planted, is required. 
(b)  For all redeveloped parking lots over 100 spaces in size, one-half of all the trees to be planted must be located in the interior of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 3-2006, § III, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 7.5-135. - General applications for all developments. 
(a)  All developments and applicable redevelopments will be required to submit a "Tree Plan" describing location of trees to be conserved, methods for tree protection, trees to be planted, species list, and other items according to the requirements set forth in Appendix C. "Tree Plan Requirements". 
(2)  Replacement trees planted to meet the "minimum tree basal area standard" requirement shall meet or exceed a two-inch caliper minimum, be given "credit" towards the "minimum tree basal area standard" according specifications in Appendix A.1. "Calculating Tree Basal Area Credit", and comply with species list generated by the city and planted according to city "Tree Planting Standard". Trees planted over six-inch caliper will not receive credit above that given a six-inch caliper tree. 
(c)  Tree save areas for individual existing trees and groups of existing trees retained to meet the "minimum basal area standard" must provide a temporary barrier to entry to the critical root zone at a distance of 1.3 feet radius for every inch of diameter trunk measured four feet above the ground. This barrier must be installed prior to development activity taking place and be removed only after development activity for the immediate site has been completed see Appendix B. "Tree Protection Requirements". 
(d)  All tree plantings of overstory trees must contain at least 200 sq. ft. of contiguous rooting space for each tree to help insure adequate root space to support long term growth. Understory tree plantings must contain at least 75 sq. ft. of contiguous rooting space for each tree to help insure adequate root space to support long term growth. 
(e)  All vegetative buffers, conserved and planted trees required by this and other zoning ordinances are required to be maintained in perpetuity. 
(f)  Written certification of the proper installation of required tree protection will be provided in writing to the planning director by a certified arborist or registered landscape architect before a land disturbance permit will be issued. 
(g)  Written certification of the proper installation of all plant materials will be provided in writing to the planning director by a certified arborist or registered landscape architect before a "certificate of occupancy" can be issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3-2006, § IV, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 7.5-136. - Options to development/redevelopment and new development. 
Should restrictions of the site (such as topography, rights-of-way or city or public easements) limit the ability of the developer to conserve or plant the required basal area on site, the following options are available with the written approval of the tree board: 
(1)  Up to 50 percent of the required number may be planted off-site on public land controlled by the city. 
(2)  A sum of money equal to the cost of purchasing, planting, and maintaining for three years, the number of trees to be planted off site, may be contributed to the "Toccoa Tree Bank" to be used for the purpose of purchasing, planting and maintaining for three years, trees to be newly planted on public property and for community tree benefit education efforts. The sum for each tree is to be determined by the planning director or his/her agent as an average of bids from three nurseries. 
(3)  Should the developer believe that site restriction will not allow even the minimum number of trees to be planted on the property after review by the tree board the developer may proceed with the normal variance appeal process to the planning commission of the city subject to compliance with the tree board's requirements in paragraph (2) above. 
(Ord. No. 3-2006, § V, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 7.5-137. - Criteria for new development. 
(a)  New Developments in Multi-family residential, manufactured home park, commercial and industrial districts (not to include duplex or single-family residential development). 
(1)  New development and sites must meet the overall site "minimum tree basal area standard" of ten units of sq. ft. of basal area/acre for all areas outside the building footprint according to basal area credit specifications (see Appendix A.2.) after parking lot tree planting requirements have been met. Trees planted in parking lots and trees conserved on site (meeting standards in Appendix B. "Tree Protection Requirements" & F. "Tree Planting Specifications"), may be counted to satisfy the minimum basal area standard. 
(2)  Parking lots on all sites must meet and maintain a minimum number of trees as described in Appendix D. "Parking Lot Planting Requirements". Additionally, for parking areas over 20 spaces in size, no less than one overstory tree for every two understory trees planted, is required. No less than half of the required trees must be placed within the interior of the lot. Every parking space must be within 50 feet of a tree. 
(b)  Duplexes and single-family residential subdivisions five acres or larger. 
(1)  All developments shall have one overstory tree planted (understory where overhead lines exist) every 40 feet along all subdivision roads and cul-de-sacs. Trees will be planted outside city right-of-ways and not within 15 feet of any curb, drive, or sidewalk, nor more than 50 feet, nor less than 25 feet from any intersection. Trees are required on both sides of the street. 
(2)  All developments sites must meet the overall site "minimum tree basal area standard" of 10 sq. ft. of basal area/acre prior to the development of any individual lots. 
(Ord. No. 3-2006, § VI, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 7.5-138. - Construction of this division. 
It is the specific intention of this division to impose development and redevelopment requirements. To the extent there is a bona fide written contractual obligation between an owner/developer and lessees or tenants as of the date of the enactment of this ordinance from which this division derives [February 13, 2006] which imposes land use requirements inconsistent with this division, this division will not be applicable until the contractual obligation is terminated. 
(Ord. No. 3-2006, § VII, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 7.5-139. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this division shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, be subject to a fine and/or restitution for damages as provided by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa. 
(Ord. No. 3-2006, § VII, 2-13-06) 
TOCCOA TREE ORDINANCE APPENDICES 
Appendix A: Basal Area Density Credit 
Appendix B: Tree Protection Requirements 
Appendix C: Tree Plan Requirements 
Appendix D: Parking Lot Planting Requirements 
Appendix E: Specimen Tree Credit 
Appendix F: Tree Planting Specifications 
Appendix G: Additional Definitions 
Appendix G: Additional Definitions 
APPENDIX A. BASAL AREA DENSITY CREDIT 
Density Credit is the value assigned to a tree, replacement or existing, that is reflective of its cross sectional area (measured at 12 inches above the ground for replacement trees and 4' above the ground for existing trees.) This cross sectional area is also known as basal area. 
Example of Density Credit Calculation: an existing, 10″ diameter tree, measured 4′ above the ground has a cross sectional area of .6 feet. 
Area Calculation: Pi × the (radius) squared of the 10″ diameter tree 
or 3.1416 × (10/2) 2 
or 3.1416 × (25) = 78.54 sq. inches 
or 78.54/144 (squares inches in a square ft.) = .54 
This value (.54) is rounded up to .6 Density Credit units. 
_____
1. Density Credit values for individual existing trees that will be conserved on site to satisfy Density Credit requirements: 

 
* Note: These values are for trees that do not qualify as specimen trees and are not subject to specimen tree designation under section Appendix B. Trees qualifying as specimen trees are subject to the benefits and restrictions noted in the afore cited section. 
Example 1. Calculated density on a 1 acre site conserving the following sized trees: 

 
Example 2: Calculated density on a 2.5 acre site conserving the same number and sized trees used in Example 1. 
a)  A commercial site with 2.5 acres disturbed area and no specimen trees would result in a density credit requirement of 25 units, calculated as follows: 
2.5 acres × 10 Tree Density Units = 25 DC 

 
b)  The required density credit is 25. The existing density credit is 21.6. 
25 ;minus; 21.6 = the amount of density credit needing to be replaced on the site. 
25 ;minus; 21.6 = 3.4 
c)  A total of 3.4 replacement units are required. See replacement tree density credit below. 
Note: Any tree which qualifies as a Specimen Tree may receive special consideration for conservation (see Appendix E "Specimen Tree Credit"). 
2. Density credit values for replacement trees that will be planted on site to satisfy density credit requirements: 
These density credits are based upon the expected size of the replacement tree in 10 years given its caliper at planting (i.e. a 2" caliper tree will have the density credit of .3 square feet 10 years from the date of planting). 

 
Example 3: Calculated density for replacement trees. 
Using the information from Example 2. an additional replacement density credit of 3.4 was required. Dividing the additional density credit required by the credit allocated to a particular sized replacement tree will yield the number of trees to be planted. 
Using 3″ replacement trees: 3.4/.4 = 8.5 trees to be planted in addition to the trees conserved on the 2.5 acre site to meet the density credit requirement. 
Notes: 
A.  No more than 30% of all trees planted for replacement density may be of any one species. 
B.  Pine trees to be planted to meet required replacement densities must be at least 2-inch caliper. 
  
Depiction of Credit Calculation 
(Ord. No. 3-06, 2-13-06) 
APPENDIX B. TREE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS 
A.  The following minimum tree protection measures must be in place for all tree save areas: 
(1)  Trees identified for conservation on the "Tree Plan" shall have protection fencing that is a minimum of four (4) feet high installed at the edge of the critical root zones. All tree protection zones shall be designated as such with signage posted visibly on all sides of the fenced area. Signs requesting workers' cooperation and compliance with tree protection standards are recommended at the site entrance(s). 
(2)  All tree conservation zones shall be designed to prevent the sedimentation of erosion material. Silt fences must be placed along the outer uphill edges of tree protection zones at the land disturbance interface. 
(3)  No person shall encroach into the tree protection zones. Construction activities, including but not limited to, parking, vehicle and foot traffic, material storage, concrete washout, debris burning, and other activities shall be arranged so as to prevent disturbance within the protected areas. 
(4)  Reasonable efforts shall be made to locate utility lines along corridors between tree protection zones. If utility lines must encroach into the protection zones, they should be installed by tunneling rather than trenching. 
(5)  All tree protection devices shall remain in fully functioning condition until the Certificate of Occupancy is issued. 
(6)  Any tree, designated for conservation, which is negligently damaged during construction, as determined by the Planning Director or his/her agent, shall be treated according to the National Arborists Association Standards. If fatally damaged, as determined by the Planning Director or his/her agent, the tree(s) shall be replaced with four (4) inch caliper trees equal to the unit value of the tree removed. Any specimen tree damaged as described above shall be replaced with trees equal to three (3) times the unit value of the tree removed. 
(7)  It is recommended to apply a layer of mulch to the tree protection zones. 
(8)  There shall be no construction activity inside the tree save areas, including but not limited to, grading, paving, and construction of buildings and other structures. 
(9)  The site shall be designed and maintained in a manner to ensure proper drainage in tree save areas during and after construction. 
B.  The developer shall designate a Tree Protection Supervisor. This person shall demonstrate knowledge in the area of tree protection practices during construction and shall be on site to ensure tree protection measures are enforced. The Tree Protection Supervisor shall participate in a Pre-Construction Conference with the City prior to the commencement of any land disturbance. The Tree Protection Supervisor must notify the City Planning Director immediately should any tree damage occur on the site. 
C.  Tree Protection inspections shall be performed by a Certified Arborist or Registered Landscape Architect during construction. The inspections shall be conducted prior to the commencement of land disturbance, immediately following the clearing and grubbing phase, immediately following the grading phase, and at the end of the project before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued. The site shall be inspected to ensure all tree protection regulations are being met and to identify any existing or developing tree related problems that require treatment. An inspection report shall be prepared by the Certified Arborist or Registered Landscape Architect and certified by the inspector and submitted to the Planning Director. Any damage noted shall be treated according to the recommendation of the Planning Director or his/her agent prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The Planning Director or his/her agent shall have the authority to require additional reports should he/she determine significant construction damage has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 3-06, 2-13-06) 
APPENDIX C. TREE PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
All development plans submitted to the development department for consideration will require that a Tree Plan be included as one of the plans submitted. The Tree Plan shall include the following: 
1.  An integrated site plan showing Specimen Trees, the trees to be saved and those to be removed, utilities to be installed, grading, the approximate location of all structures, driveways and curb cuts and proposed tree plantings and other landscaping; 
2.  A detailed plan to protect and preserve trees before, during construction, which plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  All items found on the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Submittal checklist pertinent to normal plan review; 
b.  Site area (roads, utility lines, detention ponds, etc.,); 
c.  The locations of existing and proposed structures, paving, driveways, cut and fill areas, detention areas, etc.; 
d.  Phase lines or limits of construction; 
e.  A delineation of all protected zones with any required dimensions; 
f.  Calculations showing compliance with the required Site Density Factor using existing trees, replacement trees, and/or contributions to the City of Toccoa Tree Bank (see Basal Area Density Credit, Appendix A); 
g.  Locations of all existing and proposed utility lines and easements; 
h.  Locations of any boring sites for underground utilities; 
i.  Locations of all Specimen Trees and indications whether they are to be removed or preserved; 
j.  Locations of all tree protection devices, materials to be used in each location and details; 
k.  A delineation of tree save areas in which trees have been inventoried for density calculations; 
l.  Location of trees to be planted with root zone space noted; 
m.  If applicable, locations and details of all permanent tree protection measures (tree wells, aeration systems, permeable paving, retaining walls, bollards, etc.); and 
n.  Additional information as required on a case-by-case basis. 
All Tree plans will be certified in writing for their accuracy by a Certified Arborist or a registered Landscape Architect. 
The above items may be integrated into the normal application requirements and submittals. 
(Ord. No. 3-06, 2-13-06) 
APPENDIX D. PARKING LOT REQUIREMENTS 
All "New Developments" must plant the minimum number of trees per 8 parking spaces based upon total number of parking spaces according to the following schedule: 

 
Calculations for tree replacement will be rounded to the nearest whole number. 
(Ord. No. 3-06, 2-13-06) 
APPENDIX E. SPECIMEN TREE CREDIT 
Specimen tree: Any tree, as defined by this article, in fair or better condition, which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to size, species, or condition, and which meets the following: 
24″ dbh—Large hardwoods such as oaks, hickories, yellow poplars, sweetgums, etc. 
30" dbh—Large softwoods such as pines, cedars, etc. 
8" dbh—Small trees such as dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, etc.; 
Provided, however, that a lesser-size tree can be considered by the Administrator to be and designated a specimen tree if it is a rare or unusual species, of exceptional or unique quality, or of historical significance; provided further that a lesser-size tree can be considered by the Arborist to be and designated a specimen tree if it is specifically used by a builder, developer, or design professional as a focal point in a landscape project. Specimen tree stand: Any collective group of specimen trees, as defined by this ordinance, which has been determined to be of high value in the opinion of the Arborist, and which meets one or more of the following: 
a.  A relatively mature, even aged stand; 
b.  A stand with purity of species composition or of a rare or unusual nature or ecological value; 
c.  A stand of historical significance; 
d.  A stand with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
Specimen Tree Density Credit: Trees meeting the Specimen trees specifications above and whose roots zones are protected by a physical barrier (see detail) to a distance of 1.5 feet for every inch of trunk diameter measured at dbh will receive double the density credit afforded in Appendix A. Any encroachments of any type into this protected area will remove the "Specimen Tree" designation from this tree as well as the double density credit. 
(Ord. No. 3-06, 2-13-06) 
APPENDIX F. TREE PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS 
Tree Planting - Basic Installation 
1.  Soil surface requirements are 200 sq.ft. of open soil surface area for overstory trees and at least 75 sq.ft. of open soil surface area for understory trees. 
2.  The planting area shall be tilled to a depth of 6 to 8 inches (deeper if the soil is compacted) for an area of 5 times the diameter of the root ball. 
3.  Excavate a hole three times the diameter of the root ball and no deeper than the ball or container. Leave the soil at the base of the hole compacted. 
4.  Remove the container, cut girdling roots and place tree in the hole. Plant one inch above existing soil line for every 10 inches of root ball depth (15 inch deep root ball planted 1.5 inches above existing soil line) no more and never below. For Ball and Burlap trees (B&B) place tree in the hole. Plant 1 to 2 inches above the existing soil line, no more and never below. Remove all ties and strapping, wire basket and burlap. 
5.  Backfill the hole with un-compacted native soil previously removed to make the hole. Lightly pack the soil and water as you go to eliminate any air pockets. Construct a mulch ring at outer edge of planting hole and mulch planting area to a depth of 2 to 3 inches with composted wood chips. Do not mulch within 6 inches of the trunk. This will allow air circulate around the trunk root flare and top of the root ball. 
6.  Stake tree only if wind throw is a significant issue and allow for at least 3 inches "slack" in tie wires. Never allow bare wires to contact bark. Remove stakes, and all wires, hoses and ties after first growing season. 
Detail: 
Site Preparation Detail 
(Ord. No. 3-06, 2-13-06) 
APPENDIX G. ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS 
Unless otherwise specifically defined the following definitions will be applicable: 
Basal area: The cross sectional area of a tree trunk measured 4 feet from the ground. 
Building foot print: That area occupied and defined by the exterior of the building proper. 
Caliper: Diameter of tree trunk measured at 12 inches in height above the soil line. 
Critical root zone: The minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient intact root mass to give the tree or group of trees a reasonable chance of survival. 
Green space: Canopy covered land area dedicated to be preserved from development activity in perpetuity as a special condition for or requirement of development. 
Minimum basal area standard: Minimum total tree basal area required to be saved or planted on a site to satisfy the provisions of the tree ordinance. 
Rear set back: The closest rear distance to the rear property line which the building or structure footprint can exist. 
Timber harvesting: The silvicultural practice of removal of trees from a site for sale as forest products. As an agricultural and silvicultural practice this activity is viewed as a non-development activity as no grading, mass clearing, or stump removal takes place. 
Tree save area: An area designated for preserving naturally growing or existing trees, preserving natural buffers, or trees dedicated to meet the minimum basal area standard requirement. 
Tree save easement: Land easement held by the locality in perpetuity dedicated to the preservation of trees and tree canopy. 
(Ord. No. 3-06, 2-13-06) 
Chapter 8 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fire protection and fire department, § 28. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; fire prevention code, § 5-171 et seq.; following emergency vehicles, § 11-32; subdivisions, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(1); The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-2 et seq.; authority to enact ordinances or fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-2 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; blasting standards act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 25-8-1 et seq.; blasting near underground gas pipes and facilities, O.C.G.A. § 25-9-2; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; electronic security systems installed and serviced by counties or municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Interfering with, and obstructing or hindering members of the fire department. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any member of the fire department, or to obstruct or hinder any member of the fire department, while the member of the fire department is engaged in the performance of his official duties. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-12) 
Sec. 8-2. - Opening fire hydrant. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a member of the fire department, to open or turn on any fire hydrant on the city system without permission from the city. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-14) 
Secs. 8-3—8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-31. - General responsibility, department head. 
The fire department shall be responsible for fire prevention and protection in the city. The head of the department shall be the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-1) 
Sec. 8-32. - Chief; powers and duties. 
The chief of the fire department shall: 
(1)  Execute all orders and directions of the city manager. 
(2)  Under the general direction of the city manager, be in charge of the fire department and have supervision over its members. 
(3)  Exercise and delegate police powers in the enforcement of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance pertaining to the fire department, right-of-way, inspections of buildings and fire escapes, or other provisions or ordinances pertaining to fire protection. 
(4)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-2) 
Sec. 8-33. - Service outside city. 
The city fire department shall not serve any person located outside the city limits of the city, except for church buildings, schools or educational buildings and also anyone who registers with the city fire department and shall have paid the required fee. The required fee as established shall be due annually on or before March 1 in each year of registration. The rate and charges for fire service by the city shall be established from time to time by the city commission by duly enacted resolution. 
(Ord. No. 90-011, § 1, 2-26-90) 
Chapter 9 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An Ord. of Aug. 25, 2008, has been treated by the editor as superseding former Ch. 9, Arts. I—III, in its entirety. Former Ch. 9 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 87-026, §§ 7-5-1—7-5-31, adopted Aug. 10, 1987. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; planning and development, ch. 16; soil erosion and sediment control, ch. 18; subdivisions, ch. 21; zoning, ch. 24. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Commission of Toccoa, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 9-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Toccoa, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 9-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 9-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 9-5. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this section. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 9-7. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1—A30, AR, AR/A, ARJAE, AR/A1—A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1—V30, and YE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before August 10, 1987 [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 10, 1987 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is; 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this ordinance, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after August 10, 1987 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)]. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after August 10, 1987 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any requirements of this chapter) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 6) 
Sec. 9-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Toccoa, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 9-7. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 26, 2008 as amended, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 26, 2008 as amended, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for unincorporated Stephens are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. (There are no known areas officially identified at this time.) 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Planning Department of City of Toccoa. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 9-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 9-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 9-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 9-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 9-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of City of Toccoa or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 9-13. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 9-14—9-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 9-31. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The building official of the City of Toccoa is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 9-32. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be made to the Planning Department of the City of Toccoa (hereinafter "planning department") on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(b)  Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsection 9-52(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(c)  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The planning department shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 9-33. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the planning department shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 9-7, then the planning department shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of sections 9-51 and 9-52. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 9-7. 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 9-32(b)(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the planning department shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 9-32(b)(1)c. and subsection 9-52(2) or 9-54(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the planning department shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the planning department and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 9-34—9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 9-51. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 9-52. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 9-51(4), "Elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1—30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 9-33(7). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) Individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 9-51(6) above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 9-52(3)a.3, above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 9-7, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in anyy increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection 9-52(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 9-53. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 9-7, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a Floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 9-7, then the planning department shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of sectioln 9- 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 9-51(4) "Elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The planning department shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 9-54. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 9-7 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 9-51(4), "Elevated buildings". 
The planning department shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 9-32(b)(1)c and 9-52(c). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 9-55. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 9-56. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 4, § F) 
Secs. 9-57—9-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 9-71. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  The planning commission as established by the City of Toccoa shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the planning department in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Stephens County as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only1when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause;, 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship and; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The planning department shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08, Art. 5) 
Chapter 10 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to license trades, businesses, etc., § 32. 
Cross reference— Concessions in public parks, § 15-6. 
State Law reference— Power of taxation, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; certain persons prohibited from investigating business for issuance of county or municipal license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9; levy of license, occupation or professional tax by counties and municipalities only at place of principal office, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 

Article VII. - Yard Sales 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Family entertainment. 
(a)  Defined. For the purposes of this section, the term "family recreation center" shall mean a place of business open to the public which has as its primary form of entertainment billiards, video or pinball machines and other similar games. 
(b)  Hours. No family recreation center shall be kept open, conducted or operated by any person within the city except during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Monday through Thursday, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight Friday and Saturday and between the hours of 1:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
(c)  Unlawful occurrences. No family recreation center under this section shall permit or allow any drinking of intoxicants. 
(Code 1985, §§ 8-2-1—8-2-3) 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate and license places of public entertainment, § 30. 
Secs. 10-3—10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 12-17-12, § 1, amended former Art. II, §§ 10-26—10-52, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1984, §§ 3-4-1—3-4-27; Ord. No. 90-036, § 1, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 91-001, § 1, 1-14-91; Ord. No. 94-026, § VII, 12-29-94. 
Cross reference— Taxation and revenue, ch. 22. 

Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the following meaning: 
City means the City of Toccoa. 
Gross receipts means total revenue of the business of practitioner for the period, including without being limited to the following: 
(1)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
(2)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
(3)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
(4)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(1)  Sales, use, or excise taxes; 
(2)  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
(3)  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 U.S.C. section 1563(a)(1), between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 U.S.C. section 1563(a)(2), between or among a parent corporation, wholly owned subsidiaries of such parent corporation, and any corporation in which such parent corporation or one or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries owns stock possessing at least 30 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of such partially owned corporation, or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
(4)  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services that contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
(5)  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a non-profit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
(6)  Proceeds from the sale of goods or services that are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business of practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, unless the real property's owner, lessor, or agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
North American Industry Classification System [NAICS] means categories of occupations and industries established by and promulgated by the Office of Management and Budget of the United States of America and found in the 1997 NAICS Manual. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business and enacted by the city of for the purpose of raising revenue. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-27. - Penalty of article violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction by the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-28. - Required. 
(a)  Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an annual occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or his deputies or to any police officer of the city upon his or their request. 
(b)  If the taxpayer is a new business with no previous accounting records to identify gross receipts, there shall be assessed a flat fee of $100.00, which includes the administrative fee of $30.00. This fee is subject to adjustment (credit or debit) upon verification by the city clerk of the calendar year gross sales as defined herein. 
(c)  Submission of adequate registration and information by a certified or registered public accountant shall be deemed prima facie accurate. The city clerk will determine the adequacy of all information submitted. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-29. - Due date. 
Each occupational tax levied under this article shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. The amount of tax levied under this article based on the estimates as set forth above shall he payable to the city at the office of the city clerk, at the time the return required under section 10-32 is submitted to the city, and shall be delinquent if not paid on or before March lst of each year. An administrative fee of $30.00 shall be charged for each application or tax return submitted under this article. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I; Ord. No. 2017-2, § I, 2-13-17 ) 
Sec. 10-30. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in state. 
Registration and the assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location and office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in the corporate limits. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-31. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-32. - Number of businesses considered operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-33. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
Practitioners of professions and occupation who are listed in paragraphs (1) through (18) of subsection (c) of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax resulting from application of the other provisions of this article; or 10; 
(2)  A fee of $200.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-34. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-35. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-36. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and occupation tax shall be payable to the city, at the office of the city clerk, on January 1 of each year, shall be delinquent if not paid by March 1 of each year, and shall be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a penalty imposed. The tax registration provided for in this section shall be issued by the city clerk and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling in this article specified without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall, upon the conviction of the city judge, be punished by a fine or imprisonment, either or both in the discretion of the city judge. 
(b)  The city has the right at any time to insure accurate reporting of gross receipts. Said verification will be accomplished by written documentation from an accountant, bookkeeper, independent audit or any other method acceptable to city which insures complete and accurate reporting. 
(c)  In addition to the remedies specified in subsection (a) of this section, the city may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-37. - Allocation of employees of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupational tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each location in the city. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere, and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business of a practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' gross receipts by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business has locations outside the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-38. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the gross receipts of each location or each line of business will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and the tax will be calculated at the rate of the dominant line of business conducted by the business identified on a form to be furnished by the city. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-39. - Delinquent penalty. 
(a)  Any person required by this article to pay an occupational license tax to engage in any trade, business or profession within the corporate limits of the city who shall fail to make application therefor within the time limits prescribed or fail to pay tax when due shall be subject to and required to pay a late filing penalty as described below plus any cost of collection to include attorney's fees: 
(1)  If the cost to renew or obtain the license is less than $500.00, the late penalty will be $50.00. 
(2)  If the cost to renew or obtain the license is more than $500.00, the late penalty will be $100.00. 
(b)  These penalties are in addition to other penalties authorized, by the laws of Georgia or the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I; Ord. No. 2017-2, § I, 2-13-17 ) 
Sec. 10-40. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-41. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-42. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for the business as described in this article; and in default thereof, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration provided for in this section before commencing the business. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-43. - When registration due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all taxes and fees as provided in this article before March 1 of each year, on the second day of March of each year thereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained the registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa. These penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, provided in this article, and may be collected by the remedies provided in this article for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration provided for in this article shall be issued by the city clerk; and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-44. - Subpoena and arresting powers. 
The city and its duly designated officers and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspector with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-45. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-46. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-47. - Inspections of books and records. 
The city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city such books or records shall be submitted for inspection to a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city at its discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-48. - Revocation. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay an occupation tax or any part of an occupation tax before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of the business to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city in accordance with provisions in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the city cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the city in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-49. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents or employees, who do business in the city, after the registration for the business has been revoked; and any persons, their managers, agents or employees, who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees or representatives of the city request such inspection, during the business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the city cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the city in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-50. - Execution; liens. 
In addition to the other remedies provided in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the city clerk shall, upon any tax or installment of the tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, issue execution for the correct amount of the tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for the tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person, partnership or corporation liable for the tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of the occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon the property of the defendant located in the city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other related proceedings shall be as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state; and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full, together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-51. - Amendment; repeal of provisions. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, in compliance with applicable provisions of the city Charter, this Code, and applicable state and federal laws, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the City of Toccoa to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. The amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change their classification. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-52. - Furnishing of incomplete or false information. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall furnish or shall cause to be furnished any false, misleading or incomplete information to any city official, agent or representative regarding any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city which is subject to business registration or occupation tax covered by this article. The violation of the provisions of this article shall, in addition to other legal remedies available to the city pursuant to this article, may be grounds for the suspension or revocation of existing business tax registrations or occupation tax registration and the denial or nonrenewal of future business tax registrations or occupation tax registrations issued by the city. The denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation shall be in writing with the reasons for the adverse action stated therein. Within ten days of such adverse action, the registrant or applicant may appeal the denial to the city council and request a due process hearing. The due process hearing shall be held within ten days of the receipt of the request and shall be held in compliance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.) unless agreed upon otherwise by the city and registrant or applicant. The applicant or registrant may present witnesses and evidence, cross examine witnesses for the city, may retain legal counsel at its own expense, and a record shall be made of the due process hearing. The city council shall render a decision within ten business days after the date of the due process hearing. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city council to stay any adverse action pending final resolution of the matter. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-53. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the enforcement of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions of this article, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-54. - Enforcement of article. 
It is the duty of the city clerk to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed, and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is the further duty of the city clerk, or his/her designee to inspect all registrations issued by the city as often as, in their judgment, it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-55. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by city commission. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city commission. All provisions of this article relating to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-56. - Public hearings required. 
The city commission shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-57. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The City Commission may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation taxes to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council or a plan. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Sec. 10-58. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention of this article that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 12-17-12, § I) 
Secs. 10-59—10-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKYARDS 

Sec. 10-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automobile graveyard shall mean any establishment which is maintained or used for storing, buying or selling wrecked, scraped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
Junk shall mean old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste, junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof or iron, steel and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. 
Junkyard shall mean any establishment which is maintained or used for storing, buying or selling junk or for an automobile graveyard. The term shall include garbage dumps, sanitary fills and scrap processor establishments. 
Scrap processor shall mean any person engaged only in the business of buying scrap iron and metals including, but not limited to, old automobiles, for the specific purpose of processing into raw material for remelting purposes only, and whose principal product is ferrous and nonferrous scrap for shipment to steel mills, foundries, smelters and refineries, and who maintains an established place of business in the city and its facilities and machinery are designed for such process. 
(Code 1985, § 8-5-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-77. - Proximity to rights-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain any junkyard, any portion of which is within 500 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of any street or any public thoroughfare in the city, except the following: 
(1)  Those which are screened by natural objects, plantings, fences or other appropriate means so as not to be visible from the main-traveled way of such street or public thoroughfare, or otherwise removed from sight. 
(2)  Those which are not visible from the main-traveled way of the public road. 
(b)  Any junkyard which is not maintained in accordance with this section is declared to be a public and private nuisance and shall be abated as such as provided by law. 
(Code 1985, § 8-5-2) 
Secs. 10-78—10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate itinerant merchants, § 30. 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant trades, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-101. - Registration required. 
Any person peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the city shall be required to register and obtain an identification card as provided by this article. 
(Code 1985, § 8-3-1) 
Sec. 10-102. - Temporary business license required. 
Any person desiring to peddle, solicit or canvass within the city shall first obtain a temporary business license as required by this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 8-3-2) 
Sec. 10-103. - Investigation of applicants. 
The chief of police shall have authority to conduct investigations on such applicants including requiring fingerprints and photographs. 
(Code 1985, § 8-3-3) 
Sec. 10-104. - Exhibition of license. 
Each registrant shall at all times while in the city have upon his person the city business license and shall exhibit the same when requested to do so by any law enforcement officer or by any municipal authority and by any person being solicited. Possession of this business license shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any products or project by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 8-3-4) 
Secs. 10-105—10-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-126. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "taxicab" shall mean and include taxicabs and all vehicles used to transport passengers for hire. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-1) 
Sec. 10-127. - Condition of vehicle; required markings. 
(a)  No automobile with less than four doors shall be operated as a taxicab on the streets in the city. 
(b)  The inside of all taxicabs shall be clean and free from litter, trash and bottles. 
(c)  No taxicab shall be operated on the streets of the city which have bent or torn exterior parts or broken glass or anything which is unsightly. 
(d)  Each taxicab shall be equipped with an inside dome light which shall light up when the rear door is open and the dome light shall cause enough light so that the photo identification card of the taxicab driver may be clearly seen. 
(e)  Each taxicab shall be equipped with turn signals and brake lights. 
(f)  It shall be necessary for each taxicab to have a sign painted on each side and on the rear of the vehicle in letters not less than three inches high, the word "Taxicab." There shall also be painted on each side and on the rear of each taxicab, numbers not less than two inches high, such numbers to be separate and distinct from that of any other taxicab in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-2) 
Sec. 10-128. - Identification when available for hire; restrictions on nonfare passengers. 
Each taxicab operator shall indicate that the taxicab is being operated for fare paying passengers by placing a four-inch by six-inch card inside the lower right hand corner of the windshield which shall be plainly visible, such card being plainly marked "For Hire." No taxicab shall be operated for fare paying passengers without such a card being properly placed and no nonfare passengers shall sit in the front seat of the taxicab while the card is being displayed. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-3) 
Sec. 10-129. - Fare cards to be displayed. 
Each taxicab operator shall have attached to the upper half of the rear of the front seat of such taxicab a schedule of their current rates. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-4) 
Sec. 10-130. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated on the streets of the city any taxicab unless and until a valid business license for the operation of the vehicle shall have been first issued by the city to the owner of the vehicle each and every year in which the business is carried on. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-22) 
Sec. 10-131. - Liability insurance required. 
(a)  Before any license required by this article is issued to any person for the operation of any taxicab the owner thereof, for each such vehicle, shall file with the city, a liability insurance policy to indemnify for injuries to persons or property as follows: 
(1)  For injuries and damages for any one person injured in an accident in the operation of the taxicab, an amount of not less than $25,000.00. 
(2)  For injury or damages to more than one person injured in any one collision or accident in the operation of the vehicle, in an amount of not less than $50,000.00. 
(3)  For injuries and damages to property in the operation of the vehicle at any time in any accident or collision in an amount of not less than the sum of $10,000.00. 
(b)  Any policy of liability insurance filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be executed by a company authorized to do business in the state and shall contain a provision obligating the company issuing the policy to give at least ten days' written notice to the city prior to cancellation. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-23) 
Sec. 10-132. - Issuance, revocation of licenses, permits generally. 
Any and all licenses or permits issued pursuant to this article are to be issued at the discretion of the city. Any such permits or licenses so issued for the use of a vehicle or for an operator of any vehicle may be revoked after a hearing before the city commission and at the discretion of the city commission without assigning any reason for the revocation except that in its discretion the further operation of the vehicles and the issuance of the operator's permit are not in the public interest, convenience, necessity and that it is not desirable for the safety and general welfare of the citizens of the community. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-5) 
Sec. 10-133. - Licenses, permits subject to future terms, conditions. 
Any and all licenses or permits granted pursuant to this article shall be subject to any future ordinances and regulations further regulating and governing the operation of taxicabs, or to additional and other regulations, or changing, modifying or withdrawing in whole or in part the approval of any privilege for the operation of such vehicles, as may in the judgement of the city commission be consistent and to the best interest for the public welfare and safety. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-6) 
Sec. 10-134. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city, in the interest of public safety and the general welfare of the citizens of the city, does hereby grant taxicab franchises, subject to the payment of license fees and taxes as provided in this Code. 
(b)  Such franchises will be granted by the city commission upon the recommendation of the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-21) 
Secs. 10-135—10-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATOR'S PERMIT 

Sec. 10-146. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated or to allow the operation on the streets of the city any taxicab by any person other than the licensed owner of the vehicle, unless and until the operator has first been issued an operator's permit by the city to drive a taxicab in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-41) 
Sec. 10-147. - Application. 
Each person desiring a permit to operate a taxicab shall make application on forms provided by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-42) 
Sec. 10-148. - Identification card to be displayed; format and contents. 
Each taxicab operator shall attach to the upper half of the rear of the front seat, so as to be plain and visible to those passengers sitting in the rear seat, a photo identification card, which card shall be at least three inches by five inches and shall contain a 1½-inch by 1½-inch glossy full face, light background photograph of the operator, his name and his taxicab operator's permit number. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-43) 
Sec. 10-149. - Fares collected at termination of trip. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab operator to operate a taxicab for fare-paying passengers on credit and any fare charge shall be collected immediately upon completion of the trip. 
(Code 1985, § 8-4-44) 
Secs. 10-150—10-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 20006-19, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2006, repealed former Art. IV, §§ 10-171—10-198, in its entirety and enacted new provsions as herein set out. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 94-013, § I, adopted June 13, 1994. 

DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE AND FINDINGS 

Sec. 10-171. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Toccoa, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the associated adverse secondary effects with the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-172. - Findings. 
Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in a public hearing and in reports made available to the city commission, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Erie v. Pap's A.M, 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Newport News, Virginia; and also on findings form the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the City Commission finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses cause ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities, including, but not limited to, prostitution and illicit drug trafficking and consumption, both within such businesses and in the areas immediately nearby, which are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses, defined in this article as adult theatres and adult cabarets, engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos or live sex shows. 
(4)  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of sexually oriented businesses. 
(5)  Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS) and genital herpes. 
(6)  Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States. 
(7)  The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States, as well as the state, reported annually has risen. 
(8)  In his report of October 22, 1986, the Surgeon General of the United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual conduct, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(9)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts from direct or indirect physical contact. 
(10)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(11)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view adult oriented films. 
(12)  The findings noted in subsections (b)(1)—(11) and (13)—(15) of this section raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(13)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(14)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is operated in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(15)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters. 
(16)  Requiring licenses of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(17)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(18)  In the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases, it is desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this article is designated to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such conduct. 
(19)  The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this article. 
(20)  The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to, and prevents conduct which leads to, the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(21)  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the City of Toccoa will be promoted by the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS 

Sec. 10-173. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below: 
(1)  Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(4)  Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(5)  Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins, slug-operated, electronic, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(7)  Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon means the dominant or principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas," the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
(8)  Employee, employ and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent or by another status. The term "employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
(9)  Erotic dance establishments means a nightclub, together or other establishment which features live performances by dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(10)  Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnished or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
(11)  Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
(12)  Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business. 
(13)  Minor means, for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
(14)  Nude, nudity, and a state of nudity mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(15)  Operate and cause to be operated mean to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. The term "operator" means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business or at any location who is authorized to exercise operational or control of the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation, the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an owner, part owner or licensee of the business or whether the person is on the premises. 
(16)  Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
(17)  Regularly features and regularly shown mean a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business. 
(18)  Seminude and in a seminude condition mean the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
(19)  Seminude model studio means a commercial establishment which regularly features a person who appears seminude and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured or photographed by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration, but shall not include a proprietary license by any state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
(20)  Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities. The definition of sexual encounter center or any sexually oriented business shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
(21)  Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, erotic dance establishment, escort agency, seminude model studio or sexual encounter center, as defined in this section. 
(22)  Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
b.  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(23)  Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses: 
a.  Prostitution, promotion, or allowance of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity relating to a sexually oriented business; sexual assault; molestation of a child; distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of any jurisdiction; 
b.  For which less than: 
1.  Two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
(24)  Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
a.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
b.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumes cence; or 
c.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
d.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
e.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
f.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
g.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(25)  Substantial enlargement, of a sexually oriented business, means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor areas exist on the date the ordinance from which this article derives takes effect. 
(26)  Transfer of ownership or control, of a sexually oriented business, means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
b.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
c.  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-174. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this article without a valid license to do so. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the name is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-175. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, erotic dance establishment, escort bureau or adult business, unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension, appeal, or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-176. - Sexually oriented business regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised a sexually oriented business, without a valid license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March first of each year, a sexually oriented business licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An sexually oriented business licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No sexually oriented business licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to a sexually oriented business. 
(f)  No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open on Sundays, Christmas Day, or at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays. 
(g)  No sexually oriented business licensee shall serve, sell, distribute, suffer, or allow the consumption or possession of any malt beverage, wine, liquor, distilled spirits or other controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. Premises include the parcel of land upon which the sexually oriented business is located. 
(h)  A sexually oriented business licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing at erotic dance establishments or other sexually oriented businesses shall occur on a platform intended for the purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing at any erotic dance establishments or other sexually oriented businesses shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer at erotic dance establishments or other sexually oriented businesses shall touch, fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall touch, fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron at erotic dance establishments or other sexually oriented businesses shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer at erotic dance establishments or other sexually oriented businesses shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of a sexually oriented business licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 lumens per square foot. 
(o)  If any portion or subparagraph of this section of this article or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-177. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity licensed under this article shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, any portion of a person's genitals, public area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion at any sexually oriented business, including erotic dance establishments. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or engage in specified sexual activities. 
(2)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a seminude condition, unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, is at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this article for an employee, while seminude in a sexually oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is seminude in a sexually oriented business. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this article for an employee, while seminude, to knowingly and intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-178. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult book store, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-179. - Location. 
(a)  No sexually oriented business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; or 
(4)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
(b)  It is a violation of this article to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than a general business district as defined and described in the city's zoning ordinance. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(d)  It is a violation of this article if a person, partnership, corporation, or other entity causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer or ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(e)  It is a violation of this article if a person, partnership, corporation, or other entity causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(f)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this article, shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. After the date which is one year after the effective date of this article, any sexually oriented business deemed as a nonconforming use in this subsection shall be required to comply with any and all of the terms and conditions of this article, and failure to so comply will constitute a violation of this article. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is/are nonconforming. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-180. - Sexually oriented business employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of a sexually oriented business shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as a sexually oriented business employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, a finding of guilty by a judge or jury regardless of an appeal, or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he or she shall file a notice with a licensing officer of his or her intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and shall receive approval of such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the licensing officer requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular City of Toccoa or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval of the application and issuance of a permit, the employee may begin working on licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the licensing officer for a hearing. The decision of the licensing officer after hearing may be appealed within ten days of such hearing to the city commission which may issue such order as is proper. The decision of the city commission is final. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time of the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provision of this Code, the ordinances of the city laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. Upon suspension or revocation, an employee may appeal such suspension or revocation in the same way provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-181. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any sexually oriented business shall make application to the city manager or its designated representatives. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the city commission, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city manager at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-182. - Application contents. 
Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. The Federal Tax Identification number or Social Security number of the applicant. 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding share of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant. 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right. 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or set or other business hereunder regulated. 
(21)  The application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(22)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
(23)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with the application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the City on a confidential business, and may be disclosed only: 
a.  To other governmental agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public safety function; or 
b.  As may otherwise be required by law or a court order. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-183. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city commission, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-184. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant from the date on which the applicant appears and submits his application and required fee, as described in Section 10-184. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and city commission may issue the license if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude, convicted of an attempt to commit any such offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as a crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had a sexually oriented business license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business, if used, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close, as defined in this article, to any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the state or the United States; 
(13)  That the applicant is not delinquent in the payment to the City of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation to any business operated by the applicant within the City of Toccoa; 
(14)  That the applicant has not been convicted of a specified criminal activity, felony, or other crime of moral turpitude. The fact that a conviction is being appealed should have no effect under this subsection. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "conviction" means a conviction, guilty plea, or plea of nolo contendere and includes a conviction of any business entity for which the applicant had, at the time of the offense leading to the conviction for specified criminal activity, a management responsibility or a controlling ownership interest; 
(15)  That the proposed sexually oriented business is not located in a zoning district other than a district in which sexually oriented businesses are allowed to operate under this or the city's zoning ordinances; and, 
(16)  That the person making the application is not prohibited, as a licensee, pursuant to section 10-185 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-185. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes to any government for a business at any location inside or outside the City of Toccoa. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(b)  When it is determined that a sufficient number of current licenses necessary to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city have been issued, no applicant shall be issued a license under this article. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-186. - Suspension. 
The city shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a sexually oriented business licensee or an employee of a sexually oriented business licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; or 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article. Each refusal is considered a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-187. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if a cause of suspension in section 10-186 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The city shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if the city determines that a licensee: 
(1)  Gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)  Has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of alcohol or controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  Has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  Has knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  Has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises. This subsection will not apply to an adult motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities to occur either: 
a.  In exchange for money; or 
b.  In a public place or within public view; or 
(6)  Has knowingly allowed or operated any sexually oriented business in violation of sections 10-174 and 10-175 of this article. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this article, the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation becomes effective, provided that, if the conditions of this article are met, a provisional license will be granted pursuant to that section. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation found in subsections (b)(1) through (b)(6) of this section have been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-188. - License—Refusal, suspension, revocation. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article and refuses to issue a license or to renew a license, or that facts exist to support the suspension or revocation of a license under this article, the city shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, or after determining that facts exist to support suspension or revocation, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten days from notice from the city, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-189. - Appeal—Procedure. 
(a)  The licensee may, within ten days after he or she has been notified of a license refusal, suspension, or revocation, submit a written notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the city commission and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the city commission and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled commission meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for city commission action. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-190. - Same—City commission determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the commission agenda, the commission may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date before the commission and instruct the city clerk to give such notice to the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, of the hearing date by certified mail and as otherwise required by law. If a hearing is held before the commission, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures outlined in this article. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time, and the clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-191. - City commission hearing. 
Whenever the city commission has elected to set a hearing date and consider the appeal itself as authorized above and the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city commission, at the time and date set therefore, the commission shall receive all relevant testimony under oath and evidence from the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, from interested parties and from city staff. The city commission may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-192. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. The applicant or licensee, as the case may be, and the city staff may present relevant testimony, which shall be considered by the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-193. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city commission and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. Both the city commission and the hearing officer are authorized to rule on the admissibility of evidence and testimony in light of the rules of evidence applied in administrative hearings. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-194. - Hearing officer—Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the Commission. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished the city administrator and chief of police. 
(b)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting, unless the applicant or licensee stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-195. - Same—Action by city commission. 
The city commission shall adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. The decision of the city commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-196. - Same—Renewal. 
(a)  Each license shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which the license is issued and may be renewed only by making application as provided in sections 10-182 and 10-183. An application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date. Any license renewal not made as required herein shall be considered a new application subject to all of the requirements of this article. 
(b)  When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to the denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date that the denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-197. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. A sexually oriented business license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized, but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-198. - Changes of location or name. 
(a)  No sexually oriented business shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city commission, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city administrator and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given, unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the city code have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on a sexually oriented business under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of building or other place of business where a sexually oriented business is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-199. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-200. - Inspection. 
(a)  For the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article, an applicant, operator or licensee shall permit law enforcement officers and any other federal, state, county or city agency in the performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this article, normally and regularly conducted by such agencies, to inspect, at any time the business is occupied or open for business, those portions of the premises of a sexually oriented business which patrons or customers are permitted to occupy. 
(b)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-201. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any sexually oriented business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article, shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action here under, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such sexually oriented business and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a sexually oriented business contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-202. - Exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit, if granted, will be conspicuously posted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city. 
(4)  It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manger's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manger's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
(8)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five lumens as measured at the floor level. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(8) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(10)  No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
(11)  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
(12)  The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
(13)  The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(14)  The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be construed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsection (a)(1)—(14) of this section commits a violation of this article if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-203. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits a violation of this article if the person acts as an escort, or agrees to act as an escort, for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-204. - Malt beverage and wine licenses; liquor or distilled spirits licenses. 
Pursuant to the authority of Ga. Const. art. II, § VI, ¶ VII, no malt beverage and wine license nor any liquor or distilled spirits license shall be issued for any location at which a sexually oriented business is currently operating or will be operating in the future. It is the intent of this section to require an applicant to choose between obtaining a malt beverage and wine license or liquor or distilled spirits license versus obtaining a license to operate a sexually oriented business pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-205. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 11-129 is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for violation of this article. Such violations shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-8. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 10-206. - Valid provisions independent. 
Each section and provision of this article are declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of this article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. All other provisions of Chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa, Georgia, shall remain in full force and effect. 
(1)  The ordinance from which this article derives shall take effect immediately upon its adoption by the city commission of the City of Toccoa. 
(2)  Any and all ordinances or resolutions, or parts of ordinances or resolutions, which are inconsistent with this article shall be and are hereby repealed. 
(3)  If any section, provision or clause of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or to affect the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent as the city commission of Toccoa that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Secs. 10-207—10-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 10-221. - Garage sales, yard sales, etc. 
(a)  Definition. Garage sales, yard sales. etc. means the sale or trading of clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise, other than in the normal course of business, or the sale or trading of such goods, as outlined in this definition, by a person not regularly engaged in such business. Such goods or merchandise do not need to be attended for a sale to be deemed to be in existence. The term "yard sale" shall include garage sales, carport sales and similar types of sales or events. 
(b)  Location and manner of yard sales . Yard sales may be held on a lot or parcel of land upon which there is situated a house, apartment or other structure which is utilized primarily for residential purposes. Yard sales are prohibited upon vacant lots, lots with vacant houses, and upon lots upon which there is situated a structure that is utilized primarily for any use other than residential purposes. 
(c)  Display area . All displays of yard sale merchandise shall be limited to that portion of the front yard area which is at least five feet back from the property line on all sides, and at least ten feet back from any curb or road edge. 
(1)  Any yard sale signs must have responsible party's name and phone number on the back of the sign. Any signs not removed within 24 hours after the conclusion of the sale will be in violation of this article. 
(d)  Religious and charitable organizations . Religious and charitable organizations exempt from federal taxation pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, may conduct yard sales on the property of the organization or at other locations within the city with the expressed written consent of the owner of the premises where the yard sale is being conducted. 
(e)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  No individual, firm, corporation or other partnership shall be permitted to engage in the business of promoting or conducting yard sales for others for a fee or other consideration. No merchandise shall be purchased in anticipation of resale at a yard sale. 
(2)  No yard sale shall be held on premises other than the premises of at least one of the persons conducting the yard sale except with the express written consent of the owner of the premises where the yard sale is being conducted. 
(f)  Enforcement. Any municipal officer authorized to make an arrest may enforce this article. 
( Ord. of 7-8-13 ) 
Chapter 11 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Taxicabs, § 10-126 et seq.; criminal trespass by a motor vehicle, § 14-11; requirements for vehicles transporting refuse, § 19-8. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted; penalty. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372, the Uniform Rules of the Road are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Code 1985, § 9-1-1) 
Sec. 11-2. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1985, § 9-2-15) 
Sec. 11-3. - Signs, signals, devices—Authorized. 
(a)  The city, is authorized to designate and maintain appropriate traffic control and pedestrian control signs, markings and devices. 
(b)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" adopted by the Georgia Department of Transportation. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(c)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this section shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 9-2-1) 
Sec. 11-4. - Same—Obedience. 
All traffic shall obey and be directed by official traffic control signals, signs and markings erected at street intersections and other locations now or hereafter approved by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 9-2-13) 
Sec. 11-5. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, who shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 9-1-2) 
Sec. 11-6. - Securing vehicle loads. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 9-1-3) 
Sec. 11-7. - Obstruction of view and use by trees and shrubs; notice. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in any way controlling property in the city, shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of this city so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk, or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city, to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction recited in this section after ten days' notice by the city to do so. 
(c)  If the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling the property which contains the obstruction fails to remove the obstruction within ten days of the notice, the city may remove the obstruction and assess the cost against the owner; such cost shall be collected by execution in the same manner as tax executions in favor of the city are collected. 
(Code 1985, § 9-1-4) 
Sec. 11-8. - Off-road vehicles. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-7-5, as amended, the city does hereby regulate vehicles under the State of Georgia "Off-Road Vehicle Act" as follows: 
(1)  Off-road vehicles, as defined in the Off-Road Vehicle Act, may be operated within the city between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday and from 12:00 noon until 7:00 p.m. on Saturdays; such off-road vehicles shall not be operated in the city on Sunday. The time as herein stated shall be the prevailing time then in use in the city. 
(2)  In an R-I, single-family district, or in an R-II, two-family residential district, according to the classification of such districts as established by chapter 24, off-road vehicles as defined in the O.C.G.A. § 40-7-3, as amended, shall be operated only on the property used by the off-road vehicle's owner as a residence. 
(Code 1985, § 9-1-5) 
Sec. 11-9. - Abandoned vehicles. 
Any motor vehicle remaining on the streets of the city for a consecutive period of 72 hours or more shall be presumed to have been abandoned and any member of the city police department may take possession of such an automobile and cause it to be impounded in an appropriate place. 
(Code 1985, § 9-1-8) 
Sec. 11-10. - Speed limit for trains. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to operate any train within the corporate limits of the city at a rate of speed greater than 45 miles per hour. 
(Code 1985, § 9-2-12; Ord. No. 88-034, § 1, 10-10-88) 
Secs. 11-11—11-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 11-31. - Weight limits for certain streets; exceptions. 
(a)  No vehicle weighing in excess of 8,000 pounds shall go upon or pass over the named portions of certain streets. The schedule of such streets is on file in the city offices. 
(b)  There are excepted from subsection (a) above. All vehicles delivering orders to the occupants or owners of property served by the above mentioned streets where such vehicles are actually being used for delivering such orders are exempt. 
(Code 1985, § 9-1-6) 
Sec. 11-32. - Following emergency vehicles. 
The operator of any vehicle, other than one on an emergency call, shall not follow any emergency vehicle, as defined under state law, closer than 300 feet at such time as the emergency vehicle is on an emergency trip. 
(Code 1985, § 9-1-7) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 8. 
Sec. 11-33. - Speed limits. 
The maximum permissible speed for the operation of vehicles in the city shall be determined by the city from time to time and posted on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 9-2-11) 
Sec. 11-34. - One-way streets established. 
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys designated by the city, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1985, § 9-2-14) 
Sec. 11-35. - Riding motorized vehicles on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to ride a motorized vehicle on any of the sidewalks in the city. The area known as the "mall area" which includes that area formerly known as Doyle Street shall be considered to be a sidewalk as contemplated in this section. It shall also be unlawful for anyone to ride a bicycle on the "mall area." 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-6) 
Secs. 11-36—11-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 

Sec. 11-56. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
Whenever a space is marked off on any highway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Code 1985, § 9-2-31) 
Sec. 11-57. - Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or trailer to park the vehicle in the city in prohibited locations as specified by posted signs. The schedule of such locations is on file in the city offices. This requirement shall not apply to delivery or moving vehicles that are conducting business when such vehicles have insufficient access to a private driveway and parking on a public street would impede the flow of traffic or create hazardous conditions. 
(Code 1985, § 9-2-32; Ord. No. 87-034, § 9-2-32, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 11-58. - Parking prohibited in certain locations, certain days and hours. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs indicating the prohibited parking. It is unlawful to park on the city's sidewalks. 
(Code 1985, § 9-2-33) 
Sec. 11-59. - Parking time limited in certain locations, certain days and hours. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, or other vehicle, to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city at any time on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs limiting parking time in certain locations on certain days and hours. 
(Code 1985, § 9-2-34) 
Sec. 11-60. - Special purpose parking zones established, parking otherwise prohibited. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any location on the streets and alleys of the city established and designated as special purpose parking zones indicated and specified by posted signs approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 9-2-35) 
Sec. 11-61. - Parking tickets; failure to pay; penalty. 
Any person who has received as many as three parking tickets without having responded to same, shall be summoned to appear before the municipal judge and shall be subject to be punished as prescribed in section 1-12. 
(Code 1985, § 9-2-36) 
Sec. 11-62. - Fire lanes. 
It shall be unlawful to park or operate any unauthorized vehicle in an area designated a fire lane. The state fire marshal shall designate and approve the street curbing, boundaries, and markings of the fire lane. The area of the fire lane shall have painted thereon the words "FIRE LANE" and "NO PARKING." Appropriate signs shall also be placed alongside the fire lane. The police chief and/or his designee shall have the authority to enforce this section by the issuance of a citation and/or the immediate removal of the vehicle at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. of 11-28-11, § I) 
Chapter 12 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, § 15. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Establishment and jurisdiction of municipal courts, Ga. Const. art. 6, sec. 1, par. 1; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Judge. 
(a)  The municipal judge shall be an active member in good standing of the state bar. 
(b)  The city commission shall have the authority to appoint an assistant recorder to serve from time to time in his absence. Any assistant recorder shall possess the qualifications set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 2-6-1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Jurisdiction. 
All offenders against the laws and ordinances of the city shall be tried by the municipal judge, or in his absence, by the assistant recorder. The court may impose such punishment as is provided by law. 
(Code 1985, § 2-6-2) 
Sec. 12-3. - Appearance bonds. 
(a)  The municipal judge may take bond with security, or bond without security, at his discretion, payable to the city in a sum not exceeding $2,000.00 for the appearance of any person accused of being guilty of a violation of any provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city, to stand to and abide his trial before the municipal court, and also of witnesses required to testify in any case pending in the municipal court, when the witnesses do not reside in the city and have no permanent habitation. 
(b)  All appearance bonds taken pursuant to this section shall, upon the failure of any person to appear who is the principal in the bond, at the time and place mentioned in the bond, and a breach of such bond occurs, shall be subject to forfeiture by the municipal judge in the same manner and under the rules and regulations as appearance bonds are forfeited in the superior court. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the police chief or the city attorney to sue the principal and sureties on a forfeited appearance bond in the court having jurisdiction of the suit and subject matter, by scire facias as is practiced in the superior courts of the state in relation to the collection of forfeited bonds. 
(d)  The sureties on any forfeited appearance bond shall, at any time before final judgment, be relieved by payment of the costs and surrendering the principal until discharged by order of the court, or by giving other and good security. The delivery of the principal shall discharge the surety or sureties of all further liability upon the bond if the delivery is made before any judgment of forfeiture upon the bond shall have been entered. 
(Code 1985, §§ 2-6-3, 2-6-4) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide for forfeiture of appearance bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-4. 
Sec. 12-4. - Penalty for contempt of court. 
Any person who during the sitting of the municipal court shall be guilty of contempt of court, or who refuses to abide by any order of the court, shall be fined in a sum not exceeding $50.00 and costs, or confinement in jail, or both, as shall be proper under the circumstances. 
(Code 1985, § 2-6-5) 
Sec. 12-5. - Additional penalty for jail fund. 
(a)  In addition to the other fines and penalties imposed by the municipal court for violation of this Code, including violation of traffic ordinances, the municipal judge shall impose as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine for any offense against a criminal or traffic ordinance of the city to be used for the Stephens County Jail Fund as authorized by the Jail Conduction and Staffing Act. 
(b)  The provisions of the Georgia Jail Construction Staffing Act as the same apply to municipalities is adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this section. 
(Ord. No. 89-0165, § 1, 12-18-89) 
Sec. 12-6. - Court fee levied when fine or community service work imposed. 
Any person against whom a fine is imposed or community service work imposed by the Municipal Court of the City of Toccoa, Georgia for the violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the City of Toccoa, Georgia or the laws of the State of Georgia shall be subject to and have assessed a fee in the amount of $10.00 per violation. Said to be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 6-14-10) 
Secs. 12-7—12-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROSECUTING ATTORNEY OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 12-10. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Municipal Court Prosecutor Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 8-16-12, § 1) 
Sec. 12-11. - Findings and intent. 
This article is adopted to address requirements made under Georgia law for the city to pass an ordinance or resolution creating the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court should the city choose to hire or have a prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. Under state law, in order to have a municipal court prosecutor, the city must pass this ordinance or resolution and provide to the Prosecuting Attorneys' Council of the State of Georgia a copy of the same. The city is also required to submit the name of the person appointed to be the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court within 30 days of such appointment in order to maintain the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. It is therefore the intent of the city to comply with Georgia law, particularly Article 5, of Chapter 18, of Title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia, Annotated, and to enact this article. 
(Ord. of 8-16-12, § 1) 
Sec. 12-12. - Establishment of office. 
The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the City of Toccoa in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by Georgia law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part-time position. 
(Ord. of 8-16-12, § 1) 
Sec. 12-13. - Qualifications. 
Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the Municipal Court of the City of Toccoa shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. The prosecuting attorney shall be nominated by the city manager and confirmed by the city commission. 
(Ord. of 8-16-12, § 1) 
Sec. 12-14. - Oath. 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court for the City of Toccoa shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Toccoa." 
Sec. 12-15. - Term of office. 
Unless otherwise provided by the charter for the City of Toccoa, the prosecuting attorney for the Municipal Court shall serve a term of office of one year. 
(Ord. of 8-16-12, § 1) 
Sec. 12-16. - Jurisdiction, duties, and authority. 
The office of prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Toccoa shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the city charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A § 15-18-96. 
(Ord. of 8-16-12, § 1) 
Sec. 12-17. - Assistant prosecuting attorney. 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court may appoint one or more assistant prosecuting attorneys whose appointment shall be ratified by the city council before becoming an assistant prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. Such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia or satisfy the provisions of the Third Year Practice Act, found in the O.C.G.A. § 15-18-22. 
(Ord. of 8-16-12, § 1) 
Sec. 12-18. - Ratification. 
This article shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the office of the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court to date as authorized by the city commission of the City of Toccoa. 
(Ord. of 8-16-12, § 1) 
Chapter 13 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Junkyards, § 10-76 et seq.; unauthorized accumulation of solid waste declared a nuisance, § 19-6. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Prohibited; penalty. 
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist in the city. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the remedies expressed in this chapter, violations may be punishable in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Code 1985, § 10-2-4) 
Sec. 13-2. - Enumeration. 
The following conditions are declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Grass or other vegetation in a developed residential or commercial area of the city which exceeds an average of 18 inches in height, excluding trees, ornamental shrubbery or crops. 
(2)  Any trash, debris, garbage or unkept premises which could be an attraction to or harborage for rats or other rodents. 
(3)  Stagnant water which could be a breeding area for mosquitoes or otherwise be detrimental or annoying to the public. 
(4)  Dead or decaying matter, animal, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable or living animal which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(5)  The generation of dust, smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(6)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter or rainwater into the public sewage system which would be damaging thereto. 
(7)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl. 
(8)  Obstruction of a public street, public access area, highway, or sidewalk without a permit from the city. Public access area as used in this ordinance is defined to include all city parking places, either owned by the city or patrolled by the city pursuant to an agreement with the city and private owner, all public parks and all public recreational facilities. 
(9)  Loud or unusual noises, such as loud music or recreational activities, which are detrimental or annoying to the public. 
(10)  Loud or excessive noises created by domestic animals or fowl in a residentially zoned area of the city. 
(11)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property. 
(12)  Any business or building where illegal activities are conducted. 
(13)  Unused motor vehicles, appliances or other mechanical devices or discarded building materials, furniture or other debris which are left outside within plain view of adjoining property or public right-of-way. 
(14)  Any trees, shrubbery, signs, plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city. 
(15)  Any building which is in violation of city, county or state building, housing or health regulations. 
(16)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(17)  Any "fence" or other structures that limit sight distances or creates a hazardous view or obstruction. 
(Code 1985, § 10-2-1; Ord. No. 85-023, 9-9-85; Ord. No. 2006-26, § I, 10-9-06) 
Sec. 13-3. - Complaint; hearing. 
Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the code enforcement officer, who shall investigate and may place the complaint before the municipal judge for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal judge, after a ten-day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and, upon finding that a nuisance does exist, shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the municipal judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(Code 1985, § 10-2-2) 
Sec. 13-4. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the recorder that it must be immediately abated, the municipal judge may issue an order to the city manager directing the nuisance to be abated. The city manager in such case, shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the code enforcement officer as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
(Code 1985, § 10-2-3) 
Sec. 13-5. - Open wells to be filled. 
It shall be the duty of any person owning property in the city on which is located an open well which is not in use and which has been abandoned and not kept properly closed to fill the well so as to render it safe to persons or animals using or going upon the premises. 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-3) 
Secs. 13-6—13-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS 

Sec. 13-31. - Maximum height of certain vegetation; cutting; expenses. 
For the purpose of preventing the spread of diseases, the breeding of mosquitoes, other insects, rodents, snakes and other pests, and for the protection of the health of the citizens and residents of the city, it shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant or both, in possession of any land in the city to allow weeds, grass or other vegetation, except vegetation commonly classified as growing crops, trees or ornamental or other shrubbery or nursery plants, to grow on the land at any time above the average height of 18 inches. Upon the weeds, grass, or other vegetation subject to this section reaching an average height of 18 inches, the owner or tenant in possession, or both, shall be required to cause the vegetation to be cut down at the expense of such owner or tenant, or both. 
(Code 1985, § 7-7-1) 
Sec. 13-32. - Notice to comply; service; penalty. 
(a)  Any owner or tenant, or both, subject to this article, failing or refusing to comply with the provisions of this article, after ten days' written notice from the code enforcement officer, or chief of police, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-12. 
(b)  If it shall be impossible to serve notice to both the owner and the tenant in possession, then service upon either with the notice shall be sufficient. 
(c)  If it shall be impracticable to serve the notice required by this section and if there is no tenant in possession of the land, the mailing of the notice to the owner at his last known address shall be sufficient. 
(Code 1985, § 7-7-2) 
Secs. 13-33—13-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 13-51. - Compliance. 
No person shall own, occupy, offer for sale, or allow to remain unoccupied any residential, commercial, or industrial building, structure, or premises or portion thereof, which does not comply with the requirements of this Code. The city shall cause periodic inspections to be made of all premises to secure compliance with these requirements. 
In instances where the owner of property fails to maintain property consistent with the requirements of this article the city may (where public safety, public health or the aesthetic interests of surrounding properties are affected) in addition to other remedies provided herein and after notice and a hearing decide that it will temporarily cease doing business with a commercial establishment that fails to comply with this ordinance and/or the city may refuse to provide utility services to any property or structure that does not comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-003, 3-23-98; Ord. No. 13-2004, § I, 7-1-04) 
Sec. 13-52. - To be maintained in clean and sanitary condition. 
All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish, garbage, unused motor vehicles, appliances, mechanical devices, discarded building materials, furniture, and other debris. Non-conforming commercial areas shall be cleared or repaired within 12 months after the adoption of this article, or an opaque fence at least eight feet high shall be installed to block the view from surrounding property and public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 98-003, 3-23-98) 
Sec. 13-53. - Accumulations of stagnant water, erosion. 
(a)  All premises shall be maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any building, structure, swimming pool located thereon. 
(b)  All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent soil erosion which may damage the buildings, structures, or premises. 
(Ord. No. 98-003, 3-23-98) 
Sec. 13-54. - Excessive weeds and grass, trees, and shrubs. 
(a)  All exterior property areas shall be kept free of excessive weeds and grass. 
(b)  Small tracts of land, whether improved or unimproved, within the city, shall be kept cut, clipped or controlled through necessary means as frequently as needed to insure that weeds, rank grass and noxious growths do not exceed a height of 12 inches. 
"Small tracts" are defined as building lawns, sidewalk neutral strips, walkways, gardens, decorative landscaped areas, and unimproved lots of two acres or less. 
(c)  Grass areas abutting and within 50 feet of city streets shall be kept mowed to a height not exceeding six inches. 
(d)  Large tracts, larger than two acres, shall be cut, clipped or controlled through necessary means to a height not exceeding 18 inches. 
(e)  Large tracts adjacent to improved residential property shall be kept clipped to the same standards as small tracts within 100 feet of such improved residential property. 
(f)  Any tract maintained in a natural state or as a wilderness area may be exempt from cutting except for the requirements of the provisions hereinabove. 
(g)  All trees and shrubs shall be maintained so as not to imperil public health or safety, or cause damage to any structure, premises, or utility services. 
(Ord. No. 98-003, 3-23-98) 
Sec. 13-55. - Extermination of insects, rodents, and other pests. 
Every owner of a building, structure, or premises shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests in all exterior areas of the premises, except that the occupant shall be responsible for such extermination in the exterior areas of the premises of a single-family dwelling. Whenever infestation exists in the shared or public parts of the premises of other than a single-family dwelling, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 98-003, 3-23-98) 
Sec. 13-56. - Exterior surfaces. 
(a)  Generally. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition as to exclude rodents and other vermin. 
(b)  Foundations. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all points. 
(c)  Walls; wood surfaces. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain, or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant wood, but not limited to walls, shall be made impervious to adverse effects of weather by periodic application of paint or a similar protective coating and shall be maintained in a good state of repair. All new exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant wood, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. All exterior surfaces shall be kept free of defects including scaling, peeling and loose paint. 
(Ord. No. 98-003, 3-23-98) 
Sec. 13-57. - Stairs, porches, walks, and parking areas. 
(a)  Stairs and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety as provided in the building code and shall comply with the following paragraphs of this section. 
(b)  Every outside stair, every porch, every walkway, every driveway, and every appurtenance attached thereto, shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected as required by the building code, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(Ord. No. 98-003, 3-23-98) 
Sec. 13-58. - Windows, doors and hatchways generally. 
(a)  Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. 
(b)  Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass window panes or an approved substitute. 
(c)  Every window sash shall be in good condition and fit reasonably tight within its frame. 
(d)  Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be capable of being easily opened. 
(e)  Every exterior door shall be equipped with hinges and door latch and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(f)  Every exterior door, when closed, shall fit well within its frame. 
(g)  Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction as to exclude rain as completely as possible, and to substantially exclude wind from entering the structure. 
(h)  Every basement hatchway shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water into the structure. 
(Ord. No. 98-003, 3-23-98) 
Sec. 13-59. - Maintenance of accessory structures. 
All accessory structures, including detached buildings and fences, shall be maintained structurally bound and in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 98-003, 3-23-98) 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An Ord. June 11, 2012, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Art. II. In order to avoid conflicts in numbering the editor has redesignated the provisions added by said ordinance as Art. IV. 

Sec. 13-60. - Authority, scope and applicability. 
(a)  This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Title 41, Chapter 2, Sections 7 through 17, as amended, of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 specifies the scope and purpose of this article. All powers and authorities granted to public officers and public authorities by the statute are hereby incorporated by reference so as to be assumed, delegated and granted pursuant to this article. The Toccoa City Commission specifically finds that conditions of the character described in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the City of Toccoa due to dwellings, buildings, structures or properties which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light or sanitary features; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, structures or properties unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the City of Toccoa; or which are vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes. Such dwellings, buildings, structures or properties are declared to be a public nuisance. Power is conferred upon the City of Toccoa to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings, structures or properties as provided in this article. 
(b)  All the provisions of this article may also be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or City of Toccoa building inspector or code enforcement officer that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said property is in violation of this article. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall apply to both residential and nonresidential property within the City of Toccoa whether being occupied or not and whether being developed or not. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-61. - Definitions. 
(a)  Specific terms defined . As used in this article, the following words, terms and definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Applicable codes means: 
a.  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
b.  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.); and (C) any building codes adopted by local ordinance, or the minimum standard codes provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.), provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
(2)  Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
(3)  Drug crime means an act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
(4)  Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
(5)  Governing authority means the City Commission of Toccoa, Georgia. 
(6)  Interested party means: 
a.  Owner; 
b.  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
c.  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
d.  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the Stephens County Courthouse or by the clerk of the court. "Interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
e.  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
(7)  Municipal court means the municipal court of the City of Toccoa. 
(8)  Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
(9)  Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the City of Toccoa, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the corporate limits of the City of Toccoa, Georgia. 
(10)  Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. For the purposes of this article the city manager, or designees of the city manager to include but not limited to the police chief, building inspector or code enforcement officer, may exercise the responsibilities prescribed by this article and may be the "public officer" defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8(10). The code enforcement officer, except as otherwise directed by the city manager, shall be the employee to exercise the duties presented in this article for the public officer. 
(11)  Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
(12)  Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(13)  Undesirable vegetation means plants, which due to natural growth characteristics, constitute a negative effect on public safety, public health or public welfare. 
(b)  Definitions incorporated by reference . To the extent not stated above, the definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-62. - Unsafe dwellings, buildings, structures, or properties. 
(a)  Duty of the owner of dwellings, buildings, structures or properties. It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city limits of the City of Toccoa, Georgia to construct and to maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with applicable codes in force in the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  Standards for determining unfitness for habitation of unsafe dwellings, buildings or structures. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such building, dwelling, or structure is illegal and shall be abated by repair, demolition, or qualify for a secured building status in accordance with this article. Such conditions may include the following without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
(1)  Any means of egress or portion thereof is not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Any means of egress or portion thereof, such as, but not limited to, fire doors, closing devices and fire resistive ratings, which is in disrepair or in a dilapidated or nonworking condition such that the means of egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  The stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads including dead load, exceeds the stresses allowed in the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings. 
(4)  The building, dwelling or structure or portion thereof has been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, wind or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings. 
(5)  Any exterior appendage or portion of the building, dwelling or structure that is not securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings. 
(6)  If for any reason the building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(7)  The building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof as a result of decay, deterioration or dilapidation is likely to fully or partially collapse. 
(8)  The building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of the standard codes or of a city, county or state law. 
(9)  Any building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof that is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(10)  Any building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof that is unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise a danger to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, disrepair, uncleanliness, structural defects, dilapidation, obsolescence, abandonment, or any defects to any building, structure or dwelling or portion thereof increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities. 
(c)  Standards for determining unfitness for habitation dwellings, buildings or structure being used in connection with drug crimes. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or upon report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(d)  Property endangering the public health or safety. Any property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity is illegal and in violation of this article. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or city building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said property is in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-63. - Procedures and requirements to secure structures. 
The following procedures and requirements must be met in order to secure structures pending repairs: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a building owner to secure or cause to be secured a building without first obtaining a secured structure permit (which may be or include other written authorization) from the public officer. The owner must apply for and be approved for a secured structure permit and pay any required fees in the amount established by the city, and the public officer and/or building official shall then inspect such structure. The temporary secured structure permit must be posted on the front of the building in a clearly visible location while the structure remains in secured status. 
(2)  To qualify for secured status, the building must be structurally sound as determined by the public officer (walls and roof); otherwise, the secured structure permit will be denied. 
(3)  The repairs needed to bring the structure into compliance with the Property Maintenance Code must not represent a cost that exceeds one-half of the fair market value of the structure as determined by the current ad valorem tax valuation or by an appraisal by a Georgia licensed appraiser. The property owner must provide, along with the application for a secured structure permit, a cost estimate for repairs and a valuation appraisal of the structure to the public officer for review and approval. 
(4)  The property owner must provide, along with the application for a secured structure permit, a schedule of repairs subject to the review and approval of the public officer. 
(5)  If the building is structurally sound, nonstructural interior portions (electrical wiring, plumbing, etc.) need not comply with appropriate codes while in secured status. 
(6)  Building or structure must remain vacant while in secured status. 
(7)  The secured structure permit must be posted on the front of the building in a clearly visible location while the structure remains in secured status. 
(8)  All utilities must remain turned off while in secured status unless otherwise approved by the public officer. 
(9)  The building must be secured, windows and doors covered and secured. If the condition of the building prevents securing of the windows and doors, the site must be fenced in order to deter unauthorized entry to the property. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  The public officer shall notify the police chief and fire chief of buildings that have been approved for secured status by the issuance of a secured structure permit and also shall provide notification when the secured status permit has expired or has otherwise been revoked. 
(12)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be inside a secured building or structure, except for the owner or duly authorized agent. Any person violating any provision of this paragraph shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa. 
(13)  All secured structures must be maintained in a manner which minimizes the appearance of vacancy, including the prompt removal of graffiti. 
(14)  All secured structures shall be maintained in a manner which does not create an unreasonable risk of fire, including the removal of weeds and the proper maintenance of grass areas which may constitute a fire hazard. No secured structure or portion thereof may be used for the storage of flammable liquids or other materials which would constitute a safety or fire hazard. 
(15)  All secured structures including all adjoining yard areas shall be maintained free of debris, combustible materials, litter, and garbage. 
(16)  All exterior surfaces shall be applied with sufficient paint, stucco, or other finishes, in the same color or similar color as the adjoining areas, to weatherproof the vacant structure and to create a sufficient appearance of repair to deter unauthorized occupation. 
(17)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove securing material on a secured building or structure. Any person violating any provision of this paragraph shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa. 
(18)  The secured structure permit is valid for a period of 180 days from the issue date. 
(19)  Periodic inspections of the structure and property will be performed by a code enforcement officer and/or building official. A report detailing the inspector's findings shall be included in the case file. If compliance with all of the requirements of this article is not present at the time of the inspection, enforcement action will be taken. In addition, the secured structure permit may be revoked by the public officer and nuisance abatement action initiated. 
(20)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of the secured building/structure permit during the permit year to violate any of the provisions of paragraphs (1) through (19) above. Any person violating any provision of these paragraphs shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa. 
(Ord.of 6-11-12, § I; Ord. of 6-18-18, § I ) 
Sec. 13-64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of June 18, 2018 , § II, repealed former § 13-64 in its entirety which pertained to procedures and requirements temporarily to secure structures for up to 60 days pending compliance by demolition or repair and Ord. of June 11, 2012. 
Sec. 13-65. - Reoccupying a secured building or structure. 
Before a building or structure can be reoccupied: 
(1)  The building or structure must be fully returned to compliance with building/fire codes; 
(2)  The building or structure must be reinspected by the public officer and/or building official; 
(3)  Approval of required plans, if applicable; historic preservation, if applicable; request and purchase of all required building permits, subtrade permits, etc., as may be required, for compliance with construction codes; 
(4)  No utilities shall be turned on until full compliance with construction codes (temporary service is permitted if necessary for construction work to bring building back in to compliance with construction codes). 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-66. - Inspection, complaint, hearing and order. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the building inspections by any public authority or by at least five residents of the City of Toccoa or by the director of building inspections on his own information charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(b)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, structure or property. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court, at a date and time certain and at a place within the City of Toccoa where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the municipal court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, structure, or property in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, structure or property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, structure or property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, structure or property in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and/or all debris from the property. For purposes of this code section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure or property without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factors in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure or property shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-67. - Undesirable vegetation. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of any occupied lot of land in the City of Toccoa, or for any agent or representative of any such occupant or owner, to permit or maintain on such lot any growth of undesirable vegetation. The complaint and inspection of undesirable vegetation shall be as set forth in section 13-62. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-68. - Failure to comply with order to repair or to demolish. 
(a)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or property, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(b)  In addition, the placard shall bear the date posted, street address and number of the building involved and the signature of the director of the building inspection department. It shall thereafter be unlawful for any person to mutilate or remove such placard or for such building to be occupied until the required corrective action is taken. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-69. - Demolition. 
No person shall begin demolition until a permit for demolition has been obtained and all utilities have been cut off and capped at the street. The person who has secured the permit shall remove from the property all debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and foundation exposed above the ground level; fill any excavation or other depressions to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than 25 percent stone or masonry; and adequately slope and drain all filled areas as determined by the director of the building inspection department. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-70. - Lien on property. 
(a)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(b)  The amount of the costs of repair or demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including but not limited to restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(c)  The lien provided for in subsection (b) above shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under this article. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(d)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this article shall transmit to the City Clerk of Toccoa a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk of Toccoa to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that the limitation of Code Section 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The city clerk of Toccoa shall collect and enforce liens imposed pursuant to this article in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. 
(e)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the City Clerk of Toccoa of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(f)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority of Toccoa in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(g)  The governing authority of the City of Toccoa may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract by agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(h)  Where the abatement action does not commence in superior court, review of the court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a building, dwelling or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(i)  In addition to the procedures and remedies in this article, the public officer may issue citations for violations of state minimum codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard and general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(j)  Nothing in this article shall impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-71. - Service of complaints, notices, orders and other filings. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner: At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail or personally serve copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-72. - Nuisance conditions on property. 
Without limiting the generality of the provisions of section 13-62(d), conditions constituting an endangerment to the health or safety of persons residing or working in the vicinity may include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the City of Toccoa. 
(2)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl. 
(3)  Stagnant water on premises. 
(4)  An accumulation of weeds, abandoned or inoperable vehicles, trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary and unsafe conditions that create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. 
(5)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-73. - Eminent domain. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the State of Georgia or to permit any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. Procedures under this article shall not constitute the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the City of Toccoa. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-74. - Right to enter and inspect. 
The public officer, or designee, or any person authorized to enforce this article, and any sworn officer of the police department shall be empowered to enter any property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the condition or work being performed thereon or therein. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-75. - Powers of public officer. 
The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise the following powers in addition to the other powers granted and set forth in this article: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the City of Toccoa in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purposes of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-76. - Code of Georgia. 
Any reference to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or O.C.G.A. shall include any amendment to a cited section as subsequently adopted. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Sec. 13-77. - Injunctions. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the Superior Court of Stephens County for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be heard by the superior court on petitions within 20 days or as soon thereafter as can be reasonably scheduled. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12, § I) 
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitations on home rule powers of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Resisting arrest; refusal to aid police officer. 
No person shall oppose or resist arrest by any member of the police department of the city in the discharge of his duty; and no person shall neglect or refuse to assist an officer in making any arrest, when so requested or commanded by such officer. 
(Code 1985, § 4-1-11) 
Sec. 14-2. - Obstructing police officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, prevent or obstruct any officer or other person charged with the execution of any warrant or other process issued under the provisions of this Code and engaged in arresting any person for whose apprehension such warrant or other process may have been issued, or to hinder, prevent or obstruct any officer or other person lawfully engaged in making an arrest of any person under circumstances not requiring the issuance of a warrant for such arrest, or to rescue, or to attempt to rescue, such person from the custody of the officer or person or persons lawfully assisting him as aforesaid, or to aid, abet, or assist any person so arrested, as aforesaid, directly or indirectly, to escape from the custody of the officer or person assisting him, as aforesaid, or to harbor or conceal any persons for whose arrest a warrant or other process shall have been issued, or whose arrest is lawfully sought without any such warrant, so as to prevent his discovery and arrest, after notice or knowledge of the fact of the issuing of the warrant or other process, or that the arrest is lawfully sought without any such warrant. 
(Code 1985, § 4-1-12) 
Sec. 14-3. - Posting signs without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge any sign or advertisement, or to post or display upon any telegraph, telephone or electric company's pole, or upon any public property or the private property of any person any bills, signs or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-4) 
Sec. 14-4. - Outdoor meetings, processions or parades. 
Any person desiring to hold an outdoor meeting on public property, or any person or group of persons desiring to form a procession or parade on a public street shall first secure a permit therefor which shall be issued by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-1) 
Sec. 14-5. - Littering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to litter within the city limits. Littering as defined herein includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Discarding of any refuse, trash, garbage, paper, box containers, cans, bottles, bottle caps or other debris on the streets, sidewalks and other public property owned by the city or on property of other persons within the city limits. 
(2)  Discarding of packaging materials or products by persons to include discarding or packaging materials in the alleyways and the city streets within the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply in times when persons place garbage, trash or refuse on the edge of their property near the city streets for the purpose of such garbage, trash or refuse being picked up by the city. 
(c)  Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 for each offense and by appropriate community service which could include picking up litter throughout the city for a period of time to be established by the municipal judge. 
(Code 1985, §§ 5-1-84, 10-1-2; Ord. No. 85-021, 9-9-85; Ord. No. 88-021, § 1, 7-11-88) 
Cross reference— Solid waste management, ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43. 
Sec. 14-6. - Firearms; fireworks; discharging prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms or guns, or to explode firecrackers or fireworks, anywhere in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-5) 
State Law reference— Discharge of gun or pistol near a public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103. 
Sec. 14-7. - Disorderly conduct generally. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to do any of the following: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb. 
(2)  Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Use fighting words directed toward another, who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil. 
(4)  Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(5)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so. 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-7; Ord. No. 88-035, § 1, 10-24-88) 
Sec. 14-8. - Disorderly conduct during public meetings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself in a disorderly or disruptive manner in the chambers of the city commission during meetings of the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-17) 
Sec. 14-9. - Possession of marijuana prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to possess one ounce or less of marijuana within the city. 
(b)  A violation of this section is punishable as set forth in section 1-12. 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-32) 
State Law reference— Possession of marijuana, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30. 
Sec. 14-10. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be on the streets of the city or in any public place in an intoxicated condition. 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-31) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 14-11. - Criminal trespass by motor vehicle. 
(a)  The city does hereby adopt the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-7-29(a) by reference. Such section provides as follows: 
(1)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass by motor vehicle when the person, after having been requested not to do so by law enforcement officer or by the owner or an authorized agent of the owner, parks or stands an occupied or unoccupied motor vehicle in, or repeatedly drives a motor vehicle through or within, a parking area which is located on privately owned property and is provided by a merchant or group of merchants for customers if: 
a.  The parking area is identified by at least one conspicuous sign at each entrance which contains the following information in easy to read printing: 
1.  Notice of the elements of the crime of criminal trespass by motor vehicle; 
2.  Identification of the property which is reserved for customers' use only; 
3.  Identification of the merchant or merchants providing the parking area; and 
4.  Warning that violators will be prosecuted; and 
b.  The motor vehicle is parked, is standing, or is being operated other than for the purpose of: 
1.  Transporting some person to or from the interior of the place of business or a merchant identified by the sign or signs in the parking area; 
2.  Making use of a telephone, vending machine, automatic teller machine, or other similar facility located in the parking area; 
3.  Meeting the requirements of a situation in which it has unexpectedly become impossible or impractical for the motor vehicle to continue to travel on the public roads; or 
4.  Carrying out an activity for which express permission has been given by the owner of the parking area or an authorized representative of the owner. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be subject to the following monetary fines: 
(1)  Not to exceed $50.00 for the first violation. 
(2)  Not to exceed $100.00 for the second violation. 
(3)  Not to exceed $150.00 for the third or subsequent violation. 
(Code 1985, § 9-1-10; Ord. No. 88-013, § 1, 6-13-88) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 11. 
Sec. 14-12. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited in public places. 
Opened alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed in public access areas in the city. Public access areas as used in this section is defined to include all city parking places, either owned by the city or patrolled by the city pursuant to an agreement with the city and the private owner, all public parks, and all public recreational facilities. An open container as used herein is defined as any alcoholic beverage on which the seal is broken or which is opened to be accessible for consumption. 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-33) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3. 
Sec. 14-13. - Shoplifting. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-9, it shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of theft by shoplifting within the city when the property which is the subject of the theft is valued at $100.00 or less. Theft by shoplifting is defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14, and such section is hereby adopted to the extent applicable as a part of this Code. 
(b)  In all cases involving theft by shoplifting, the term "value" means the actual retail value of the property at the time and place of the offense. The unaltered price tag or other marking on property, or duly identified photographs thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of value and ownership of the property. 
(c)  Any person charged by the city with a first or second offense of theft by shoplifting property valued at $100.00 or less, shall be entitled upon request to have the case against him transferred to a court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. Any person convicted by the municipal court of a first or second offense of theft by shoplifting property valued at $100.00 or less shall be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14(b)1. which section has been incorporated by reference herein. 
(Code 1985, § 10-3-1; Ord. No. 88-014, 6-13-88) 
State Law reference— Municipal court jurisdiction re shoplifting, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-9. 
Chapter 15 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning and development, ch. 16; zoning, ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, para. 3, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment, etc., of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "public parks" shall mean and refer to all municipally owned or municipally maintained parks of the city, whether located wholly within, wholly without, or partly within and partly without, the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-81) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-2. - Penalty for violation. 
Violators of any rule or restriction in this chapter shall be subject to a fine set by the municipal court, in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-91) 
Sec. 15-3. - Protection of park vegetation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, pluck, walk, step on or in any way injure or destroy any shrub, flowers or bush, or to dig, uproot, tear up or injure or destroy any shrub, any flowers, or bush, or to dig, uproot, tear up or injure or destroy any sod or grass in any of the public parks, or to walk, drive, sit or go upon any space or area in any of the public parks where a "Keep Off" sign has been posted. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-82) 
Sec. 15-4. - Protection of park structures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to write on, cut, deface, injure or break any part of any building, grandstand or other structure or any chair, seat, bench, fence in any of the public parks or upset any benches, chairs, or seats in any public park. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-83) 
Sec. 15-5. - Advertising in public parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any bill posters or to post or tack up or otherwise display any bills or advertising signs or to distribute handbills in any public park except with permission from the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-86) 
Sec. 15-6. - Concessions in public parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except such as may have a permit or concession from the city commission of the city, to sell or offer for sale in any public park any cold drinks, foods, eatables, cigars, tobacco or other merchandise except with permission from the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-87) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10. 
Sec. 15-7. - Alcohol in public parks. 
No malt beverage, wine or alcoholic beverage of any kind shall be permitted in the city park. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-88) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3. 
Sec. 15-8. - Internal combustion engines prohibited on waterworks lake. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any boat propelled by an internal combustion engine on the city waterworks lake. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-90) 
Secs. 15-9—15-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOCCOA-STEPHENS COUNTY PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Joint recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-4 et seq. 

Sec. 15-36. - General authority. 
The Toccoa-Stephens County Parks and Recreation Department shall be operated utilizing the resources of the city and county. 
(Ord. No. 90-039, § 1(2-7-1), 12-17-90) 
Sec. 15-37. - Joint committee, chairman. 
The members of the county commission and the city commission will serve as a joint committee to develop policies and procedures for the operation of the city-county parks and recreation department. For the year 1990 the mayor shall serve as chairman of this committee. Thereafter the chair shall alternate between the county commission chairman and mayor every year. 
(Ord. No. 90-039, § 1(2-7-2), 12-17-90) 
Sec. 15-38. - Annual budget. 
The joint recreation committee shall approve an annual budget, including operations and capital, of which all costs shall be divided on a 50/50 percent basis with the city paying one-half and the county paying one-half. 
(Ord. No. 90-039, § 1(2-7-3), 12-17-90) 
Sec. 15-39. - Operation, management, ownership of facilities. 
All public recreation facilities, parks, playgrounds, and equipment owned by the city and/or county shall be operated and managed by the city-county parks and recreation department. Ownership of all such facilities will remain with either the city or county and not with the recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 90-039, § 1(2-7-4), 12-17-90) 
Sec. 15-40. - Administrative organization. 
The city-county parks and recreation department will operate as a department of the city, except as previously defined for budgetary and policy matters. The recreation director will work for the city manager. Employees of the recreation department will be employees of the city and entitled to all rights and privileges thereof, as provided for in the department's annual budget. 
(Ord. No. 90-039, § 1(2-7-5), 12-17-90) 
Sec. 15-41. - Operating procedures. 
The county and the city agree to establish from time to time policies and procedures for the city-county parks and recreation department and to annually approve an operating and capital budget for the department. All actions taken by the county and the city in connection with the department shall be approved by a majority vote of the members of the city commission and a majority vote of the members of the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 90-039, § 1(2-7-6), 12-17-90) 
Chapter 16 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Cemeteries, ch. 6; flood damage prevention, ch. 9; parks and recreation, ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Municipal powers of planning and zoning, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, para. 4; urban redevelopment, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 16-26. - Established; purposes. 
In order to guide and accomplish coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the city planning commission is hereby created and established. 
(Code 1985, § 7-1-1) 
Sec. 16-27. - Composition; appointment and removal of members; regular terms; filling vacancies; compensation. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of five members all to be appointed by the city commission. The terms of the members shall be staggered. The terms of the members of the planning commission shall be for three years or until their successors are appointed. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city commission. 
(b)  The city commission shall have the authority to remove any member for cause. 
(c)  All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expense incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1985, § 7-1-2; Ord. No. 87-028, § 7-1-2, 8-24-87; Ord. No. 2000-013, § I, 6-12-00; Ord. No. O-11-01, § I, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 16-28. - Organization. 
The planning commission shall elect a chairman, vice chairman and secretary from among its members. The term of these officers shall be for one year, or until they are reelected or their successors are elected. 
(Code 1985, § 7-1-3) 
Sec. 16-29. - Meetings; required records. 
The planning commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairman, and at such other times as the chairman may determine. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Code 1985, § 7-1-4) 
Sec. 16-30. - Employees. 
The planning commission shall use the staff resources of the city planning department and such other as may be assigned from time to time by the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 7-1-5) 
Sec. 16-31. - Functions and duties generally. 
It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of its political jurisdiction. In particular, the planning commission shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of its political jurisdiction. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the appropriate governing authority or authorities a zoning ordinance and map, or amendments thereto, for its political jurisdiction. 
(3)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the appropriate governing authority or authorities standards for the subdivision of land, or amendments thereto, within its political jurisdiction. 
(4)  Review all applications for rezoning, subdivisions, annexation, flood control permits, soil erosion control permits and changes to rights-of-way for compliance with this article and related regulations and standards. 
(5)  Recommend approval or disapproval to the city with respect to applications, for rezoning, subdivisions, annexation, flood control permits, soil erosion control permits and changes to rights-of-way. 
(6)  Perform such other duties and functions as may be required. 
(Code 1985, § 7-1-6; Ord. No. 86-023, § 7-1-6, 10-13-86) 
Secs. 16-32—16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLANNING DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq. 

Sec. 16-51. - Functions generally. 
The planning department shall be responsible for code enforcement administration, zoning administration, soil erosion control, flood hazard area control and for developing and maintaining a comprehensive plan of development for the city. 
(Code 1985, § 7-1-21) 
Sec. 16-52. - Duties of director of planning. 
The director of planning shall: 
(1)  Execute all orders and directions of the city manager. 
(2)  Under the general direction of the city manager, be in charge of the planning department and have supervision over the department. 
(3)  Perform other functions as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 7-1-22) 
Sec. 16-53. - Duties of code enforcement officer. 
The code enforcement officer shall: 
(1)  Enforce all decisions of the city commission and all regulations dealing with zoning, subdivisions, buildings, flood hazard areas, soil erosion, weed control, water and wastewater and public nuisances. 
(2)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 7-1-23) 
Sec. 16-54. - Building code regulations. 
(a)  In the event that the code enforcement officer should determine that there is a violation of the building code, electrical code, gas code, housing code, energy code, mechanical code, one- and two-family dwelling code, excavation and grading code, existing building code, swimming pool code, unsafe building abatement code, fire prevention code, or the plumbing code of the city, he shall give written notice to the person in possession of such premises in violation or, if there is no person in possession of the premises, then the notice shall be tacked upon the front of the premises near the main entrance thereof and, after 14 days from the giving of the notice, and if the violation has not been corrected within the 14-day period, the code enforcement officer shall exercise all actions against such persons as are authorized under law. 
(b)  In the event any violation of this Code poses an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the code enforcement officer shall have the authority to discontinue any and all city services to the violating premises until the violation is corrected. 
(Code 1985, § 7-1-26) 
Chapter 17 - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide police protection, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, para. 3(a)(1); law enforcement officers and agencies, O.C.G.A. title 35. 

Sec. 17-1. - Functions generally. 
The police department shall be responsible for law enforcement and protection in the city. The head of the department shall be the chief of police. 
(Code 1985, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 17-2. - Powers and duties of chief of police. 
The chief of police shall: 
(1)  Execute all orders and directions of the city manager. 
(2)  Abate or remove any nuisance when so directed by the municipal judge. 
(3)  Maintain the peace, good order and tranquility of the city by the enforcement of all municipal ordinances and state or federal laws. 
(4)  Place on the recorder's docket the names of all persons violating any of the municipal ordinances and arrest and take into custody all persons who violate any city ordinances, state or federal laws. 
(5)  Under the general direction of the city manager, be in charge of the police department, have supervision over the members, and properly delegate police powers to duly authorized officers. 
(6)  Serve subpoenas and warrants of the municipal court. 
(7)  Issue and serve summons for any violation of any law or ordinance and serve all processes, executions and attachments of the municipal court. 
(8)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 4-1-2) 
Charter reference— Chief of police, § 23. 
State Law reference— Training requirements for police chiefs, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-20. 
Sec. 17-3. - Police patrol and arrest powers. 
(a)  The police officers of the city shall have the authority to patrol any street, alley, path, sidewalk or park, in and around any stores, cafes, taverns, restaurants, dance halls, service stations or any other establishment in the city. 
(b)  An officer while on duty for the city shall have authority to enter any type of business while open to the public and check to see if everything is being carried on in a lawful manner. After business hours, and while closed to the public, an officer for the city has authority to check places of business, to see if the doors and windows are locked. 
(c)  An officer for the city shall have the authority to check and investigate, enter and patrol any park, business, residence or public place within the city limits if the officer has probable cause or sufficient reason to believe some act is being committed which would involve the violation of a law or a city ordinance; a personal injury or damage to property; or if any of the above appear to be imminent. 
(Code 1985, § 4-1-3) 
State Law reference— Arrest of persons, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-1 et seq. 
Chapter 18 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Nov. 14, 2016, amended former Ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-8, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 18 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 95-009, §§ I—VIII, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 2001-12, § 1—8, 6-11-01. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; flood damage prevention, ch. 9; planning and development, ch. 16; subdivisions, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as "the City of Toccoa Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. of 11-14-16, § I(1) ) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best Management Practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
District: The soil and water conservation district. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 18-4(c). 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other sol id material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 18-3(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et. seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment- producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. of 11-14-16, §I(2) ) 
Sec. 18-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of subsection 18-4(c), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United S:ates engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. of 11-14-16, § I(3) ) 
Sec. 18-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land- disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. 
Therefore, plans for those land- disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of Subsection 18-4(b) and (c). The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections 18-4(b) and (c) shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director, or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (t) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (t) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in (c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 18-4(b)(2); 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single- family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed ; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single- family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code Section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code Section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land- disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are folly implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01 (r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the Division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsection 18-4(b)(c). 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. of 11-14-16, § I(4) ; Ord. of 9-24-18 , § I) 
Sec. 18-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Toccoa without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 18-5(c). Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 18-5(b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 18-4(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 18-5(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised Plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any Combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection 18-4(b) and (c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January l of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the District and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsection 18-4(c) (15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 18-5(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this ordinance, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this ordinance. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7f)(1) 
( Ord. of 11-14-16, § I(5) ) 
Sec. 18-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The City of Toccoa will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land- disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The District or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to Code Section 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a Local Issuing Authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
( Ord. of 11-14-16, § I(6) ) 
Sec. 18-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her Designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred, which stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 18-5(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. of 11-14-16, § I(7) ) 
Sec. 18-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land- disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. of 11-14-16, § I(8) ) 
Sec. 18-9. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Municipal Court of the City of Toccoa within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Stephens County, Georgia. 
( Ord. of 11-14-16, § I(9) ) 
Sec. 18-10. - Validity and liability. 
(a)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(b)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
( Ord. of 11-14-16, § I(10) )) 
Chapter 19 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Junkyards, ch. 10; nuisances, ch. 13; littering, § 14-5. 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; wrecker driver required to remove glass and parts of vehicle being towed, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-277. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes shall mean and include the waste products from coal, wood and other fuels used for cooking and heating from all public and private residences and establishments. 
Building rubbish shall mean waste material resulting from construction, remodeling repairs and demolition operations on houses, commercial buildings and other structures, including driveways and walks, and it comprises waste and rejected matter such as excavated earth, stones, bricks, plaster, wallpaper, sheetrock and lathes, lumber, shingles, tile, concrete and waste parts occasioned by the installation or replacement of plumbing, heating systems, electrical work and roofing. 
Dumpster shall mean a metal container furnished by the city and which remains stationary. 
Garbage shall mean waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used for or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Industrial waste shall mean solid waste materials from factories, processing plants, wholesale establishments, assembling plants or shops and garages, such as paper, cardboard, cartons, food processing wastes, cinders and ashes, lumber scraps, sawdust, excelsior, shavings, floor sweepings, metal scrap and shavings, glass and other waste products. 
Recyclable material shall mean materials suitable for the city to collect from residents and businesses for resale or reuse. Such materials include: 
(1)  Cardboard. 
(2)  Newspapers. 
(3)  Aluminum cans. 
(4)  Plastic containers. 
(5)  Glass bottles and jars. 
Roll-out container shall mean a plastic 80- or 90-gallon container furnished by the city which has a lid and wheels to roll on. 
Rubbish shall mean a variety of combustible and noncombustible waste not subject to rapid decomposition derived from places of residence, commercial areas and institutions and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, cans, bottles, glass, crockery, excelsior, rubber, discarded clothing and similar materials. 
Scavenge shall mean uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Solid waste shall mean putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except human body waste, and includes garbage, rubbish, paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, tin cans, glass, crockery, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, waste materials generated in industrial operations, residue incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, construction wastes and any other wastes in a solid or semi-solid state, not otherwise defined in this section. 
Waste shall mean unwanted or discarded material, except human body waste. 
Yard rubbish (trash) shall mean tree branches, stumps, twigs, grass and shrub trimmings, bushes, weeds, leaves and general yard and garden waste materials. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-2. - Waste acceptable for collection. 
Garbage, rubbish, yard rubbish and industrial waste constitute waste acceptable for collection by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-2) 
Sec. 19-3. - Waste unacceptable for collection. 
(a)  The following items constitute waste normally unacceptable for collection by the city: 
(1)  Dangerous or hazardous materials or substances such as poisons, acids, caustics and explosives. 
(2)  Building rubbish. 
(3)  Ashes—Industrial waste. 
(4)  Cut trees more than three inches in diameter. 
(5)  Automobile and motor vehicle tires. 
(6)  All other solid waste not specifically authorized herein. 
(b)  Any person responsible for waste not acceptable for collection by the city shall make any arrangements as may be necessary for the collection and disposal of the unacceptable waste. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-3) 
Sec. 19-4. - Disposal of trees, yard rubbish and building debris. 
(a)  The city will remove small tree limbs, shrubbery trimmings and yard rubbish on assigned days, provided such limbs or trimmings are cut into lengths of not more than six feet. All limbs, rubbish and cuttings shall be placed as near as possible to the street or sidewalk right-of-way adjacent to the property owners' or occupants' property but not in streets or sidewalks. At no time shall yard rubbish or trash be placed in ditches, gutters, drains, walkways or alleys or streets of the city. 
(b)  The city will not remove cut or fallen trees or limbs over three inches in diameter, regardless of whether or not they have been cut into short lengths. It will be the responsibility of individual property owners to remove such trees. 
(c)  Any building debris such as plaster, roofing, concrete, boards, brick and other such rubbish resulting from repairs, remodeling or construction of any building will not be removed by the city. Individual property owners shall be responsible for the removal and disposal of all such debris. 
(d)  The city will vacuum leaf piles placed on the street right-of-way on assigned days. Such piles may not contain any yard rubbish other than leaves. Piles containing yard rubbish, sticks, limbs or brush will not be picked up. 
(e)  The city will remove the following items if they are placed in a recycling basket provided by the city and placed on the street right-of-way on assigned days: 
(1)  Newspapers. 
(2)  Aluminum cans. 
(3)  Plastic containers. 
(4)  Glass bottles and jars. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-4) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 
Sec. 19-5. - Disposition of hazardous substances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any combustible, inflammable or any other hazardous waste substances within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-5) 
Sec. 19-6. - Unauthorized accumulation of solid waste; nuisance; unlawful to deposit on streets, lots, etc. 
(a)  Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within a reasonable time as may be fixed by written notice from the appropriate department shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall deposit, throw or place or cause to be deposited, thrown or placed into or upon any public square, street, alley, or sidewalk, vacant lot or unoccupied premises of the city any paper, rags, shavings, trash, rubbish, chips, ashes, rotten fruit, vegetables, dead bodies, liquids or any thing or things which are or may become offensive, or which may injure or damage any of said public squares, streets, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots or unoccupied premises, or interfere with the free use and enjoyment of the same. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-6) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, ch. 13. 
Sec. 19-7. - Scavenging. 
No person other than the owner thereof shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any container from the location where the container has been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-7) 
Sec. 19-8. - Requirements for vehicles transporting refuse. 
Any vehicle used to transport garbage, ashes or rubbish or waste of any kind upon the streets of the city shall be so constructed and equipped as to prevent escape of any of the contents of the vehicle. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-8) 
Sec. 19-9. - Cardboard disposal. 
Cardboard will be collected from commercial establishments only if placed in designated containers marked "cardboard only." 
Secs. 19-10—19-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTIONS 

Sec. 19-36. - Authority of director of public works. 
(a)  The director of public works shall be responsible for the collection and disposal of all garbage, rubbish and industrial waste. 
(b)  The director of public works shall also be responsible for the collection and disposal of all yard rubbish (trash). 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-21(A), (B)) 
Sec. 19-37. - Permit required for private collectors. 
No person shall collect and dispose of or transport over the streets of the city any garbage, rubbish, yard rubbish or industrial waste without first obtaining a written permit from the city to do so. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-21(C)) 
Sec. 19-38. - Collection containers provided by city. 
(a)  The city shall furnish to each owner or leasee of a single-family residence within the city a roll-out cart and a recycling basket. Any such owner or leasee shall be responsible for replacing the roll-out cart and/or recycling basket if it is damaged due to their negligence. In the event an owner or leasee shall move from the residence to which the cart has been assigned, such owner or leasee shall notify the city and the cart will be reclaimed. 
(b)  The city shall, at its option, either provide roll-out carts and recycling baskets to individual residents of multifamily housing or a sufficient number of stationary dumpsters in each apartment complex for use by residents. 
(c)  All nonresidential waste or garbage customers must use a dumpster for depositing garbage, waste and rubbish. Such dumpsters shall be furnished by the city. No cardboard boxes may be placed in a dumpster unless they are first broken down and folded so as to be flat. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-23) 
Sec. 19-39. - Size, bundling and placement of refuse. 
(a)  All garbage, rubbish and industrial waste shall be placed in the container supplied by the city. Such refuse will not be collected if it is not in the container nor shall any refuse be removed if the container contains materials listed in section 19-3. 
(b)  Residential owners and leasees who have been given a roll-out cart and recycling basket shall place the cart and basket near the curb or street by 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection in their area prior to the arrival of the sanitation vehicles and shall remove the cart by 7:00 p.m. of the same day. This requirement of curbside placement may be waived for any person who is physically unable to place the cart on the street. The city manager must approve all such waivers. 
(c)  All yard rubbish shall be placed for collection pursuant to the requirements under section 19-4. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-24) 
Sec. 19-40. - Monthly charge imposed; persons liable. 
In order to defray the costs and expense of providing for the collection of garbage, trash, rubbish, refuse and recyclables refuse, monthly sanitary and health fees are herewith fixed and assessed against the owner or occupant of each improved premises within the city. Each occupant of an improved premises shall be liable for the payment of the monthly charge to the city, but if for any reason the occupant of an improved premises shall fail to pay the monthly charge to the city, then the owner of the improved premises shall be liable for the payment thereof. Owners of premises which are unoccupied shall not incur a monthly charge where the premises remain unoccupied for a continuous period of 30 days and the owner has given advance written notice to the director of public works of the period of time for which owned premises will be unoccupied. The amount of the monthly charges shall be set from time to time and a schedule of such charges is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1985, §§ 5-2-27, 5-2-28; Ord. No. 88-015, § 1, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 98-008, § I, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 19-41. - Evasion of monthly charge. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed on the premises of another, with or without the permission of any other person, any garbage, garbage substances, refuse or debris, for the purpose of avoiding payment of the monthly sanitation and health charge. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-30) 
Sec. 19-42. - Termination of other services for nonpayment of charges. 
Any person failing for any reason or refusing to pay the monthly sanitary and health charge imposed by the city shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, in addition to other penalties, all sanitary and health services and water service provided by the city to the premises for which the monthly charges are past due shall be terminated by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-31) 
Chapter 20 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 11; planning and development, ch. 16; subdivisions, ch. 21; zoning, ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and maintain streets and roads, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, para. 3; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Obstructions, offensive deposits or discharges prohibited; enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed the streets, alleys, sidewalks, culverts or drainage ways except in cases of necessity of which the city manager shall be the judge, nor shall any person throw or discharge anything upon them so as to render such streets or sidewalks offensive, or hazardous. 
(b)  In case any person is erecting or has erected any obstruction prohibited by subsection (a) of this section, he shall be notified by the city to remove the obstruction. Upon failure to comply with the request of the city within 24 hours after the notice, the city shall have the obstruction removed, and the city shall issue an execution against the person so refusing or failing to remove the obstruction for the expense incurred in having the obstruction removed if the expense is not promptly paid. The remedy provided by this subsection shall not be exclusive. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-11) 
Sec. 20-2. - Displays of merchandise prohibited; costs. 
(a)  No person shall obstruct any street, sidewalk, alley, municipal parking lot or other public place by exposing, exhibiting or storing of any goods, commodities, merchandise or other articles on the streets, sidewalks, alleys, municipal parking lots or any other public place without the approval of the city. Any such approval may be granted by the city manager or designee of the city manager on a nonpermanent basis for special promotions for no more than 30 days per calendar year. 
(b)  Any obstruction prohibited by subsection (a) of this section shall be removed by the city, and if the removal is attended with any expense, the expense shall be defrayed by the person so obstructing the same. Any person placing obstructions or hindering or preventing the city in the execution of any duty under this section shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-12; Ord. No. 90-006, § 1, 2-26-90) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10. 
Sec. 20-3. - Damaging street markers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hack, cut, saw, mark, disfigure, or interfere in any manner with any street markers or notices erected within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-13) 
Sec. 20-4. - Utility work on public streets or rights-of-way. 
(a)  All public utilities or agents thereof operating in the city shall obtain a permit from the city prior to the commencement of any new encroachments or ground openings or ground cuts which will obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic along any public street or thoroughfare. For the purpose of this section a permit shall not be required for normal maintenance. This permit shall be obtained notwithstanding any franchise agreement the public utility may have with the city. 
(b)  In order to obtain a permit from the city, the public utility shall inform the city of the time and place for the work project and shall outline the effect that such work product shall have on the flow of traffic along the affected street or thoroughfare. 
(c)  There shall be no fee charge for the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-14) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 23. 
Secs. 20-5—20-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 20-31. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 and, in addition thereto, shall have his license to do business in the city revoked, and shall not make application for a new license until six months after the date of the revocation thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-25) 
Sec. 20-32. - Base and base materials standards adopted. 
Every street, road in the city, before being paved, shall conform to the minimum specifications as to base and base materials in the following provisions of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications Volume I, Construction of Roads and Bridges, and Volume II, Materials for Roads and Bridges, as approved by the State Highway Board, as amended. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-21) 
Sec. 20-33. - Paving standards adopted. 
The paving of every street, road, or way in the city shall conform to the minimum specifications as to paving adopted by reference in this section as contained in the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, Volume I, Construction of Roads and Bridges, and Volume II, Materials for Roads and Bridges, as amended. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-22) 
Sec. 20-34. - Submission and approval of plans prior to paving. 
Prior to commencing work on any street or road in the city, the contractor shall submit to the city manager, or the city manager's authorized representative, the plans and specifications 
for the paving for approval by the city manager. Approval shall be given if the contractor complies with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-23) 
Sec. 20-35. - Inspection of base prior to paving; notice to city manager; pavement not to be laid until base approved. 
Before any street, road or way is paved, and after the base has been prepared, the contractor shall notify the city manager, or the city manager's authorized representative, that the base has been prepared and the city manager, or the city manager's authorized representative, shall make an inspection thereof to determine whether the base has been prepared to meet the minimum specifications established in this division. If, in the opinion of the city manager, the base does not meet the minimum specifications, the contractor shall not pave the street, road, or way until, in the opinion of the city manager, the base meets the minimum specifications. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-24) 
Secs. 20-36—20-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 20-56. - Approval of city required. 
No person shall repair, improve or in any way affect any existing city-owned sidewalks in the city without first securing approval from the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-31) 
Secs. 20-57—20-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 20-76. - Approval of city required. 
No person shall repair, improve or any way affect any existing city drainage system without first securing approval from the city. No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant can demonstrate that all improvements will comply with the drainage specifications in the community design ordinance for subdivisions, chapter 21, and for soil erosion, chapter 18. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-41) 
Sec. 20-77. - Supervision by city required. 
All repair work or improvements of any existing city drainage system shall be done under the supervision of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-42) 
Sec. 20-78. - Responsibility of property owner. 
The city shall not maintain drainage culverts, ditches, pipes or catch basins on private property. The property owner shall be responsible for drainage systems on private property. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-43) 
Secs. 20-79—20-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOUSE NUMBERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 

Sec. 20-101. - Penalties. 
If the owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or building refuses to comply with the terms of this article by failing to affix the number assigned within 60 days after notification, or by failing within such 60-day period to remove any old numbers affixed to such house, or house entrance, or elsewhere, which may be confused with the number assigned thereto, he shall be punished as provided for in section 1-12. 
(Code 1985, § 4-5-4) 
Sec. 20-102. - Designation of street numbers. 
Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public and private streets within the corporate limits of the City of Toccoa shall be in conformity with numbers issued by Stephens County and the Stephens County Emergency Communications Department. 
(Code 1985, § 4-5-1; Ord. No. 6-2005, § I.1, 5-9-05) 
Sec. 20-103. - Posting of designated street address. 
(a)  The owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or building in which a number has been assigned will be notified in writing by Stephens County of the number assigned. 
(b)  Within 60 days after the receipt of such written notification from the city, the owner or occupant or person in charge of a house or building to which a number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous manner in a conspicuous place. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of such owner or occupant or person in charge thereof upon affixing a number to remove any number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned to such structure by Stephens County. 
(d)  Mobile home parks, apartments, houses converted to apartments or houses containing apartments, and duplexes, triplexes and quadraplexes. Each principal building shall display the number assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance may display a separate number. 
(e)  Numerals indicating the official numbers for which principal building or each front entrance to such building shall be posted in a manner and to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located. Each number shall be at least three inches high, shall be reflective, and shall be placed on a contrasting background. 
(Code 1985, § 4-5-2; Ord. No. 6-2005, §§ I.2—I.5, 5-9-05) 
Sec. 20-104. - New structures. 
No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the owner or developer has procured from Stephens County the official number of the premises. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any principal building erected or repaired after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the requirements of section 20-103. 
(Code 1985, § 4-5-3; Ord. No. 6-2005, § I.6, 5-9-05) 
Secs. 20-105—20-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARKING LOTS 

Sec. 20-201. - Description. 
The parking lots described herein and as described in Exhibit A attached hereto (at the end of this section) are parking lots owned and maintained by the city for the use and convenience of patrons and customers of businesses and other entities or agencies located adjacent or near said parking lots. 
City-Owned Public Areas and Parking Lots 
Toccoa City Hall 
Toccoa Fire Station 
Railroad Depot/Amtrak Station 
Whitman Street Community Center 
Henderson Falls Park 
Toccoa Animal Shelter 
Lake Yonah Pumping Station (outside city) 
Davidson Creek Pumping Station (outside city) 
Toccoa Reservoir and Fishing Area 
Toccoa Water Treatment Facility 
Braswell Street Public Works Facility 
Recycling Center 
Toccoa Natural Gas Facility and Peak Shaving Plant 
Camp Toccoa Water Treatment Facility (out) 
Camp Toccoa Pumping Station (out) 
Toccoa Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant 
WABCO Oxidation Pond (out) 
Eastanollee Creek Wastewater Treatment Facility 
Broad Street Off-Street Parking Lot 
Doyle Street Park 
Emory Johnson Park 
Alewine Park 
Henderson Falls Park 
Toccoa Municipal Golf Course 
Downtown Mall Off-Street Parking Lots (3) 
(Ord. No. 96-014, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 20-202. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the city that said parking lots shall be maintained and operated for the use and convenience of the customers and patrons and are parking lots for the express purpose of maintaining and encouraging economic growth and development in the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-014, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 20-203. - Hours of operation. 
All parking lots shall be opened as of 5:00 a.m. All parking lots shall be closed within 30 minutes of the close of businesses and facilities adjacent to said parking lots. Under all circumstances, all parking lots enumerated in this article shall be closed to public traffic and parking no later than 12:00 midnight. 
(Ord. No. 96-014, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 20-204. - Use by owners of adjacent property and employees of adjacent businesses. 
Nothing contained within this article prohibits the owner of property located adjacent to said parking lots or employees of businesses located adjacent to said parking lots to use said parking lots at any time. 
(Ord. No. 96-014, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 20-205. - Extending hours of operation. 
Recognizing that, from time to time, there may be some necessity to extend the operation of the time for said parking lots to be open, the city commission does hereby delegate to the city manager, the right to extend the hours of operation of said parking lots. In all such cases, the city manager's extension of operating hours shall only be temporary and must be extended by written confirmation from the city manager. In no event shall the parking lot hours described herein be extended more than three times per year per parking lot without the express authorization of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 96-014, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 20-206. - Violation. 
This article shall become effective immediately. Any violation of this article shall be treated as a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the city and shall be punished as provided herein and as is authorized pursuant to section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
For the first violation there shall be imposed a fine of no less than $50.00. For the second violation there shall be imposed a fine of no less than $100.00. For the third violation, there shall be imposed a fine of no less than $150.00. Nothing contained herein will prevent the judge of the municipal court from imposing more severe fines and penalties as authorized by law and by the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-014, 7-22-96) 
Secs. 20-207—20-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HISTORIC COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-221. - Prohibited activities as defined. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated a skateboard, roller skates, other skates, bicycle or any wheeled vehicle which is intended and designed to be propelled by a foot on the vehicle at the time of the wheeled vehicle's propulsion on the sidewalks, ramps, parking lots and medians within the downtown historic district. The downtown historic district is defined in Exhibit "A" attached hereto. This section is not intended to prohibit the parking of wheeled vehicles described herein within or on the sidewalk, ramps, parking lots and medians. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall be treated as a violation of the Code of Ordinances and shall be punished as authorized in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa. 
  

Exhibit A  Historic Commercial District 
(Ord. No. 7-2003, § I, 8-25-03; Ord. of 8-10-09, § I) 
Chapter 21 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, ch. 8; flood damage prevention, ch. 9; planning and development, ch. 16; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; utilities, ch. 23; zoning, ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Sales of subdivided land, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Terms not herein defined in this chapter or in section 1-2, shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. 
Lot shall mean a portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description as on a subdivision plat or record of survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of this chapter, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
Planning commission shall mean the Toccoa Planning Commission. 
Street shall mean an accepted or nonaccepted way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley or other way, and for the purpose of this chapter streets are divided into the following categories: 
(1)  Major thoroughfares. Those streets designated as such on the major thoroughfare plan of the city. 
(2)  Connector streets. A street within a subdivision used to carry traffic from the residential streets to the major thoroughfares and includes the principal entrance and circulation streets of a subdivision. 
(3)  Residential street. A street used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(4)  Alley. A minor way used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(5)  Cul-de-sac. A residential street with only one outlet, sometimes called a "dead end" street. 
(6)  Marginal access street. A residential street parallel and adjacent to major thoroughfares and which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through traffic. A marginal access street with only access shall be considered a cul-de-sac. 
(7)  Private street. A street owned privately by an individual(s), corporation or other legal entity other than the city, over which the general public has no right of use. A private street shall always be nonaccepted for public use. 
(8)  Public street. A street over which the general public has acquired the right to use. A public street can be accepted or nonaccepted. 
(9)  Accepted street. A street to which the city has accepted title as public right-of-way and is maintained by the city pursuant to such acceptance. All accepted streets shall be public streets. 
(10)  Nonaccepted street. A street to which title has not been accepted by the city and which, accordingly the city does not maintain. A nonaccepted street can be a private or public street. A nonaccepted street shall not be allowed within the city unless the developer provides an outline of plans and provisions for the maintenance of the street and enters into a contract with the city to bring the street up to street design standards within 36 months and requests the city to accept the street. The city shall have the right to deny the extension of any city services to any property only adjoining or abutting a nonaccepted street. In making a decision as to the extension or the provision of city services to property owners adjoining nonaccepted streets, the city may take into consideration among other things, safety, pavement conditions, access to and from the nonaccepted street, and other considerations concerning the effective and efficient delivery of city services. 
Subdivider shall mean the person having such a proprietary interest in the land to be annexed or subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to annex or subdivide such land under this chapter, or the authorized agent of such person for the purpose of proceeding under this chapter. 
Subdivision shall mean all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into five or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development, or any development of a new street or change in existing streets or rights-of-way thereof. Provided, however, that the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the city are not included within this definition. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-1, 9-14-87) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-2. - Application of chapter. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter and those of some other ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, that ordinance requiring the highest, or more strict, standard shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-111, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-3. - Amendments. 
This chapter may be amended from time to time. Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the city commission shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published at least ten days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-101, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-4. - Variations. 
From time to time it may be necessary to consider certain variations to the provisions of this chapter. These variations may be necessary because of terrain or topography. A variation will be considered provided the person seeking the variation submits an application in writing to the city and pays the required variance application fee. Each proposed variance shall be considered by the planning commission. If the application is approved by the planning commission it shall be submitted for consideration by the commission and shall then be treated as an amendment requiring a public hearing with at least ten days notice. If approved the variation will be listed and maintained as a specific amendment to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-102, 9-14-87) 
Secs. 21-5—21-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 21-31. - Platting authority. 
No plat of a land subdivision shall be entitled to record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county unless it shall have the approval of the city commission inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the city commission as required by this chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-11, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-32. - Use of plat. 
The transfer of, sale, agreement to sell or negotiation to sell land by reference to or exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the city commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-12, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-33. - Opening and improving streets. 
The city commission shall not accept, annex, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street or lay any utility lines in any street, unless such street corresponds to the street location shown on an approved subdivision plat or on an official street map adopted by the city commission, and unless such street meets the construction specifications of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-13, 9-14-87) 
Cross reference— Street improvements, § 20-31 et seq. 
Sec. 21-34. - Erection of buildings. 
No building permit shall be issued until the proposed subdivision has been approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-14, 9-14-87) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 
Sec. 21-35. - Annexation of subdivisions. 
No subdivided property or property otherwise intended for use as a subdivision shall be annexed into the city until such subdivision has been recommended by the planning commission, and approved by the city. The city, upon recommendation of the planning commission, shall have the right to propose certain conditions on any property sought to be annexed prior to annexation. These include conditions regarding the maintenance of streets in the subdivision and the extension or provision of city services to the property owners sought to be annexed. No city utilities shall be extended or subsidized by the city to service contiguous property until annexation has taken place. In subdivisions not annexed, the developer will pay 100 percent of all costs of utility extensions, including gas, water and sewer. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-15, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-36. - Nonaccepted streets. 
Nonaccepted streets shall be allowed in the city pending acceptance. Maintenance, including drainage, paving and signs, shall be the responsibility of the owners. Under no circumstances shall the city maintain the street. The city shall not accept title to a previously nonaccepted street unless the street meets city standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-16, 9-14-87) 
Secs. 21-37—21-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF SKETCH PLAN 

Sec. 21-56. - Review by planning department. 
Prior to the filing of a final plat, the subdivider, or authorized agent, is urged to confer with the planning department, who shall review the sketch plan of the proposed subdivision to determine if the subdivision meets all the requirements of the community design ordinance. It is the intent of this requirement that the subdivider may familiarize himself with these regulations, the planning department and the procedures of the planning commission to advise and assist the subdivider prior to the preparation of the final plat and related material. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-21, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-57. - Sketch plan specifications. 
The sketch plan should show in sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a free-hand sketch made on a print showing ground elevations or contour intervals. The sketch plan should include all of the contiguous property under one ownership and should include the following information: 
(1)  Subdivision name. 
(2)  Name and address of the record owner of the land proposed to be subdivided, and the proprietor of the subdivision. 
(3)  Date, scale and north arrow of map. 
(4)  Proposed street design and layout. 
(5)  Vicinity map. 
(6)  Acreage in total tract. 
(7)  Approximate lot boundaries and number of lots. 
(8)  Proposed use of property to be subdivided. 
(9)  Storm water control plans. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-22, 9-14-87) 
Secs. 21-58—21-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 21-81. - Application for plat approval. 
The subdivider shall submit to the city planning department, at least 14 days prior to the next regular or called meeting of the planning commission, the following which shall be reviewed within 21 days: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of a subdivision plat and giving the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the plat shall be sent. 
(2)  Ten paper copies or a reproducible mylar sepia of the subdivision plat and other documents, as may be specified, if required, and the original tracing or reproducible print thereof drawn in the permanent ink or equivalent on drafting cloth or film. 
(3)  A subdivision plat filing fee of $4.00 per lot. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-31, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-82. - Review of plat. 
(a)  The planning department shall review the subdivision plat for conformance with the rules and regulations of this chapter and report their findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a hearing on the subdivision plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the planning department to the person requesting plat review and approval, not less than five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  Thereafter, the planning commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the plat. Subsequently, the city commission shall hold a public meeting to consider the plat. A notation of approval, if appropriate, shall be made on two prints of the plat. A notation of the action shall be made in the minutes of the commission including a statement of the reasons therefore if the plat is disapproved. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-32, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-83. - Recording subdivision plat. 
Upon approval of the subdivision plat, the planning department shall have the plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. The subdivider shall be responsible for payment of the recording fee. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-33, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-84. - Subdivision plat specifications. 
The subdivision plat shall conform to and meet the following specifications and contain the required information: 
(1)  The subdivision plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink with mechanical lettering and at a scale not smaller than one inch to 100 feet on transparent plastic film. 
(2)  Show proof of response from the department of transportation on all subdivisions abutting state highways. 
(3)  Show ground elevations and contours based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, except that the developer will provide five-foot contours if requested by the planning department. 
(4)  Information to be provided on plat: 
a.  Name and address of owner of record and subdivider. 
b.  North point and scale. 
c.  Vicinity map showing location. 
d.  Bearings and distances to the nearest existing street lines or bench marks or other permanent monuments shall be accurately described on the plat. 
e.  Municipal, county and adjacent property lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
f.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth foot and angles to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one to 3,000. 
g.  Name of subdivision, streets and total acreage. 
h.  Street, center line and right-of-way data, including property line dimensions to points of curvature, curve radii, tangent lengths, angles of deflection and angles of intersection. 
i.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth foot and bearings. 
j.  Minimum building setback lines. 
k.  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
l.  Location, dimensions and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
m.  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. 
n.  A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants. 
o.  Name of record owners of adjoining property or name of recorded subdivision plats of adjoining property as applicable. 
p.  Specific provisions for storm water control in conformance with section 21-189. 
q.  Provisions for water supply and sewerage. 
r.  Such street cross sections and center line profiles as may be required by the planning department. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-34, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-85. - Required certification. 
The following certificates are required for each plat filed under this article: 
(1)  An engineer's or surveyor's certification, directly on the final plat, as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that the plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown herein actually exist or are marked as `future', and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the land subdivision chapter of the city, have been fully complied with. 

 
(2)  An owner's certification, directly on the final plat as follows: 
"Owner's Certification: 
State of Georgia, County of Stephens." 
"The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, that all state, city and county taxes or other assessments, now due on this land have been paid. 

 
(3)  A certificate of approval of the subdivision plat by the city commission, directly on the plat, as follows: 
"Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Chapter of the City of Toccoa, Georgia, all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this plat was given approval by the Toccoa City Commission on ;daterule;, 19 ____________ . 

 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-34(4)(S)(1—3), 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-86. - Performance bond. 
A performance bond, for the estimated cost of the road, shall be provided by the developer to insure completion and acceptance of the street to meet city standards within 36 months. The performance bond amount will be determined by the addition of all costs associated with developing and completing the road based on specifications established in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-34(4)(S)(4), 9-14-87) 
Secs. 21-87—21-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL DESIGN AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 21-106. - Suitability of the land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-41, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-107. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the commission. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision or street. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-42, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-108. - Access. 
Access to every subdivision shall be provided over an accepted street. This shall not preclude internal streets within the subdivision from being nonaccepted. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-43, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-109. - Conformance to adopted major-thoroughfares and other plans. 
(a)  All streets and other features of the major thoroughfare plan of the city shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the major thoroughfare plan adopted by the commission. 
(b)  When features of other plans adopted by the commission such as schools or other public building sites, parks or other land for public uses are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within a reasonable time by the appropriate public agency. 
(c)  When a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the commission finds not required or suitable for such public use, the commission shall refuse to approve the plat, and shall notify the subdivider of the reasons for such action. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-44, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-110. - Large-scale developments. 
A comprehensive group development, including large scale construction of housing units together with necessary drives and ways of access, may be approved by the planning commission although the design of the project does not include standard streets, lot and subdivision arrangements, if developed according to the planned unit development provisions established in section 24-166 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-45, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-111. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements having a minimum width of ten feet and located along the side or rear lot lines shall be provided, as required for utility lines, and underground mains and cable. 
(b)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage right-of-way of adequate width. Parallel streets may be required by the commission in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-47, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-112. - Reservation of public sites and open space. 
(a)  Where the features of the comprehensive plan, such as school sites, parks, playgrounds and other public spaces are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, such features shall be reserved by the subdivider, provided however that no more than ten percent of the total area of the subdivision, shall be required for reservation to fulfill the requirements of this section. Whenever the land required for such plan features is not purchased, acquired, optioned, or condemned by the appropriate public agency within a two-year period from the date of recording the subdivision or by the time that at least 75 percent of the lots are built on and occupied, whichever is sooner, the subdivider may, after approval by the commission, claim the original reservation and cause it to be subdivided in a manner suitable to the subdivider, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Whenever the public body responsible for land acquisition executes a written release, stating that the reserved land is not to be acquired, the commission shall waive the reservations requirements. 
(b)  The commission shall not approve plats when such planned features, as specified by the comprehensive plan, are not incorporated into the plat. 
(c)  Whenever the commission finds that proposed reservation of land or dedication of land for public use is not required or suitable for such public use it may require the rearrangement of lots to include such land. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-48, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-113. - Community assets. 
In all subdivisions due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees, and watercourses, and for historical spots and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-49, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-114. - Acceptance of streets. 
All streets dedicated for use by the public and accepted by the city must meet the minimum requirements for streets as set forth in this chapter. The city shall not accept any street or other right-of-way which does not meet those requirements. Acceptance of a public street shall require approval of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-50, 9-14-87) 
Secs. 21-115—21-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 20. 

Sec. 21-136. - Continuation of existing streets. 
Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-51, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-137. - Street names. 
Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already existing and names, shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the names for proposed streets duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, way or court. Through its index list of street names on file the city can assist the subdivider in avoiding duplication. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-52, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-138. - Dead-end streets. 
Where, in the opinion of the commission, it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining property, streets shall be extended to the boundary of such property and provided with a temporary turn-around. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-53, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-139. - Development along major thoroughfares, limited access highway or railroad right-of-way. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains a major thoroughfare, a limited-access highway or a railroad right-of-way, the commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street or, at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land, with a nonaccess reservation suitably planted. Due regard should be given requirements for approach grades and future grade separations in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to major thoroughfare (or limited access highway), but only to access street. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-54, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-140. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial or industrial developments but shall not be provided in one- and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-55, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-141. - Additional width on existing streets. 
Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the above minimum street width requirements. 
(1)  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the street. 
(2)  When the subdivision is located on one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-56, 9-14-87) 
STREET DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

 
(1)  Width as set in major thoroughfare plan. 
(2)  Sight line to object six feet above grade. 
(3)  There shall be at least 10;ft; between the pavement and right-of-way. 
(4)  Permitted distance between blocks. 
Secs. 21-142—21-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS 

Sec. 21-161. - Block lengths and widths. 
Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Blocks shall be not greater than 1,800 feet nor less than 600 feet in length, except as approved by the city. 
(2)  Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots, except where fronting on major thoroughfares, limited access highways, or railroads or prevented by topographical conditions or size of property; in which case the city commission may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-71, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-162. - Lot sizes and proportions. 
(a)  Lots shall meet the minimum lot width and lot area requirements of chapter 24 or as set forth hereinafter, whichever is more stringent. 
(b)  The following health and sanitary conditions shall be observed: 
(1)  Residential lots served by public water system but not a public sewerage system shall not be less than 100 feet wide at the building setback line nor less than 12,000 square feet in area. 
(2)  Residential lots not served by public water system or public sewerage system shall not be less than 100 feet wide at the building setback line nor less than 15,000 square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-72, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-163. - Adequate building sites. 
Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements or building setback lines required by this chapter and chapter 24. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-73, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-164. - Lot line arrangements. 
In so far as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot must front for at least 30 feet upon a public or private street. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-74, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-165. - Building setback lines. 
(a)  Building setback lines shall meet the requirements of chapter 24. 
(b)  In the case of electric transmission lines where easement widths are not definitely established, there shall be a minimum building setback line from the center of the transmission line as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-75, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-166. - Double and reverse frontage lots. 
Double frontage, and reverse frontage lots, should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-76, 9-14-87) 
Secs. 21-167—21-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 21-186. - Performance and specifications. 
Every subdivider shall be required to make the improvements outlined in this article in accordance with the specifications herein or otherwise adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-81, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-187. - Monuments. 
(a)  Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as required by the commission. Monuments shall be of reinforced concrete with dimensions of at least four inches by four inches by 24 inches with bronze center pins of one-fourth inch length and after installation the top shall be six inches below finished grade. 
(b)  Lot corners shall be marked with solid steel rods not less than five-eighths inch in diameter and 24 inches in length and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-82, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-188. - Grading. 
(a)  No grading or excavation shall begin until the subdivision has been given plat approval. 
(b)  All dedicated streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded by the subdividers so that pavements and sidewalks can be constructed to the required cross section. The minimum width of grading shall be the pavement width as specified in section 21-141 plus ten feet on each side. Deviation from the above will be allowed only when due to special topographical conditions. 
(1)  Preparation. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials and all trees not intended for preservation. 
(2)  Cuts. Boulders and other obstructions shall be removed to a depth of two feet below the subgrade. Rock, when encountered, shall be scarified to a depth of 12 inches below the subgrade. 
(3)  Fill. All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches, or at other places as needed. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clays, etc., shall be removed from the roadway. Roadway fills shall be rolled, compacted and constructed in accordance with the approved recommendations of a certified independent soils testing company, and the in-place fill shall be tested and certified by that company to be adequate for the intended subsequent use. The cost of such tests shall be borne by the subdivider. The filling of utility trenches and other places not accessible to the roller shall be mechanically tamped. 
(4)  Subgrade. The subgrade shall be properly shaped, rolled and uniformly compacted to conform with the lines, grades and typical cross section as shown on drawings approved by the planning commission. Unsuitable materials shall be excavated and replaced with acceptable material. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-83, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-189. - Storm drainage. 
(a)  An adequate system, including necessary ditches, curbs, gutters, pipes, culverts, street drains, drop inlets, bridges and other improvements shall be provided for the conducting of all surface water through the site. Specifications for curb, gutters and ditches are established in illustrations located at the end of this chapter. 
(b)  Drains and cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water courses as well as water flowing from the site and shall extend beyond the roadway shoulders sufficiently to protect the embankment slopes. 
(c)  Pipe sizes and slopes shall be determined by acceptable engineering calculations and shall provide for not less than a ten-year return frequency storm. In no case shall cross drains be less than 15 inches in diameter and longitudinal drains less than 12 inches in diameter. 
(d)  Stormwater runoff from the improved site shall not exceed the rate of runoff that existed prior to the proposed improvements. The subdivider shall engage a registered engineer to design such storm water control improvements including storm water holding basins, as are required to meet this objective of preventing increased erosion and flooding. The subdivider shall submit such design and calculations for the storm water drainage system, including elevations and capacities of pipes and holding basins to the city for approval prior to any construction. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-84, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-190. - Installation of utilities and driveways. 
After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the underground work, water mains, gas mains, etc., and all service connections shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the road and across the flat section. All driveways for houses to be built by the subdivider shall be cut and drained, if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-85, 9-14-87) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 23. 
Sec. 21-191. - Water supply system. 
(a)  Water mains shall be properly connected to the city water supply system and shall be constructed in such a manner as to serve adequately for both domestic use and fire protection, all lots shown on the subdivision plat. 
(b)  The sizes and materials of water mains, the location and types of valves and hydrants, the amount of soil cover over the pipes and other features of the installation shall be approved by the city and shall conform to accepted standards of good practice for municipal water systems. 
(c)  The subdivider shall submit a plan showing the location of all water system improvements, including locations of service connections to the city for approval prior to construction. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-86, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-192. - Sanitary sewers. 
(a)  When the subdivision is located within the service area of the city sewerage system, sanitary sewers shall be installed in such manner as to serve adequately all lots with connection to the city system. Where lots cannot be economically connected with a sewerage system, they must contain adequate area for the installation of approved septic tank and disposal fields and must be approved in writing by the county health department. 
(b)  All sewer facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the department of natural resources of the state, the city and the county health department. 
(c)  The subdivider shall furnish a plan for the proposed sewerage system showing locations of all improvements, including sewer taps and invert and top elevations of manholes, to the city for approval prior to any construction. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-87, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 21-193. - Street and alley improvements. 
(a)  Curb and gutter required. All dedicated streets must be constructed with either pre-cast concrete curb, or integral concrete curb and gutter conforming to the following dimensions: 
(1)  Pre-cast concrete or granite curb: Six inches by eight inches. 
(2)  Integral concrete curb and gutter, as specified in illustrations located at the end of this chapter. 
Option: The city may waive this provision provided the developer installs a drainage system according to the illustration located at the end of this chapter. 
(b)  Paving required. All dedicated streets must be prepared and paved according to the following methods or by equivalent methods that are acceptable to the city: 
(1)  Base. The base shall consist of a graded aggregate base course having a minimum thickness of six inches after being compacted to 98 percent modified proctor and constructed on a prepared subgrade in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades and typical cross section as shown on the drawings submitted to and approved by the commission. 
a.  All materials shall be secured from an approved source and shall generally conform to Georgia Department of Transportation minimum acceptable standards for this area in materials and application. 
b.  All materials shall be mixed to the extent necessary to produce a thoroughly pulverized and homogenous mixture. 
c.  The base course shall be maintained under traffic and kept free from ruts, ridge and dusting, true to grade and cross section until it is primed. 
d.  No base material shall be deposited or shaped when the subgrade is frozen or thawing or during unfavorable weather conditions. 
(2)  Pavement. Wearing surface shall conform to mixes found suitable by Georgia Department of Transportation and shall be applied after prime coat. Unless otherwise approved by the commission, pavement shall be constructed as follows: 
a.  Prime coat shall be cut-back asphalt or cut-back asphalt-emulsion applied on a clean slightly damp surface in the amounts of from 0.10 to 0.30 gallons per square yard, depending on the nature and condition of the surface. 
b.  Wearing surface shall consist of an approved hot plant mix prepared in a central plant, applied by a suitable paving machine and compacted to a minimum thickness of two inches of 19 millimeter base and one inch of F mix topping, in accordance with Department of Transportation specifications for material and application procedures. 
c.  Care and precaution shall be taken that all joints between such structures and manholes and curbs, and the surface mixture are well sealed. 
(Ord. No. 87-029, § 7-3-88, 9-14-87; Ord. of 6-13-11; § I) 

Curb and Gutter Specifications 
  
INSERT DIAGRAM ON MSP 1167 HERE 
Curb and Gutter Specifications  TYPICAL CROSS SECTION  INTEGRAL CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER 
  
INSERT DIAGRAM ON MSP 1168 HERE 
Chapter 22 - TAXATION AND REVENUE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Ad valorem taxes, § 17. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic beverage excise taxes, § 3-56 et seq.; business license occupational tax, § 10-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal governments, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, para. 1; limitation on taxing power of municipalities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, para. 8; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-2; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Annual budget. 
(a)  The city manager shall submit to the city commission an annual budget listing all expected appropriated expenditures and revenues at least 30 days prior to the end of the fiscal year. 
(b)  The annual budget shall be approved by a majority vote of the city commission. 
(c)  All amendments to the budget shall be made with the approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1-2) 
Sec. 22-2. - Duties of director of finance. 
The director of finance shall serve under the supervision and direction of the city manager and shall perform the following general duties: 
(1)  Maintain the accounts of the city and its departments and other agencies in accordance with generally accepted principles of governmental accounting. 
(2)  See that all funds of the city and its agencies are properly received and deposited and properly disbursed in accordance with its budget, the charter and general law. 
(3)  Invest the available funds of the city and its agencies in a profitable manner as directed by the city manager. 
(4)  Keep the commission, the city manager, the city clerk and all other officers of the city advised of the financial condition of the city. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as may be provided by act, or be imposed by the city manager, not inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1-3) 
Charter reference— Director of finance, § 24. 
Secs. 22-3—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS 

Sec. 22-31. - Approval and payment of disbursements. 
(a)  Disbursements not exceeding $2,000.00 may be made with the approval of the city manager and the director of finance. 
(b)  Disbursements exceeding $2,000.00 shall be approved by the city commission. 
(c)  All disbursements shall be approved in writing by the director of finance. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1-11) 
Sec. 22-32. - Bidding. 
The city commission may require that any purchase exceeding $2,000.00 be made upon a bid basis. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1-12) 
Sec. 22-33. - Payments of city funds. 
(a)  The payments of all city funds shall be made in accordance with administrative procedures approved by the city commission in keeping with the requirements of the charter and this Code. 
(b)  All checks shall be signed by the clerk and the director of finance. In the absence or disability of the clerk, the mayor shall sign such checks, and in the absence or disability of the director of finance, the city manager shall sign such checks, and in the absence of the city manager, the mayor, or in his absence, the vice-mayor shall sign such checks. All voucher checks shall be signed by two of the aforementioned persons and in no case shall the same person sign any voucher check twice. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1-13) 
Secs. 22-34—22-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL OPTION SALES TAX 

Sec. 22-56. - Authorized initiation of tax. 
The city, in conjunction with the City of Martin and Stephens County, has initiated a one percent sales tax pursuant to the requirements and regulations under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-2 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 3-5-1) 
Sec. 22-57. - Distribution of revenues. 
(a)  The revenues received from the local option sales tax shall be distributed on the basis of percentage of population of each qualifying municipality and county. The percentage of population shall be determined by taking a ratio of each qualifying city population to the total county population. The population shall be determined by the final count of the latest census of population as published by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 
(b)  The qualifying municipalities and county shall meet every other year to renegotiate the distribution formula which would be based on net changes in city or county populations which can be mutually agreed upon by all qualifying municipalities and county at the time of renegotiation. If a renegotiated distribution formula cannot be reached by all parties, then the current distribution formula would prevail until either a subsequent renegotiated formula is agreed upon or a new census of population is published by the Bureau of the Census. 
(Code 1985, § 3-5-2) 
Secs. 22-58—22-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 22-81. - Definition. 
For purposes of this article, the term "gross receipts" shall mean the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized below during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax imposed by the ordinance is due. 
(Code 1985, § 3-6-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-82. - Business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the minimum amount of the business license tax due from any depository financial institutions pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1985, § 3-6-1) 
Cross reference— Business license occupational tax, § 10-26 et seq. 
Sec. 22-83. - Calculation of tax. 
(a)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts under this article with respect to banks are as follows: 
(1)  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others. 
(2)  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions. 
(3)  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale. 
(4)  Interest on other bonds, notes, and debentures, excluding interest on obligations in the state or its political subdivisions and obligations on the United States. 
(5)  Dividends on stocks. 
(6)  Income from direct lease financing. 
(7)  Income from fiduciary activities. 
(8)  Service charges on deposit accounts. 
(9)  Other service charges, commissions, and fees. 
(b)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts under this article with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
(1)  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold in service for others. 
(2)  Interest on mortgages, participations or mortgage-backed securities. 
(3)  Interest on real estate sold on contract. 
(4)  Discount on mortgage loans purchased. 
(5)  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States. 
(6)  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits. 
(7)  Loan fees. 
(8)  Loan servicing fees. 
(9)  Other fees and charges. 
(10)  Gross income from real estate owned operations. 
(11)  Net income from office building operations. 
(12)  Gross income from real estate held for investment. 
(13)  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries. 
(14)  Miscellaneous operating income. 
(15)  Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans, and other assets. 
(16)  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
(c)  The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to subsection (a) or (b) of this section: 
(1)  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period. 
(2)  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 7-1-710 et seq. 
(3)  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions. 
(4)  An amount equal to a depository financial institution's gross income which is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than Georgia. 
(5)  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (c)(2), (3) and (4) of this section, any deductions taken under subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (c)(2) through (4) of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (c)(1) through (4) of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 3-6-2) 
Sec. 22-84. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 each year. 
(Code 1985, § 3-6-3) 
Secs. 22-85—22-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INSURERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 94-025, section I, adopted October 24, 1994, amended the Code by deleting Article V, §§ 22-106—22-111 in its entirety and adding a new Article V, §§ 22-106—22-112. Formerly such sections pertained to life insurers and derived from §§ 3-7A-1—3-7A-6 of the 1985 Code. 

Sec. 22-106. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $50.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 22-107, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $50.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 94-025, § I, 10-24-94) 
Sec. 22-107. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $17.50 per location for the year 1995 and for each thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 94-025, § I, 10-24-94) 
Sec. 22-108. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 22-106, in the amount of $50.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-025, § I, 10-24-94) 
Sec. 22-109. - Gross premiums tax—Life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-106 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-025, § I, 10-24-94) 
Sec. 22-110. - Same—All other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-106 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-025, § I, 10-24-94) 
Sec. 22-111. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 22-106, 22-107 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 94-025, § I, 10-24-94) 
Sec. 22-112. - Administrative provisions. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the insurance commissioner of the state within 45 days of its enactment. 
(Ord. No. 94-025, § I, 10-24-94) 
Secs. 22-113—22-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An Ord. of July 9, 2012, repealed former Art. VI, §§ 22-131—22-141, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2000-016, § II, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 14-2005, 6-13-05. 

Sec. 22-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City. The City of Toccoa and, variously, the incorporated territory of Toccoa, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq. 
City clerk. The duly appointed city clerk of the city or his designee. 
Due date. The 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability. The lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room. Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel. Any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truck stop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest accommodations and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider. Any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident. Any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax. The tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq., specifically § 48-13-51(b). 
(Ord. of 7-9-12, § I) 
Sec. 22-132. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of eight percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 22-134. 
(Ord. of 7-9-12, § I) 
Sec. 22-133. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 22-134. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(1)  Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. 
(2)  An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this subsection. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. of 7-9-12, § I) 
Sec. 22-134. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is not subject to this tax. 
(Ord. of 7-9-12, § I) 
Sec. 22-135. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that the ordinance from which this article derives becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. of 7-9-12, § I) 
Sec. 22-136. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § Section 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and Section 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 7-9-12, § I) 
Sec. 22-137. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 22-136. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. of 7-9-12, § I) 
Sec. 22-138. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 22-137(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 22-136. 
(Ord. of 7-9-12, § I) 
Sec. 22-139. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. of 7-9-12, § I) 
Sec. 22-140. - Administration of article; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city clerk shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 7-9-12, § I) 
Sec. 22-141. - Violations. 
Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect and pay the tax as required as provided by section 22-133 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 22-136, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. of 7-9-12, § I) 
Chapter 22.5 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; cable communications, Ch. 5.5; zoning, Ch. 24. 

Sec. 22.5-1. - Purposes. 
This chapter is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the City of Toccoa, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunications facilities within the city so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote the City of Toccoa as a proactive city in the availability of wireless telecommunications service. To that end, this chapter shall: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities to serve the residents and businesses of the city; 
(2)  Protect the city's built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities; 
(3)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(4)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antennae failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures and antennas; 
(5)  Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the city; 
(6)  Maximize and encourage use of alternative telecommunications tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; and 
(7)  Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications facilities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, terms shall have the meanings indicated in the City of Toccoa Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 24 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5-3. - Exclusions. 
The following shall be exempt from this chapter: 
(1)  Any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height and owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
(2)  Any device for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multi-channel multi-point distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service; or 
(3)  Any telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the City of Toccoa provided a license or lease authorizing telecommunications facility has been approved by the governing body. 
(4)  Any monopole tower and antenna up to 70 feet in total height. 
(5)  Any antenna located on any existing structure (i.e. existing towers, watertanks, buildings, utility poles, streetlights, etc.). 
(6)  Any antenna located on a new or existing utility pole to include poles used/or lighting for city owned recreation facilities (i.e. ball fields, tennis courts, etc.) or on new structures properly permitted (i.e. bell towers, steeples, clock towers, streetlights, etc.) 
(7)  Any monopole tower and antenna 100 feet or less located in an electrical substation. 
(8)  Any telecommunications facilities operative on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5-4. - Placement of telecommunications facilities by zoning district. 
Except as otherwise provided, telecommunication facilities are not allowed in any residential or Main Street districts or in any: 
(1)  R-IA: Single-family Residential District. 
(2)  R-IB: Single-family Residential District. 
(3)  R-II: Two-family Residential District. 
(4)  R-III: Multi-family Residential District. 
(4)  SR: Suburban Residential District. 
(5)  B-III: Central Business District. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5-5. - Preferred location sites. 
(a)  Publicly used structures: Publicly used structures are preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunications facilities. Therefore, telecommunications facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly used structures than when placed on commercial or residential structures. Publicly used structures include facilities such as police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. 
(b)  Co-location sites: Any existing site on which a legal wireless telecommunications facility is currently located shall be a preferred location site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site, provided, however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this ordinance and co-location sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise be deemed by the planning department of the city or the city commission authority to be visually obtrusive. 
(c)  Industrial and commercial structures: Wholly industrial and commercial structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, or service stations shall be preferred locations particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roof line can and will be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunications system. 
(d)  Mixed use buildings in planned development districts: Mixed use buildings (housing above commercial or other non-residential space) are also preferred location sites. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5-6. - Requirements for telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  General requirements for all telecommunications facilities: The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications facilities governed by this chapter. 
(1)  Building codes and safety standards: To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for such telecommunications facilities that are published by the FCC as amended from time to time. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every three years to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a structural engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the city planning department. 
(2)  Regulatory compliance: All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate communications towers and antennae. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this chapter shall bring such communications towers and antennae into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 
(3)  Security: All telecommunications facilities shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. This requirement may be waived by the city planning department if it is deemed that this would produce negative visual clutter or obstruct a view corridor. 
(4)  Lighting: No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless part of a approved public lighting program or required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction in which case the director may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(5)  Advertising: No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. 
(6)  Visual impact: 
a.  Telecommunications facilities shall, subject to applicable standards of the FAA or other federal or state agencies, be maintained with a galvanized metal finish, painted a neutral color, or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. Telecommunications facilities located in residentially zoned areas shall be painted in a neutral color or textured to match the existing environment to minimize visual obtrusiveness. If federal or state regulations require, telecommunication facilities shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or other required finish. 
b.  Concealment requirements such as pine tree, cactus, parapet extension, silo, fake chimney, water tower, extended wall inside existing pylon sign, fiberglass flag pole, and existing steeple should be ordered and may be ordered by the city. 
c.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower and is generally visible to the public, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers, or other background. 
d.  Antennas mounted on architecturally significant structures or significant architectural details of the building shall be covered by appropriate casings, which are manufactured to match existing architectural features found on the building. 
e.  Where feasible, antennas can be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
f.  Towers or roof mounted antennas shall not be placed in direct line with significant view corridors, as designated by the city or by any state or federal law or agency. For purposes of this ordinance a significant view corridor shall be defined as an area to be kept free of obstructions or structures which interfere with the view of any scenic area, or historic building or area. A view corridor may be established by ordinance of the city, by zoning restrictions adopted in accordance with the ordinances of the city, or by any state or federal law or agency in accordance with provisions of federal laws or duly adopted regulations. 
g.  Any equipment shelter or cabinet must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters shall be screened from public view and may use landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding structures. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(7)  Landscaping: 
a.  Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
b.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
c.  The planning commission may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes or for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the planning commission. 
8.  Maintenance impacts: Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector and local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector street. Access drives and maintenance vehicle parking shall be paved unless the requirement is waived by the planning commission. 
(9)  Principal, accessory and joint uses: 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower. 
b.  Towers may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same build able area. Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals. 
(10)  Lot size and setbacks: 
a.  The site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide an adequate setback from the base of the tower to any property line abutting a residential district, public property, or public street. Such setback shall be sufficient to: 
1.  Provide for an adequate vegetative, topographic or other buffer as required; 
2.  Preserve the privacy of surrounding residential property; and 
3.  Protect adjoining property from the potential impact of tower failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in section 22.5-7. 
(11)  The proposed project must not disrupt the overall community character. For purposes of this ordinance, the term overall community character shall be determined by applying the criteria set forth in Chapter 24, Zoning. 
(b)  Additional requirements for towers: 
(1)  Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district as much as possible. Wireless communication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical (i.e. camouflaging through integration with structures or appearance such as artificial trees, etc.). 
(2)  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
(3)  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. (i.e. artificial tree appearance, steeples, decorative fencing, etc.) 
(4)  Towers greater than 70 feet in height shall not be located any closer than 1,500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable as determined by the Planning Department of the City of Toccoa through a variance request. 
(5)  When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, it must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance at least equal to its total height. 
(6)  Towers shall not be sited where they will create visual clutter or negatively affect specific view corridors as designated by the City of Toccoa or any state or federal law or agency. 
(7)  Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided requirement number (b)(4) above is met along with all setback, design and landscape requirements as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5-7. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Special use permits: 
(1)  A request for a special use permit shall be initiated by application to the planning department and handled in accordance with the special use permit provision of Article 19 of the City of Toccoa Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 24 of this Code]. The applicant may obtain a special use permit pursuant to the City of Toccoa Zoning Ordinance provided that all of the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied and further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
(2)  In granting a special use permit, the city commission of Toccoa may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
(b)  General application requirements for all building and special use permits. Application for a building permit or special use permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the planning commission. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit, special use permit or other permit or variance included in this chapter: 
(1)  Basic information: 
a.  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas; and adjacent land uses. 
b.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings as required or suggested by the ordinances of the City of Toccoa. 
c.  An impact statement fully describing the effects that the proposed telecommunications facility will have on the environment and surrounding area including the impacts on adjacent residential structures and districts, impacts on structures and sites of historic significance and impacts on streetscapes and significant view corridors. The impact statement shall include a description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs; and traffic noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
d.  Report from a professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting the following: 
1.  Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
2.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
3.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure (i.e. Engineers statement that structure is built to meet or exceed Standard Building Code); and 
4.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications tower(s) over 70 feet and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
5.  Setbacks for telecommunication towner(s) 70 feet and less shall not be closer to a residential structure than the height of the tower or closer to a residential property line than 40 feet. 
e.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity. 
f.  The identity of a community liaison officer to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
g.  The existing towers and tall structures located within the geographic service area should be identified on a map along with written justification as to the need for a new tower in place of an existing structure. 
(2)  A map indicating all existing tower and antenna sites located within the city and within two miles of the city boundaries. 
(3)  The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the planning department and/or city commission to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(c)  Grant or denial of permit: 
(1)  The planning department shall review the completed application for a building permit or special use permit and shall issue a grant or denial of a building permit or forward the application for conside1ation for a special use permit pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Toccoa [Ch. 24 of this Code] within a reasonable time. 
(2)  Any decision to deny a building permit or special use permit pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Toccoa shall be supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5-8. - Co-location. 
Application and owner shall allow other future wireless communications companies including public and quasi-public agencies using similar technology to collocate antenna equipment and facilities on the tower unless specific technical constraints prohibit said co-location. Applicant may negotiate any type of agreement for co-location but shall not charge fees, which are so unreasonable at to prohibit co-location. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5-9. - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the planning commission shall be to the city commission pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance of City of Toccoa [Ch. 24]. Any decision on a request to build a tower or for a Special Use Permit for a tower shall be in writing, and any denial of any such request or special use permit shall be supported by substantial evidence and a written record. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5-10. - Nuisances. 
Telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times in such a manner as to not be a nuisance as defined by the ordinances of the City of Toccoa. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5-11. - Removal of antennas and towers. 
All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the director or his designee any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the minimum Standard Building Code or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such facility into compliance. In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within 30 days, the city may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the city may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal or seek costs incurred through court action. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the minimum Standard Building Code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owners' or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5.12. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the city may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal or seek costs incurred through court action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owners' or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this ordinance as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5-13. - Pre-existing towers/non-conforming use. 
(a)  All telecommunications facilities operative on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a non-conforming use and shall be treated as a non-conforming use in accordance of the city. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing telecommunications facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. The planning department may approve the addition of 20 feet to any existing tower whereby it can be shown that this would provide for co-location and eliminate the need for a new tower and it is determined that adequate site area exists for the location of any equipment buildings. Approval of an additional 20 feet applies to all zoning districts, however, additions greater than feet shall require a special use permit. 
(b)  A telecommunications facility that has received city approval in the form of either a building permit or special use exception, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(c)  Placement of an antenna on a non-conforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the non-conforming structure. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Sec. 22.5-14. - Coordination with federal law. 
Whenever the city commission finds that the application of this ordinance would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a special use permit waiving any or all of the provisions of this chapter may be granted. 
(Ord. of 11-23-09, § I) 
Chapter 23 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; planning and development, ch. 16; subdivisions, ch. 21; zoning, ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Power of city to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, para. 3; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; city's authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Connection of utilities—Notice from city. 
No utility doing business in the city, including the city gas department, the city water department and the Georgia Power Company shall make any new or remodeled service connections to any building or mobile home in the city without being first notified in writing by the duly authorized city official that all codes and ordinances of the city have been complied with by the premises to be served. 
(Code 1985, § 6-1-1) 
Sec. 23-2. - Same—City supervision; permit required. 
All connections to the city sewerage, water and gas systems shall be made at the place on the property designated by a duly authorized official of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to, tap-in, repair, add to or otherwise tamper with or change any of the city utility systems without a permit therefor from the city. All work performed under such permit shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the duly authorized official of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-1-2) 
Sec. 23-3. - Tampering with meters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, damage or injure any gas meter, electric meter or water meter in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-1-3) 
Sec. 23-4. - Using water from hydrant. 
Any person desiring to use any water out of a city fire hydrant shall contact the head of the city water department and the city shall meter the amount of water used by such person from the fire hydrant. Such person shall pay the city the current sum which shall be for the cost of the labor of installing the meter and the cost of amortizing the meter and in addition, shall pay in accordance with the published rate for the water taken from the city system. Any person which shall take any water from a city fire hydrant without complying with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 6-1-4) 
Sec. 23-5. - Payment of monthly sanitary and health charge, due date; inclusion with water bill. 
The monthly sanitary and health charge for each premises to which the city supplies water service shall be billed and collected in the same manner and at the same time as water service is billed and collected. The monthly sanitary and health charge for each premises to which the city does not supply water service shall be billed and collected monthly in advance by the tenth day of each month and shall be payable by the occupant or the owner. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-29) 
Sec. 23-6. - Director of utilities. 
The utilities of the city shall be under the control and supervision of the utilities director. 
Secs. 23-7—23-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GAS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Gas code, § 5-66 et seq. 

Sec. 23-31. - General responsibility of gas department. 
The gas department shall be responsible for providing gas service to the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-2-1) 
Sec. 23-32. - Meter required. 
No person shall consume gas from the city natural gas system unless the gas to be consumed shall first pass through a meter which shall measure the quantity of gas to be consumed. 
(Code 1985, § 6-2-12) 
Sec. 23-33. - Deposit required. 
Each tenant or lessee at any location serviced by the city gas department shall deposit with the city the current deposit per connection prior to connecting the gas service to the leased building and the owner or tenant of a mobile home shall deposit with the city the current deposit per mobile home prior to connecting the gas service to the mobile home. 
(Code 1985, § 6-2-13) 
Sec. 23-34. - Extension of gas mains and service lines. 
A gas main line extension will be made by the city, up to 200 feet per customer, of various size pipe up to two inches in diameter along streets and highways. Any extension in excess of 200 feet shall be paid for by customer. All three-quarter-inch service lines from the main extension are to be free on each tap up to 100 feet, with additional pipe over the first 100 feet to be installed at cost. 
(Code 1985, § 6-2-14) 
Sec. 23-35. - Charge for reconnection of gas or lighting pilot lights. 
A charge of $15.00 during normal business hours and a charge of $20.00 after normal business hours shall be made to reconnect gas service or to light pilots on appliances where the gas has been turned off either for nonpayment of bills or at the request or by action of the owner or tenant. The consumer contracting for gas service shall be responsible for the payment of the gas bill. No such gas service shall be resumed until the past due gas bill, including the cut-on charge, shall be fully paid. 
(Code 1985, § 6-2-15) 
Sec. 23-36. - Requirement for new residential structures. 
Gas service shall not be provided to any new residential structure unless such residence shall use natural gas or heating and at least one other year-around appliance. 
(Code 1985, § 6-2-16) 
Secs. 23-37—23-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 5-86 et seq. 
State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; acquisition of water systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

Sec. 23-56. - General responsibility of water department. 
The department of water and wastewater shall be responsible for providing water and sewage services to the city. The department shall be headed by the director of water and wastewater. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-1) 
Sec. 23-57. - Meter required; installation. 
No person shall consume water from the city water system unless the water shall first pass through a water meter which shall measure the volume of water to be consumed. The city shall install meters required by this section at the expense of the consumer. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-13) 
Sec. 23-58. - Rates generally. 
The rates and charges from water services provided by the city shall be established from time to time by the city commission by resolution. Each dwelling unit to be serviced by city water shall be individually metered. The meter set fee shall apply to each dwelling unit. In cases of multiple-use apartments, housing units and trailers where a master meter is used, the minimum charges shall be based upon the number of units served. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-11) 
Sec. 23-59. - Penalty for late payment of charges; time for payment. 
The charges for water service shall be subject to a five percent penalty if the charges are not paid within 15 days from the date of the billing period as shown on the water bill. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-12) 
Sec. 23-60. - Water emergencies. 
(a)  If the city commission declares that an emergency exists insofar as the city's supply of treated water or raw water, the use of city water shall be restricted as follows: 
(1)  All domestic users of water shall be required to use the city water only for baths, drinking, cooking and sanitary uses and for no other purposes. 
(2)  All commercial users shall use water only for sanitary, drinking and cooking purposes, and for no other purposes. 
(3)  All industrial users shall use water only for sanitary, drinking and manufacturing uses and for no other purposes, except that when notified by the city manager, the industrial user shall be required to follow an allotment of water from the city, which allotment shall be related solely to the needs of the city and the amount of available water. 
(b)  The city manager shall, if practical, give 24 hours notice through the local radio stations of the decision to curtail the use of water prior to the effect of such restrictions. 
(c)  These emergency powers granted to the city manager for the ordering of nonuse or limited use of water shall exist for a period of 48 hours and any extension of the emergency powers of the city as hereinabove set forth may be continued upon resolution of the city commission of the city for such period of time as in the judgement of the city commission it may determine such state of emergency to exist. 
(d)  Any person violating the provisions of this section after having been notified by the city that an emergency does exist who resides or has a place of business in the city shall be punished as provided in this Code. 
(1)  Any person using city water outside the city limits of the city and who violates the provisions of this section after having been notified by the city that an emergency does exist shall have their water cut off and before the same shall be reconnected, such person shall pay to the city the current fee for turning on the water to such customer. 
(2)  The notice contemplated by this paragraph shall be personal notice from the city to an individual or to an agent or representative of a firm or corporation, which shall be in addition to the notice given through the local radio stations as hereinbefore provided. 
(e)  The city commission may declare a continuous water shortage emergency if temporary curtailment is not sufficient. In such event they may ration the use of water. Top priority will be given in the following decreasing order: 
(1)  Essential domestic use. 
(2)  Essential industrial needs. 
(3)  Essential commercial needs. 
(4)  Nonessential industrial needs. 
(5)  Nonessential commercial needs. 
(6)  Nonessential domestic use. 
(f)  Water shortage management plan. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (f), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business using high volumes of water means a water customer using more than 50,000 gallons of water per day. 
Essential services means health care, sanitation, cooking needs and fire protection. 
Inside city means inside the city limits. 
Low pressure means less than 20 per square inch (psi). 
Outdoor water usage means lawn and garden watering; noncommercial car washing; and filling of private swimming pools. 
Outside city means outside the city limits. 
Step I means the public shall be notified to begin voluntary water conservation measures through the news media and by posting notification on the bulletin board located in city hall and on the bulletin board located in the county courthouse. The public notice shall be advisory, and request water customers to cease outside water usage. 
Step II means there shall be no outside water usage during days and hours recommended by the city manager and the water/wastewater utilities director and affirmed by the city commissioners. The city water/wastewater department shall approve all use of the city distribution system to fill a tank truck. The standard used by the water/wastewater department to exercise this discretion shall be: 
a.  To protect either storage volumes or system pressures from dropping below section 4 levels and; 
b.  To protect the water supply to assure that public health and safety are not imminently threatened. 
Step III means there shall be no outside water usage during days and hours recommended by the city manager and water/wastewater utilities director and affirmed by the city commissioners. Businesses using high volumes of water may be put under significant restrictions by the city manager. When exercising this discretion, the city manager shall consider: 
a.  The effect that a high-volume user has on causing the level mentioned in section 4; 
b.  Whether limiting a business' hours or days of operation will allow water levels to exceed the levels mentioned in section 4; and 
c.  The increased water supply generated by any restrictions to best promote public health and safety. 
Step IV means all outdoor water use shall be banned. Water may be rationed for essential purposes only. Commercial and industrial users shall be restricted in accordance with a plan adopted by the city manager. 
(2)  Application. This article shall apply to all users of the city water system whether inside the city or outside the city. Surcharges under this article are provided in attachment A of this plan, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(3)  Purpose and public notification. 
a.  The purpose of this subsection (f) shall be to install emergency procedures to prevent threats to public health and safety arising from periods of water shortage and drought and to prevent acts that cause, or can reasonably be expected to cause, significant imminent harm to limited water resources. 
b.  The public shall be notified that this article is in effect, and which step is being implemented, through the news media and by posting notice thereof on the city's bulletin board in city hall and on the bulletin board located at the county courthouse at least 24 hours prior to this article, or to the particular step, being enforced. 
(4)  Implementing Step I. Step I shall be implemented if the city exceeds 90 percent of its permitted water withdrawal amount or maximum safe production level for one day or if low pressure or loss of service is experienced, or if directed by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. Step I shall remain in effect until all factors are relieved and shall cease when city commissioners determines that an adequate supply to fulfill public needs exists. The commissioners decision shall be made upon recommendation of the city manager and the water/wastewater utilities director, which shall be subject to being approved or modified by the city commissioners at the commissioners next meeting. The public shall be notified of the termination of Step I through the news media and by removing prior notice from the city and county bulletin boards. 
(5)  Implementing Step II. Step II shall be implemented if Step I is not effective in restoring water levels above the levels described in subsection (4) above, or if directed by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. Step II 
shall remain in effect until the factors that invoked Step I is/are relieved for two weeks from the last date on which one or more factor(s) occurred. When Step II is withdrawn, Step I shall be reimplemented. 
(6)  Implementing Step III. Step III shall be implemented if Step II fails to prevent loss of service, or if directed by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. Step III shall remain in effect until loss of service ceases. When Step III is withdrawn, Step II measures shall be reimplemented. 
(7)  Implementing Step IV. Step IV shall be implemented when Step III fails to prevent loss of service, or if directed by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. Step IV shall remain in effect until loss of service ceases. When Step IV is withdrawn, Step III shall be reimplemented. 
(8)  Extreme cases. 
a.  In extreme cases of loss of service, the city manager may authorize closing valves in the water distribution system. When exercising this discretion, the city manager shall: 
1.  Make water available to private consumers from fire hydrants that are equipped to dispense water to the consumers' private containers; 
2.  Fully consider the needs of medical facilities; and 
3.  If possible, avoid the interruption fire protection. 
b.  When determining "extreme cases" the city manager shall consider: 
1.  Loss of service; 
2.  Available water supply; and 
3.  The threat posed to public health and safety by continued water usage. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-14(A)—(E); Ord. No. 2000-014, 6-15-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-2004, adopted Sept. 13, 2004 enacted water restrictions as follows: 
OUTSIDE USE OF WATER IS RESTRICTED 
The City Commission of the City of Toccoa imposed certain restrictions on the outdoor use of water throughout the City Water Distribution System. This also includes the unincorporated portions of Stephens County. These restrictions were imposed as a result of a mandatory, statewide water ban imposed by the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Effective August 1, 2004, the outside use of water is hereby restricted as follows: 
Odd Numbered Addresses are allowed outdoor water usage ONLY on Saturday, Tuesday and Thursday; 
Even Numbered Addresses (as well as those residences without numbers) are allowed outdoor water usage ONLY on Saturday, Monday and Wednesday. 
No addresses are allowed to use outdoor water on Friday or Sunday. 
These restrictions will remain in effect until further Notice to the Public is given. 
First instance of violations will be given a written warning; the second instance will be given a fifteen ($15.00) dollar ticket, payable to the Clerk of the Municipal Court; and the third and subsequent instances of violation will result in the water service being discontinued until a fine of $200.00 is paid to the City of Toccoa. 
Sec. 23-61. - Water conservation. 
(a)  In all new or replacement construction, only fixtures and trim not exceeding the following flow rates or water usage shall be installed: 
(1)  Water closets, tank type, 1.6 gallons per flush. 
(2)  Urinals, tank type, 1.0 gallons per flush. 
(3)  Shower heads, 2.5 gallons per minute. 
(4)  Lavatory, sink faucets, 2.2 gallons per minute. 
(5)  Water closets, flushometer tank or close coupled 2-piece gravity-flush type, 1.6 gallons per flush. 
(b)  All flow rates shall be tested at 60 psi. 
(c)  The following exceptions to this section are permitted: 
(1)  Water closets designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution. 
(2)  Water closets, tank type, designed for the handicapped. 
(3)  Water closets, tank type, designed for juveniles. 
(4)  Industrial flood shower heads (emergency use). 
(5)  Water closets, one piece combination. 
(d)  Any person who installs any water closet, faucet or shower head, after July 1, 1983, in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-14(F); Ord. No. 14-2001, § I, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 23-61.1. - Restriction on the outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)  Time of watering restricted. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the City of Toccoa and the unincorporated portion of Stephens County area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses: 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(2)  The City of Toccoa shall be the enforcement authority for this ordinance. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(3)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-22-10) 
Sec. 23-62. - Extension of water lines outside of city limits. 
In order to establish certain rules and regulations to be followed in connection with the extension of water lines outside the city limits of the city, the following rules and regulations are hereby adopted: 
(1)  Water service extended beyond the city limits must have commission approval. If extension is made in cooperation with a developer there shall be a written agreement stipulating all conditions. The agreement should take the form of a binding contract. 
(2)  All water main extensions shall meet the rules, regulations and specifications of the city and the state. 
(3)  All main extensions shall be six-inch diameter water pipe unless larger or smaller size is recommended by the water director, fire chief and city manager and approved by the city commission. 
(4)  All main extensions shall be made at the expense of the developer. Should larger main size, above six inches in diameter, be required by the city for its purposes, the city may agree to pay a pro rata share of the cost. 
(5)  Upon filing a request for water service, the developer shall submit complete plans. The area to be served shall be spelled out including the number of potential customers in the development, and, if any, those on the proposed route. 
(6)  Requests for meter sets, other than developments shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Payment of meter set fee. 
b.  Pay full cost of main extension and meter set if cost exceeds meter set fee (if extension is required). 
c.  Extend water main of the same size as the existing main. 
d.  Sign water service agreement with the city. 
(7)  In the event of any emergency, the city reserves the right to discontinue service pursuant to the requirements in section 23-61. 
(8)  Each dwelling unit to be serviced by the city water shall be individually metered. The meter set fee shall apply to each dwelling unit. 
(9)  Only apartment units above two stories may be metered on a master meter. 
(10)  Each service line shall be a cutoff installed for the customer's use, and separate from the meter installation. 
(11)  Meter set fees for multifamily single structure dwellings shall be as determined by the city commission from time to time for each additional unit when the additional meter sets can be made with only one water tap on the water main. 
(12)  All main extensions shall be the property of the city. 
(13)  No meter shall be granted for property contiguous to the city limits unless the owners of such property annex into the city. This requirement will not apply where such property only abuts the city on a public street. The term "contiguous" as used in this subsection refers to property which abuts directly on the current municipal boundary or would abut on the municipal boundary if it were not otherwise separated from the municipal boundary by lands owned by the municipal corporation, or some other political subdivision, by lands owned by this state, or by the width of any street or right-of-way, any creek or river, or any right-of-way of a railroad or other public service corporation which divides the municipal boundary and the property for which the meter set application is sought. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-15; Ord. No. 87-035, § 6-3-15, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 23-63. - Protection of water supply—Generally. 
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations of this article. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow device required by this article is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow preventive device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions are corrected. If, in the judgement of the waterworks director, an approved check valve or backflow and backsiphonage prevention device is necessary for the safety of the water system, the director will give notice in writing to the consumer to install such an approved device immediately. The consumer will install such approved device at his own expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device immediately, shall constitute a grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device has been installed. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-16(A)) 
Sec. 23-64. - Same—Where required. 
(a)  Each service connection from the public water system supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system, unless the auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the water purveyor and such source is approved by the health authority. 
(b)  Each service connection from the public water system supplying water to premises on which any substance is or may be handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the water system shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public system. This shall include premises having industrial piping systems, handling industrial fluids or progress waters, or waters originating from the public water supply system which have been subject to deterioration in sanitary quality. 
(c)  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service connection to any premises that have internal cross-connections unless such cross-connections are abated to the satisfaction of the water purveyor and approved by the state or local health department. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-16(B)) 
Sec. 23-65. - Same—Type. 
(a)  The protective device shall provide protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. In determining the degree of hazard and the type of device required the consumer shall: 
(1)  Make a comprehensive survey of water use practices within the customer's plant to determine whether there are any actual or potential cross-connections to the in-plant potable water system through which sewage, toxic chemicals or other fluids containing contaminants of a biological or chemical nature could backflow into the potable system. 
(2)  When cross-connections are found or when it can be anticipated that cross-connections will, in all likelihood, be installed in the future or that in-plant backflow preventers are likely to be neglected and, as a result fail to prevent backflow, the inspector should determine whether permanent control at the point of cross-connection would be effective or whether a plan of cross-connection control by contaminant would be more effective. 
(3)  Determine whether there are contaminants being handled on the premises and, if there are, whether they could, if ingested, create a health hazard or whether they would be considered to be a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable. 
(b)  Once these three objectives have been attained, the degree of hazard can be evaluated and a backflow preventer commensurate with the degree of hazard can be chosen. For the guidance of all concerned, such determination shall be made in accordance with the following stated policy: In all cases where the interconnection may be subjected to a vacuum or to backpressure and where a backflow would result in creating a danger to public health; an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed at the service connection. Where the air gap is used, an emergency bypass shall be installed with a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device installed therein. 
(c)  An approved double check valve assembly or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow preventer device may be used where there is an existing or potential pollutional hazard not dangerous to health. 
(d)  In no case should a vacuum breaker be installed at the service connection. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-16(C)) 
Sec. 23-66. - Same—Specific requirements.* 
(a)  Generally. The following listed plants or facilities are where backflow protection at the service connection will usually be required and their respective method of correction. 
(1)  Aircraft and missile plants, A.G. or R.P.D. 
(2)  Automotive plants, A.G. or R.P.D. 
(3)  Auxiliary water systems: 
a.  Potentially contaminated source, A.G. or R.P.D. 
b.  Potable but not acceptable as supplemental source for the public water system, D.C.A. 
c.  Approved source supplemental to the public potable water system, none. 
(4)  Beverage bottling plants: 
a.  Subject to backpressure, A.G. or R.P.D. 
b.  Not subject to backpressure, D.C.A. 
(5)  Breweries, A.G. or R.P.D. 
(6)  Buildings; hotels, apartment houses, public and private buildings or other structures: 
a.  Major health hazard exists, A.G. or R.P.D. 
b.  Minor health hazard exists, D.C.A. 
(7)  Canneries, packing houses and reduction plants, A.G. or R.P.D. 
(8)  Chemical plants; manufacturing, processing, compounding or treatment, A.G. or R.P.D. 
(9)  Chemically or biologically contaminated water system, A.G. or R.P.D. 
(10)  Civil works: 
a.  Health hazard exists, A.G. or R.P.D. 
b.  No health hazard, D.C.A. 
(11)  Dairies and cold storage plants: 
a.  Health hazard exists, A.G. or R.P.D. 
b.  No health hazard, D.C.A. 
(12)  Film laboratories, A.G. or R.P.D. 
(13)  All waterfront facilities, such as piers, docks, shipyards, waterfront industries, farms and dockside watering facilities, R.P.D. 
(14)  Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums, morgues, mortuaries, autopsy facilities, A.G. or R.P.D. and nursing and convalescent homes and clinics (single story), D.C.A. 
(15)  Irrigation systems; premises having irrigation systems separate from their domestic systems, such as parks, playgrounds, cemeteries, golf courses, schools, estates, ranches, etc., A.G. or R.P.D. 
(b)  * Abbreviations. The following abbreviations have been adopted describing devices and methods used to control cross-connections at the service connection: 
(1)  A.G., air gap. 
(2)  R.P.D., reduced pressure backflow device. 
(3)  D.C.A., double check valve assembly. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-16(F)) 
Sec. 23-67. - Installation, maintenance of backflow preventers. 
(a)  Backflow preventive devices required under this article shall be approved by the water purveyor and shall be installed by and at the expense of the customer. The devices shall be installed in an accessible location and in a manner approved by the water purveyor. 
(b)  The customer shall regularly test and service such devices to maintain them in satisfactory operating condition and shall overhaul or replace such devices if they are found defective. 
(c)  Records of such tests, repairs and overhauling shall be kept by the customer and made available to the water purveyor. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-16(D)) 
Sec. 23-68. - Typical installations. 
(a)  An approved reduced pressure principle backflow preventer shall be installed at each service connection to any premises when there is an auxiliary water supply unless such auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the water purveyor, and the source is approved by the public health authority having jurisdiction. A complete and permanent abandonment of the auxiliary water facility, where such is feasible, will void this requirement. 
(b)  An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed at each service connection to any premises on which "industrial fluids" are handled in a separate system and there are, or may be, actual or potential cross-connections on the premises. 
(c)  An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed at each service connection to any premises on which there is a sewage treatment plant, sewage pumping station, including privately owned sewage pumping plants in buildings, or a storm water pumping station. 
(d)  An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed at each service connection to a hospital, medical-dental building, mortuary or other similar premises where the water purveyor determines that an actual or potential hazard exists. 
(e)  An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed at each service connection to a pier, dock, waterfront industry, and to all other waterfront properties. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-16(E)) 
Sec. 23-69. - Discontinuance of service for failure to pay bill; resumption of service. 
A charge during normal business hours and a charge after normal business hours shall be made to reconnect water service where the water has been turned off either by nonpayment of bills or at the request or by action of the owner or tenant. The consumer originally contracting for water services shall be responsible for the payment of the water bill. No such water service shall be resumed to the consumer regardless of the consumer's location until the past due water bill, including cut-on charge has been fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 85-027A, 9-30-85) 
Secs. 23-70—23-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, para. 3(a)(6); acquisition, construction, etc., of municipal water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-89. - Purpose and policy. 
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for all users of the wastewater collection and publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the operation of the POTW; 
(b)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; 
(c)  To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations; 
(d)  To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; 
(e)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW; 
(f)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and 
(g)  To enable the city to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other Federal or State laws to which the POTW is subject. 
This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. The chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires industrial user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. All industrial users of the POTW shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and all other POTW shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-90. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of utilities shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director of utilities may be delegated by the director of utilities to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or "the Act" shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority shall mean the State of Georgia, Environmental Protection Division. 
Authorized representative of the industrial user shall mean: 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25 million (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures; 
(2)  If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or proprietor, respectively; 
(3)  If the industrial user is a Federal, State or local governmental facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee; 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3) above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under EPA approved laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471. 
City shall mean the City of Toccoa or the City Commission of Toccoa. 
Color shall mean the optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density. 
Combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Composite sample shall mean the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. 
Customer shall mean every person who is responsible for contracting (expressed or implied) with the city in obtaining, having, or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the sewer system of the city and in obtaining, having or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through the system. Such terms shall include the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
Director of public utilities or director shall mean the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article or his duly authorized representative. 
Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA shall mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source shall mean any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
Floatable oil shall mean oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Flush toilet shall mean the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Grab sample shall mean a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Indirect discharge or discharge shall mean the introduction of nondomestic pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial user or user shall mean a source of indirect discharge. 
Industrial wastes shall mean the wastewater from industrial processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Infiltration/inflow shall mean groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes or other openings. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit shall mean the maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference shall mean a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources: 1) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 2) therefore is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
Medical waste shall mean isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood by-products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
Natural outlet shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
New source shall mean: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(a)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
(b)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(c)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(a)  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program 
(i)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(b)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Noncontact cooling water shall mean water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
Normal wastewater shall mean wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 350 milligrams per liter (mg/l), BOD 5 is not more than 300 mg/l, total phosphorus is not more than 15 mg/l, total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 20 mg/l, and the total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
Pass through shall mean a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the U.S. in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
Person shall mean any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock, company, trust estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State or local governmental entities. 
pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration, used as a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units. 
Pit privy shall mean a shored, vertical pit in the earth covered with a flytight slab on which is securely located a flytight riser covered with hinged flytight seat and lid. 
Pollutant shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharge equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, odor). 
Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards shall mean prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits. 
Private sewer system shall mean a private sewer system shall mean any system other than a public sewer system. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges shall mean absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 23-121 of this article. 
Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer shall mean a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW shall mean a "treatment works" as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned by the state or municipality. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the industrial users and responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the treatment works. 
Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not intentionally admitted. 
Septic tank shall mean a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Septic tank waste shall mean any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks. 
Sewage shall mean the spent water of a community. The equivalent term is "wastewater." 
Sewage works (sewerage) shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. See "publicly owned treatment works". 
Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
Significant industrial user shall apply to a) industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; b) any other industrial user that i) discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater, ii) contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant or, iii) is designated as significant by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement; and c) upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (b) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from the user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes or more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
Slug load shall mean any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 23-121 of this chapter or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code shall mean a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source and excluding sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Stormwater shall mean any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt. 
Suspended solids shall mean total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtration as approved by EPA and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Toxic pollutant shall mean one of 129 pollutants, or combination of those pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPD or EPA under the provision of Section 307 (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act. 
Treatment plant effluent shall mean any discharge of pollutants from the POTW into waters of the state. 
Unpolluted water shall mean water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
User or industrial user shall mean a source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater is the equivalent of "sewage" and shall mean the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities, wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant shall mean that portion of the POTW, including the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Watercourse shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 

 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-31; Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 23-92. - Violations. 
(a)  Violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with article IV, division 6 of this chapter. Each day of the continuing violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to other remedies under the city code available to the city in the event of violation of this article, the city may also treat such violation as a nuisance within the meaning of section 13-2, and shall abate such nuisance under the provisions of that chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-98; Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-93. - Compliance with state and federal regulatory requirements. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. Specific user charge and industrial cost recovery requirements, promulgated pursuant to Public Law 92-500, shall be considered as a part of this article upon official adoption. The national categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated. 
(a)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(b)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(c)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(d)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-38; Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-94. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry—Generally. Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the public sewerage system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Inspection and sampling. The director shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to ascertain whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director or his representatives ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing, records examination and copying, subject to the confidentiality requirements under section 23-105, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, state and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The city, state and EPA shall have the right to set up on the industrial user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The city may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
While performing the necessary work on private properties under this article, the authorized employees or agents of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by such employees or agents and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required by this article. 
(c)  Search warrants. If the director has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then upon application by the city attorney, the municipal court judge of the city shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the director in the company of a uniformed police officer of the city. In the event of an emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a warrant. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-005, adopted May 11, 1998, amended § 23-94 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such section pertained to right of entry—generally and derived from § 6-3-96(A) of the 1985 Code. 
Sec. 23-95. - Dilution prohibition. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-005, adopted May 11, 1998, amended § 23-95 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such section pertained to right of entry—private property and derived from § 6-3-96(C) of the 1985 Code. 
Sec. 23-96. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 23-89 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-005, adopted May 11, 1998, amended § 23-96 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such section pertained to right of entry—records and derived from § 6-3-96 of the 1985 Code. 
Sec. 23-97. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-005, adopted May 11, 1998, deleted § 23-97. Formerly, such section pertained to observance of safety rules and derived from § 6-3-96(B) of the 1985 Code. 
Sec. 23-98. - Malicious damage prohibited. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the municipal sewerage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct or malicious mischief. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-97; Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-99. - Authority to disconnect service. 
The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the public sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; or 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; or 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process; or 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(4)  Notification processes for discontinuance of service are presented in section 23-131. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-99) 
Sec. 23-100. - Rates and charges generally. 
(a)  The rates and charges to be paid by contributors in the city sewerage system shall be established from time to time by the city commission. 
(b)  The city may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-32; Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-101. - Requirement of toilets. 
All premises shall be provided by the owner thereof with at least one flush toilet. All such flush toilets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-33) 
Sec. 23-102. - Sewage prohibited in stormwater system. 
No person shall connect a sewerage system so that sewage flows into a stormwater sewer or into a drain intended exclusively for storm water. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-34) 
Sec. 23-103. - Discharge of sewage on surface of ground. 
No person shall discharge sewage onto the surface of the ground or discharge sewage in a way that permits it to come to the surface of the ground. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-35) 
Sec. 23-104. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-005, adopted May 11, 1998, deleted § 23-104. Formerly, such section pertained to private removal of sewage; permit required, equipment standards; manner of disposal and derived from § 6-3-37 of the 1985 Code. 
Sec. 23-105. - Confidential information. 
In accordance with 40 CFR 403.14, as amended, information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from city inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction—unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-37; Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Secs. 23-106—23-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC SEWER USE 

Sec. 23-116. - Unsanitary deposits prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-51(A)) 
Sec. 23-117. - Discharges into natural outlets. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-51(B)) 
Sec. 23-118. - Privies, etc., prohibited. 
Except as may be provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-51(C)) 
Sec. 23-119. - Connection, when required. 
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the corporate limits of the city and located within 300 feet of a public sanitary sewer to which such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity is hereby required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with such public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division within 30 days after the date of official notice to do so. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-51(D)) 
Sec. 23-120. - Discharge of surface runoff. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this division to the contrary, no person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, area drains, or other sources of surface runoff for groundwater for any sewer or drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to the public sanitary sewer system of the city unless such connection is approved by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-52(A); Ord. No. 89-155A, § 1(6-3-52), 12-11-89) 
Sec. 23-121. - Prohibited discharges into public sewers. 
A person may not introduce into a POTW any pollutant(s) which cause pass through or interference. The prohibitions of this section apply to each user introducing pollutants into a POTW whether or not subject to other national pretreatment standards or any national, state, or local pretreatment requirements. Additionally, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes into any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas which may create a fire or explosive hazard in the municipal wastewater collection and POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140;deg;F (60;deg;C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW; or any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
(6)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(7)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants; except at discharge points designated by the city in accordance with section 23-132. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or wastewater which will elevate the temperature of the influent to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) to 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) or higher. 
(10)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin or less amounts if interference or pass through may be caused. 
Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-52(B); Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-122. - Certain discharges limited. 
The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of oils, fat, grease, or wax, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius) and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places whether garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(3)  All industrial discharges to the city sewer system must comply with the Federal Industrial Pretreatment Standards (40 CFR 403) and those Industrial Pretreatment Standards developed by the city and/or Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
a.  No industrial user shall discharge wastewater to the city sewer system which contains specific priority pollutant concentrations in excess of the following maximum limits developed by the city's industrial pretreatment standards. 
b.  Users discharging to the Eastanollee Creek and Toccoa Creek Treatment Plants discharge limits are: 

 
Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. At his discretion, the director of utilities may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration-based limitations above. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing taste- or odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the city. 
(5)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(6)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amendable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Any unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine demand in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair, form solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(10)  Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(11)  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director of utilities in a wastewater discharge permit. 
(12)  Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(13)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-52(C); Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98; Ord. of 8-27-18 , § II(Exh. A) 
Sec. 23-123. - Options for limited discharges. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 23-122 and which in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, process, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes. 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-52(D)) 
Sec. 23-124. - Interceptors. 
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintenance of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the city. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-52(E)) 
Sec. 23-125. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-005, adopted May 11, 1998, deleted § 23-125. Formerly, such section pertained to control structure and derived from § 6-3-52(F) of the 1985 Code. 
Sec. 23-126. - Certain information may be required. 
The industrial users may be required to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period. 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters. 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality. 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control. 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location. 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities. 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the public sewer. 
(8)  Development of a baseline report in conformance with Fed. Reg. 403.12, as amended. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-52(G)) 
Sec. 23-127. - Special agreements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with industrial users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. However, the industrial user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the industrial user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-52(H); Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-128. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-005, adopted May 11, 1998, deleted § 23-128. Formerly, such section pertained to standards for measurements, tests and derived from § 6-3-52(I) of the 1985 Code. 
Sec. 23-129. - Pretreatment of wastes. 
(a)  Persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewerage system shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in sections 23-121 and 23-122 above within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the director, whichever is more stringent. 
(b)  Plans for all pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the city prior to construction. At the time written plans are submitted for approval, written maintenance plans shall also be submitted and approved by the director. The facilities shall be allowed to operate only as long as they are maintained in accordance with the approved maintenance plans. The city's review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under the provisions of this article. Pretreatment requirements shall be determined on a case-by-case basis and shall include the following facilities as a minimum. 
(1)  Neutralization. If plans are submitted for the neutralization of strong acid or alkaline wastes, the plans shall include the necessary instrumentation and controls to assure compliance with the above regulations at all times. 
(2)  Equalization. Holding tanks or equalization basins shall be required ahead of the receiving manhole of the city sewerage system when deemed necessary by the director to prevent peak flows that exceed the capacity of the system or that result in operational problems. 
(c)  All pretreatment facilities shall be operated and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-52(J); Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-130. - Waiver of requirements. 
There shall be no provision for the granting of variances for discharge of incompatible wastes. If a user begins to violate any of the provisions of this division, it shall be his responsibility to apply to the city which can issue a temporary permit along with the compliance schedule for planning and construction of necessary treatment or pretreatment works. Each case will be carefully evaluated with respect to its effect on the wastewater treatment system and the environment prior to issuance of a temporary permit and compliance schedule. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-52(K); Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-131. - Discontinuance of service for failure to comply. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this division shall be cause for the discontinuance of sewer or water service to the offending person. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  A written notice, signed by the appropriate city official shall be delivered personally to the person then responsible for the offending use, outlining the conditions of the wastes which violate the city ordinances. 
(2)  In the event that the person in charge will not accept the notice, it shall be conveyed by registered mail to the responsible person. 
(3)  The person notified shall have 24 hours from the time of receipt of the notice, either personally delivered or received by registered mail, to correct the offending conditions. 
(4)  If correction is not made or a request for extension is not received by the city within 24 hours, it shall be mandatory that water or sewer service shall be discontinued to the offending person without further notice. 
(5)  If a request for an extension of time is received by the city within 24 hours of the above notice and if circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the city, the best interest of the city would be served by extending the time for correction of the offending condition, then he may grant an extension of time up to a maximum limit of 30 days. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-52(L)) 
Sec. 23-132. - Responsibilities of person discharging waste. 
(a)  Control manhole. It shall be the responsibility of the person discharging industrial waste into the city sewerage system to: 
(1)  Build a control structure in the discharge line from his premises, immediately prior to the entrance of the discharge line into the city sewerage system, suitable for the observation, sampling and measuring of wastes, including such necessary meters and other appurtenances. Such structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans. Plans for this structure must be approved by the city. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. This requirement will be on a case-by-case basis. This requirement may be waived if deemed unnecessary by the city. In the event that no special manhole is required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(2)  Contact the director prior to operation changes which will materially alter the characteristics of the waste from the last prior sampling. 
(3)  Make timely, periodic payments to the city of surcharges for excessive loadings as detailed in the city user charge system. 
(b)  Accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any industrial user to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two years the director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs such a plan. Any industrial user required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stores chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the prohibited or limited discharges in sections 23-121 and 23-122 above; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutant (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(c)  Tenant responsibilities. Where an owner of property leases premises to any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Hauled wastewater. 
(1)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the director, and at such times as are established by the director. Such waste shall not violate section 23-121 of this chapter or any other requirements established by the city. The director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(2)  The director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the director. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the director. The director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(4)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-52(M); Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-133. - Infiltration of system—Optional procedures. 
If the owner, or the owner's agents, of a private sewer or drainage system permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow into the city public sewer system, the city may at its option: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the private sewer or drainage system so as to conform and comply with the existing sewer ordinances in the city. 
(2)  Undertake the necessary repairs to the private sewer or drainage system so as to conform and comply with the existing sewer ordinances of the city, and require the owner of such private sewer to pay the city for the full and complete cost for such repairs. 
(Ord. No. 89-155A, § 1(6-3-54), 12-11-89) 
Sec. 23-134. - Same—Declared nuisance. 
If any owner of a private sewer permitting the entrance of inflow or infiltration into the city public sewer system refuses to either repair or allow the city to repair such sewer, then this refusal shall be deemed to be a nuisance under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 89-155A, § 1(6-3-55), 12-11-89) 
Sec. 23-135. - Surcharge fees. 
(a)  All commercial and industrial users shall be billed, as a surcharge, a fee based upon their pollutant load in excess of that found in the maximum residential waste effluent. The city, in accordance with the standard practice for sample taking and sample analysis, shall compute monthly for each commercial and industrial user, the amount of waste pollutants in pounds introduced in the sewer system in excess of the residential criteria hereafter established. 
(b)  Waste effluent contaminants to be analyzed and measured for surcharge are: 
(1)  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) 
(2)  Total suspended solids (TSS) 
(c)  The criteria hereby established for maximum or upper limit of residential waste are: 
(1)  BOD, 200 mg/L 
(2)  TSS, 200 mg/L 
(d)  The surcharge to industrial and commercial users for excess pollutants over the maximum residential criteria each month will be computed as follows: 
(1)  BOD—Seventeen cents ($0.17) per pound per day of biochemical oxygen demand in excess of residential criteria. 
(2)  TSS—Seventeen cents ($0.17) per pound per day of total suspended solids in excess of residential criteria. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Secs. 23-136—23-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 23-146. - When permitted. 
When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 23-119, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-61) 
Sec. 23-147. - Requirements for system. 
(a)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system, including all septic tanks and absorption fields, shall comply with all recommendations of the department of human resources and the department of natural resources, environmental protection division of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(b)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 23-119, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(c)  The owner shall operate and maintain any private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(d)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-62) 
Sec. 23-148. - Restricted use of pit privies. 
No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved; 
(2)  In areas where the city deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; 
(3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or 
(4)  Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-63) 
Secs. 23-149—23-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 

Sec. 23-161. - Permit required for construction or modification of facilities. 
A construction permit from the city shall be required before construction is begun on any building. No person shall connect to the public sewerage system or construct or modify a private sewerage system until the proposed system has been submitted to and approved by the city, with issuance of a construction permit. 
(Code 1985, §§ 6-3-71, 6-3-76) 
Sec. 23-162. - Inspection, approval required; notice to city. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city. It shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-72) 
Sec. 23-163. - Approval of system in subdivisions. 
No person shall begin the physical development of a subdivision of five or more lots in which one or more private sewerage systems are to be constructed until he has submitted to the city a plat of the proposed subdivision showing the lot boundaries, the topography, the location and results of soil percolation tests on each acre of the proposed subdivision, and until the city has approved the location as suitable for the type and size of private sewerage system proposed. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-73) 
Sec. 23-164. - Systems under construction to be prepared for connections. 
Each person in constructing, building or laying pipe or tile as a part of a sewerage system, or to become a part thereof, shall stub out, or extend from the sewerage system, so as to connect to the sewerage system each property owner in the area in which such sewerage system is being constructed, built or laid, or in the case of a subdivision, or a proposed subdivision, to each lot to be served by a sewer connection. The connection shall extend to the property line of the property owner. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-74) 
Sec. 23-165. - Installation of facilities prior to paving streets; assessment of cost. 
(a)  Each person shall, before paving, repairing or otherwise improving any street, or any area to become a street in the city, shall stub out, or extend from the sewerage system as it exists in the street right-of-way or the area to become a street, so as to connect to the sewerage system each property owner adjoining such street right-of-way on both sides thereof or, in the case of a subdivision, or a proposed subdivision, to each lot to be served by a sewer connection. 
(b)  In the event the city commission shall deem it necessary to make improvements to streets as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1, as amended, and shall proceed as provided by law, the improvement shall include the stubbing out, or extending from the sewerage system as it exists in such street right-of-way, so as to connect to the sewerage system each property owner adjoining the street right-of-way on both sides, or, in the case of a subdivision, or a proposed subdivision, to each lot to be served by a sewer connection, and the cost of the connections shall be assessed as an improvement as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1, as amended, and in addition to the assessment of the cost of other improvements. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-75) 
Sec. 23-166. - Expense of connection. 
All cost and expense incident to the connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the city property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. Any connection from the city property line into the public sewer shall be made by the city, for which the owner shall pay the city a standard sewer tap fee. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(B)) 
Sec. 23-167. - Separate sewer for each building. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(C)) 
Sec. 23-168. - Use of old sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(D)) 
Sec. 23-169. - Specifications for materials. 
(a)  The materials for the building sewer shall conform to one of the following specifications: 
(1)  ASTM C200 extra strength clay pipe; C425 vitrified clay pipe joints using material having resilient properties; Type III, O ring gasket. 
(2)  ASTM D-2661 ABS plastic, Type I, Schedule 40; DWV pipe, NSF. 
(3)  ASTM D-2665 PVC plastic, Type I, Schedule 40; DWV pipe, NSF. 
(4)  ASTM A-74-69 cast-iron soil pipe and fittings SV, hub and spigot, joint lead and oakum or compression with neoprene rubber gaskets. 
(b)  All joint connections shall be made with approved material of the same classification of the pipe. The connection of pipe of different material shall be made by using adaptors manufactured by Fernco Joint Sealer Company. Approved equal will be considered, but must be approved in advance of construction by the city. A cleanout plug will be provided at the building and at each 90-degree turn. All 90-degree turns will be made by using two one-eighth bends. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76) 
Sec. 23-170. - When cast iron soil pipe required. 
Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints and may be required by the city where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76) 
Sec. 23-171. - Depth, alignment of pipes. 
The depth of the pipes shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(G)) 
Sec. 23-172. - Size, slope of sewer. 
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the city, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(H)) 
Sec. 23-173. - Point of connection. 
Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(I)) 
Sec. 23-174. - Lifting mechanisms. 
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(J)) 
Sec. 23-175. - Excavations. 
All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specifications C-12; except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(K)) 
Sec. 23-176. - Joints. 
All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead. Federal Specification QQ-L-156, not less than one inch deep. Lead shall be run in one inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coatings shall be permitted on the joint material until after the joint has been tested and approved. Rubber joint cast iron pipe may be used as an alternative. All joints in vitrified clay or concrete pipe or between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot pouring jointing material, as specified below or by using rubber gaskets or preformed, factory-applied couplings, having resilient properties in accordance with ASTM Specification C-443-59T for concrete pipe and ASTM Specification C-425-64 for vitrified clay pipe, or the latest revisions thereof. Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit, nor be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp or similar approved materials. Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(L)) 
Sec. 23-177. - Connection of building sewer to public sewer. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the director. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, which entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(M)) 
Sec. 23-178. - Request for inspection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(N)) 
Sec. 23-179. - Protection of public. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(O)) 
Sec. 23-180. - Compliance with EPA, OSHA regulations. 
Any industry or establishment introducing industrial wastes to the system shall agree to comply with the United States Environmental Protection Agency's pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403), and shall comply with all pertinent OSHA requirements. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(P)) 
Sec. 23-181. - Connections from inflow sources. 
No new connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be made from inflow sources. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-76(Q)) 
Secs. 23-182—23-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 23-191. - When required; notice from city. 
All property owners within the city and within 300 feet to any sewer line in the city shall, within 30 days after receipt of a written notice from the city connect their premises with the sewerage system. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-86) 
Sec. 23-192. - Permit from city required. 
(a)  No connection or tap shall be made to the sewerage system of the city unless a permit has first been obtained from the duly authorized city official. 
(b)  Permits shall be issued subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-87) 
Sec. 23-193. - City to make connections. 
All public sewer connections or taps shall be made exclusively by personnel of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-3-88) 
Secs. 23-194—23-214. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 23-215. - Wastewater discharge permit eligibility. 
(a)  Wastewater survey. When requested by the director, all industrial users must submit information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey within 30 days of the request. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating services to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of the ordinance. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(1)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the director, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 23-215(c) of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(2)  The director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(3)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 23-218, 23-219 and 23-220 of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of his obligation to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State and local law. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permitting: Existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 30 days after said date, apply to the director for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 23-215(e) of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 60 days of the effective date of this chapter except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the director. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permitting: New connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 23-215(e) of this chapter, must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The director may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 23-217(a)(2) of this chapter; 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operations, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(f)  Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(g)  Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-216. - Wastewater discharge permit issuance process. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the city, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards in Federal, State and local law; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling, location, sampling frequency and sample type based on Federal, State and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following candidates: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties; 
c.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
d.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or nonroutine discharges; 
e.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
f.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
g.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
h.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
i.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permit appeals. The director shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 15 days of notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the director fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Municipal Court for Stephens County. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permit modification. The director may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision for a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days advance notice to the director and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the director must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable on the date of facility transfer. 
(f)  Wastewater discharge permit revocation. The director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to section 23-217(e) of this chapter; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or the ordinance. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(g)  Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 23-215(e) of this chapter, a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(h)  Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(1)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the director shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(2)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (1) above, the director shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
a.  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
b.  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
c.  Such other information as the director may deem necessary. 
(3)  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by paragraph (1) above, shall contain the following conditions: 
a.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 23-122 of this chapter. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits. 
b.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
c.  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the director and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the director, providing the contributing municipality has an approved industrial pretreatment program. 
d.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the director with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
e.  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
g.  A provision ensuring the director access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other duties deemed necessary by the director; and 
h.  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-217. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later existing categorical users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards, and currently discharging to or schedule to discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2), below. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner(s). 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
(1)  Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
(2)  Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required) by the standard or by the director of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 23-217(j) of this chapter. 
(3)  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 23-217(k) of this chapter. 
f.  Certification. A statement reviewed by the industrial user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 23-217(b) of this chapter. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 23-215(f) of this chapter. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress report. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 23-217(a)(2)g. of this chapter: 
The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting routine operation); (2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; (3) The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, (and, if appropriate) the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule; and (4) in no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(c)  Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in section 23-217(a)(2)d. through f. of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 23-215(f) of this chapter. 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 23-215(f) of this chapter. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in section 23-217(k) of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Report of changed conditions. Each user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least ten days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 23-215(3) of this chapter. 
(2)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 23-215(g) of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 23-216(d) of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement significant changes include, but are not limited to flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(f)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the use shall immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter. 
(4)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (1) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(g)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the director as the director may require. 
(h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the POTW performs monitoring at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the POTW performs sampling between the user's initial sampling and when the industrial user receives the results of this sampling. 
(i)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph needs to be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under section 23-217(e) of this chapter. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections 23-217(a), (c) and (e) of this chapter. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (1) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law. 
(j)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA and the city. 
(k)  Sample collection. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (2) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity, sulfides, and volatile organic pounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(l)  Determination of noncompliance. The director may use a grab sample(s) to determine noncompliance with pretreatment standards. 
(m)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(n)  Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-218. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Publication of users in significant noncompliance. The director shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of city personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(b)  Notification of violation. When the director finds that any user has violated or is violating any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director or his agent may serve upon said user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(c)  Consent orders. The director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (e) and (f) below and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(d)  Show cause hearing. The director may order any user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of any provision of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Compliance orders. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within ten days. If the user does not come into compliance within ten days, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and property operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Cease and desist orders. When the director finds that a user has or is violating any provision of this chapter, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: Immediately comply with all requirements; and take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $50,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one and one-half percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(3)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the director to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the director may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The director may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(4)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(h)  Emergency suspensions. The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection and/or discontinuance of water service, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in subsection (i) are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the director, prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsection (d) and (i) of this chapter. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(i)  Termination of discharge. In addition to those provisions in section 23-216(f) of this chapter, any user that violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(A)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(B)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(C)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(D)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or 
(E)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections 23-121 and 23-122 of this chapter. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 23-218(d) of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-219. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director may petition the Municipal Court of Stephens County Court through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking remediation. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, any order or wastewater discharge permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of up to at least $1,000.00 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The director may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six months or both. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000.00 and/or be subject to imprisonment for six months. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater discharge permit or order, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
(4)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The director may take any, all or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-220. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, any orders, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Liability insurance. The director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has filed to comply with any provision of this chapter, any order, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the director caused by its discharge. 
(c)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, orders, or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(d)  Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director or his designee. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance. 
(e)  Informant rewards. The director may pay up to $1,000.00 for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a user. In the event that the information provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty levied against the user, the director may disperse up to five percent of the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed $5,000.00. 
(f)  Contractor listing. Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards may be terminated at the discretion of the director. 
Sec. 23-221. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical state and local pretreatment standards and requirements and/or permit conditions because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical, local and/or state pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (3) are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
(i)  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(ii)  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
(iii)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical, local and/or state pretreatment standards. 
(6)  The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical, local and/or state pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(b)  General/specific prohibitions. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in section 23-121 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: (a) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference, or (b) no local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(c)  Bypass. 
(1)  a.  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
b.  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  a.  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements or permit conditions to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. Those bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  a.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director at least ten days before the date of the bypass if possible. 
b.  A user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the director within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  a.  Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(i)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(ii)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(iii)  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the conditions listed in paragraph (a) of this section. 
b.  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (4)a. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-222. - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be effected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 23-223. - Conflicts. 
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this chapter, are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict. 
(Ord. No. 98-005, 5-11-98) 
Chapter 24 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; cemeteries, ch. 6; flood damage prevention, ch. 9; parks and recreation, ch. 15; planning and development, ch. 16; subdivisions, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to exercise power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, para. 4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined here or in other parts of this Code, all words used in this chapter shall have their customary dictionary definition where not inconsistent with the context. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words shall be defined as follows: 
Accessory dwellings: An accessory structure to a dwelling, single-family attached or detached that meets the following development standards: 
(1)  Accessory dwellings are permitted within the principal dwelling or as a freestanding dwelling in the following zoning districts: R-IA, R-IB, SR, R-II, R-III, and R-IV. 
(2)  There shall be no more than one (1) accessory dwelling per residential lot. 
(3)  The accessory dwelling may be located in a second floor over a detached garage or may be a separate structure. 
(4)  The accessory dwelling shall comply with all building and health code standards. 
(5)  A detached accessory dwelling shall be located only within the rear yard. 
(6)  The accessory structures shall comply with all minimum setbacks set forth within this chapter. 
(7)  The residential lot shall comply with the minimum lot area standards set forth within this chapter. 
(8)  An accessory dwelling is limited to two bedroom(s), two bath(s), and one kitchen. 
(9)  There should be no separate utility accounts. 
(10)  An accessory dwelling building must contain no more than 960 square feet. 
Accessory use or building shall mean a use or building customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
Alleys shall mean a private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to a building property and not intended for general traffic circulations. 
Boarding or rooming house shall mean a dwelling in which three or more persons, single or as a family, are housed for compensation, with or without meals. 
Building shall mean any structure which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building setback line shall mean an imaginary line connecting all points in any lot which are located the specified distance in section 24-121 from the street right-of-way for front yard setback, or from the property lines for side or rear yard setback. 
Centerline of street shall mean a line or any extension thereof running midway between the established lot lines or property lines of lands abutting on the street, or the legally surveyed centerline of the street. 
Club shall mean buildings and facilities owned or operated by corporation, association, person or persons, for a social, educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Customary home occupation shall mean an occupation or a profession which: 
(1)  Is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit. 
(2)  Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit. 
(3)  Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. 
(4)  Which conforms to the following additional conditions: 
a.  The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the principal building. 
b.  No more than one person outside the family shall be employed in the home occupation. 
c.  There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign, no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building. 
d.  No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare shall be produced. 
e.  No significant increase in traffic volume shall be created by the occupation. 
(5)  In particular a customary home occupation includes, but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Art studios. 
b.  Dressmaking. 
c.  Professional office of a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer, architect or accountant within a dwelling occupied by the same. 
d.  Teaching, with musical instruction limited to a single pupil at a time. 
(6)  However, a home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the following: 
a.  Barber and beauty shops. 
b.  Commercial stables and kennels. 
c.  Real estate offices. 
d.  Restaurants. 
Dwelling shall mean a building or portion thereof arranged or designed to provide living facilities for one or more families. However, mobile homes shall be specifically excluded from this definition. 
Dwelling, multifamily, shall mean a building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more families, with separate housekeeping and work facilities for each family, regardless of ownership of such units. 
Dwelling, single-family: A structure containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for residential use, which meets or exceeds the following standards: 
(1)  Minimum width in excess of 24 feet. 
(2)  Minimum square footage required shall not be less than 960 square feet. 
(3)  The roof shall have a minimum 3:12 roof pitch and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials, or other materials approved by the building official. 
(4)  The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance. 
(5)  The structure shall be attached to a permanent foundation. The structure shall be completely enclosed down to the foundation with a full perimeter masonry curtain wall, except for necessary access and ventilation. 
(6)  Be constructed according to standards established by the Standard Building Code, latest edition, as amended. 
(7)  The city commission may approve deviations from one or more of the development or architectural standards provided herein or on the basis of a finding that the materials to be utilized or the architectural style proposed for the dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the vicinity. 
(8)  If said structure is constructed off-site to be considered as a dwelling, single family, such structure must in addition to the above standards: 
a.  Be inspected by the city prior to assembling on site, and 
b.  Must have a certificate from the manufacturer or off-site builder that the structure meets and complies with the standards established by the Standard Building Code, latest edition, as amended. 
Dwelling, two-family, shall mean a building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families, with separate housekeeping or cooking facilities for each family. 
Dwelling unit: A structure or a portion of any structure designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including apartment units or hotels, motels, boarding houses or like uses. 
Family shall mean one or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling. 
Hardship shall mean extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography and the application of the ordinance or resolution to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship, and such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved, and relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this chapter. 
Industrialized building shall mean a factory-fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation in a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of either the Southern Building Code Congress International or the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
Lot area, net, shall mean the total area of a lot excluding any road or highway or street right-of-way whether dedicated or not dedicated to public use. 
Lot, plat or parcel, shall mean a developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership, legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
Lot width shall mean the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at the front building line. 
Manufactured home shall mean a structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq. The definition at the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, is as follows: 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under this title. 
Except as provided manufactured homes, as defined by this section if over seven years old as of the date the owner seeks a certificate of occupancy will not be allowed in the corporate limits of the city. 
Provided a single wide manufactured home (as that term is commonly used within the manufactured housing industry) if over seven years of age may be allowed in the city subject to an inspection approved by the building inspector of the city. The criteria to be reviewed by the building inspector prior to allowing a single wide manufactured home within the corporate limits must include: 
(1)  An application and inspection fee of $150.00. 
(2)  The manufactured home must be located within a 75-mile radius of the city. 
(3)  There must be a visual inspection before the manufactured home is moved into the corporate limits of the city. 
(4)  The manufactured home must have a gable roof with a standard pitch of 3-12. 
(5)  The manufactured home must have house-type windows. 
(6)  The manufactured home must have minimum dimensions of 14 feet by 60 feet including the tongue. 
(7)  The flooring of the manufactured home must be at last ¾-inch plywood, advantec, or equivalent. (Particle board will not be accepted.) 
(8)  There should be no interior or exterior structural damage to the manufactured home. 
(9)  There should be no major cosmetic damage to the exterior of the manufactured home. 
(10)  The manufactured home cannot be any older than 15 years. 
(11)  The manufactured home must have the required HUD inspection and identification decal. 
(12)  Any manufactured home must be located in a manufactured home park located within the corporate limits of the city. 
Manufactured home park shall mean a tract of land developed and offered for the purpose of parking manufactured homes for use as permanent or semipermanent dwelling units. No tract shall be a manufactured home park if more than ten percent of the available spaces are routinely made available to the traveling public for temporary use of less than 30 days. 
Map, zoning map shall mean the official zoning map of the city. 
Miniwarehouse shall mean a series of storage spaces contained in one building or in a series of buildings which are designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to persons in order that any person renting or leasing one or more such individual storage spaces shall have access for the purpose of storing property therein. 
Mobile home shall mean a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. Mobile homes are prohibited within the Toccoa city limits. 
Mobile home park shall mean any lot, parcel, or tract of land, together with open spaces required by this chapter, used, designed, maintained, or held to accommodate two or more residential trailers, including all buildings, structures, tents, accessories, vehicles, appurtenances, used or intended as equipment of such mobile home park, whether or not a charge is made for use of such park, and or its facilities. A mobile home park does not include trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for inspection and sale. 
Nursing home shall mean any dwelling where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care of hire. 
Residential dwellings in historic districts shall mean a residential dwelling in the Historic District of the City of Toccoa as allowed by Chapter 5, Article IV, Division 3 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Toccoa. 
Sign shall mean any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but not including any flag, badge or insignia of any government or government agency, or of any civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal or similar organization. 
Sign, business identification, shall mean an attached or free standing structure on which are announced the nature of the business on the premises and/or the name of the operator of the business. 
Sign, outdoor advertising, shall mean an attached or free standing structure conveying some information, knowledge or idea to the public. 
Street shall mean a public or private street open to general public use and having a pavement or road bed width of not less than 20 feet, which affords principal access to abutting property. Streets are divided into three classes: major thoroughfares, connector streets and residential streets, and are defined as shown on the zoning map of the city. Such designations are made a part of said map and this chapter. 
Structure shall mean anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
Use principal shall mean the principal purpose for which a lot or the principal building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Used; occupied, as applied to any land or building, shall include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
Utility building shall mean any structure customarily used to store lawn tools and equipment, not to be used as a garage or wood shop. The structure shall have a maximum size of 150 square feet and maximum height of ten feet. 
Yard shall mean an open space on a lot situated between the principal building on such lot and the lot lines of such lot. In measuring a yard for determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the principal building on the lot shall be used. 
Yard, front, shall mean a yard extending across the front of lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the front lot line and the principal building on the lot. 
Yard, rear, shall mean a yard extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear property line and the principal building on the lot. 
Yard, side, shall mean a yard extending along either side of a lot between the front and rear yards and lying between the side lot line and the principal building on the lot. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-1; Ord. No. 86-006, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 88-007, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 92-016, § 1, 9-14-92; Ord. No. 95-014, 3-27-95; Ord. No. 4-2005, 4-25-05; Ord. of 8-8-2016, § I ; Ord. of 4-10-2017, § I ) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 24-2. - Continuance of a nonconforming use. 
Any lawful building, structure or use of land existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter or subsequent amendment, but not in conformity with its use regulations and provisions, may for a period of time be continued subject to the following provisions. It shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use if such use is more objectionable by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes, noise, vibration or any other use which would be more objectionable. 
(2)  Enlarged or extended except in conformity with this chapter. 
(3)  Reestablished after discontinuance for one year. 
(4)  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 60 percent of its fair market value immediately prior to damage except in conformity with this chapter. 
(5)  Improved in any way to the extent that such improvements equal or exceed 20 percent of the value of the structure at that time. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-2; Ord. No. 86-009, 5-26-86) 
Sec. 24-3. - Discontinuance of a nonconforming use. 
All nonconforming uses of land shall be discontinued and all nonconforming buildings or structures which cause substantial detriment to the public good shall be torn down, altered, or otherwise made to conform with the use provisions of this chapter within five years after May 26, 1986. 
(Ord. No. 86-009, § 7-23, 5-26-86) 
Sec. 24-4. - Off-street automobile parking and storage. 
Off-street automobile parking or storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the following uses are thereafter established in all districts as provided for in this chapter except the B-III commercial district; or provided that no parking space can be reasonably provided on the same lot, such space shall be provided on any lot, a substantial portion of which is within 400 feet of such uses. The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays. Each automobile parking space shall be not less than 200 square feet in area exclusive of adequate access drives and maneuvering space. Maneuvering space shall be provided (except for single-family residences) to prevent any vehicle from backing into the street. Such space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley; such use shall not thereafter be encroached upon or altered; and shall be equal in number to at least the minimum requirements for the specific use set forth below. When application of such provision results in a fractional space requirements, the next larger requirement shall prevail. 

 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-4) 
Sec. 24-5. - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley unless otherwise approved. Such space shall have access to an alley or if there is no alley, to a street. For the purposes of this section an off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 40 feet and an overhead clearance of 14 feet in height above the alley or street grade, with adequate access provisions for vehicles. The requirements are: 
(1)  Retail business, one space for each 3,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Wholesale and industry, one space for each 10,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Terminal facilities for trucks, buses or railroads, one space for each bus or truck to be stored or loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-5) 
Sec. 24-6. - Conflict with other regulations. 
Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width of size of yards, courts, or other open space, or require a lower height of buildings or lesser number of stories or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statutes, the regulations and requirements of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-201) 
Sec. 24-7. - State law adopted by reference. 
The city does hereby adopt by reference the Zoning Procedures Law of the State of Georgia and does hereby incorporate each and every provision of that zoning procedures law as it exists or as it may be amended as incorporated by reference herein the Zoning Procedures Law of the State of Georgia as a part of this Code. 
Secs. 24-8—24-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 24-31. - Use. 
No building or land shall be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-21) 
Sec. 24-32. - Height and density. 
No building shall be erected or altered so as to exceed the height limit, or to exceed the density regulations of this chapter for the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-22) 
Sec. 24-33. - Lot size and occupancy. 
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter derives even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots or record, shall be reduced in size or area per family below the minimum requirements set forth herein. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-23) 
Sec. 24-34. - Yard use limitations. 
No part of a yard or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter, shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for another building. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-24) 
Sec. 24-35. - One principal building on a lot. 
Except as hereinafter provided, only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any lot. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-25) 
Sec. 24-36. - Public street frontage. 
No building shall hereafter be erected on any lot which does not abut at least 30 feet on publicly dedicated or maintained street. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-26) 
Sec. 24-37. - Temporary office and storage trailers. 
(a)  Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term "temporary office and storage trailers" shall mean a detached unit designed or modified for use as a temporary office or storage space, constructed with wheels for movement (whether or not wheels have been removed) and placed on a permitted construction site for temporary use during construction operations. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Temporary office and storage trailers may be used as follows: 
(1)  Temporary field office for construction operation. 
(2)  Temporary storage facility for construction operation. 
(3)  Temporary location of business during construction of its permanent facility on same site. 
(c)  Additional provisions. The following provisions shall be applicable to the use of temporary office and storage trailers: 
(1)  Sleeping, bathing and food preparation facilities are not permitted. 
(2)  Trailers will be removed immediately upon substantial completion of the construction project, or upon discontinuance of construction operations for a period of more than 30 days for reasons other than weather delays. 
(3)  Trailers being used as temporary places of business will be removed after a time period of 24 months. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-27; Ord. No. 87-010, 2-23-87) 
Secs. 24-38—24-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-61. - Establishment and purposes of districts. 
In order to implement the intent of this chapter, the incorporated area of the city is divided into the following districts. Other uses may be allowed in these districts as in permitted uses. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-51) 
Sec. 24-62. - Types of districts. 
For the purpose of this chapter the city is divided into 13 districts designated as follows: 

 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-41; Ord. No. 86-026, 12-22-86; Ord. No. 2007-1, § I, 2-26-07) 
Sec. 24-62.1. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The official zoning map of the City of Toccoa, including the map of the historical district which are attached as Exhibits "A" and "B," is hereby ratified and adopted as the official zoning map of the City of Toccoa, Georgia. This map and all explanatory matter on the map are adopted as a part of this chapter. 
(b)  The official zoning map shall at all times be located in the office of the planning department of the City of Toccoa. 
(c)  All duly enacted amendments to the zoning map shall be so designated in the official zoning map and upon adoption by the city commission become a part of the official zoning map. 
(Ord. of. 11-14-11, § I) 
Sec. 24-63. - District boundaries. 
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map, City of Toccoa, Georgia," 1984, as amended and adopted by the city commission. Such map and all explanatory matter thereon is hereby made part of this chapter. Such map shall be retained in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-42) 
Sec. 24-64. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or railroad right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerlines, street lines, or railroad right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the center lines of streets, highways or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map. 
(4)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extensions shall not include any part of such a lot more than 35 feet beyond the district boundary line. 
(5)  Where district boundaries follow a stream, lake or other body of water, such boundaries shall be construed to be at the limits of the jurisdiction of the city unless otherwise indicated. 
(6)  Where district boundaries appear to follow corporate lines, such boundaries do follow the corporate lines. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-43) 
Secs. 24-65—24-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 24-76. - Single-family residential district (R-IA). 
(a)  Purposes. The single-family residential district (R-IA) allows up to four dwelling units per acre with provisions for customary accessory uses. Commercial, industrial or other uses that would interfere with the residential character of this district are prohibited. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-IA district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling (four units per acre). 
(2)  Parks, playgrounds, museums, libraries and community and governmental buildings owned and operated by public agencies. 
(3)  Public school, elementary or high, or a private school having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in a public school. 
(4)  Country club or golf courses, except miniature course or practice driving range operated for commercial purposes. 
(5)  Churches or other places of worship. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses, including a private garage, and the use of a lot or portion thereof for an orchard or a vegetable or flower garden. 
(7)  Church or public building bulletin board not exceeding ten square feet in area and temporary signs not exceeding six square feet in area pertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-51) 
Sec. 24-76.5. - Suburban residential district (SR). 
(a)  Purpose. This district accommodates suburban detached residential growth located in forested, hillside, and stream valley areas along the perimeter of the city. Larger lot sizes have been imposed for preservation of the natural and scenic values in the environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Horticulture and forestry-related uses; 
(2)  Public and/or nonprofit parks and playgrounds, public uses, and public utilities structures; 
(3)  Single-family detached dwellings; 
(4)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, including, but not limited to, community facilities for the use of the residents, fences, private garage, vegetable flower garden, home occupation, orchard, and private pool. 
(c)  Principal Use design standards. 

 
(d)  Accessory use design standards. 
(1)  Maximum permitted height—20 feet. 
(2)  Minimum setback requirements: 
Front yard —No accessory structure shall be located within the front yard. 
Side yards —Ten feet on each side (20 feet total). 
Rear yard —Ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 2007-1, § I, 2-26-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-1, adopted Feb. 26, 2007, added provisions numbered as § 24-76A. In order to conform the decimal numbering system used in the Code, the editor has redesignated the provisions of said ordinance as § 24-76.5. 
Sec. 24-77. - Single-family residential district (R-IB). 
(a)  Purposes. The single-family residential district (R-IB) allows up to five dwelling units per acre with provisions customary for accessory uses. Commercial, industrial or other uses that would interfere with the residential character of this district are prohibited. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-IB district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in single-family residential district (R-IA). 
(2)  Single-family dwelling (five units per acre). 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-52) 
Sec. 24-78. - Two-family residential district (R-II). 
(a)  Purpose. The two-family residential district (R-II) allows up to nine dwelling units per acre for single-family or two-family dwelling units with provisions for customary accessory uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-II district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-I single-family residential district. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Rooming or boarding houses accommodating more than two persons. 
(4)  Bed and breakfast inns. 
a.  Definition. A bed and breakfast inn is a place for overnight accommodations and accompanied by morning meal in a dwelling unit provided to transients. The overnight accommodations and breakfast are provided for compensation. 
b.  Bed and breakfast inns must meet the following requirements: 
1.  Owner(s) must reside on the premises. 
2.  Parking requirements: One space for each guest bedroom, one space for owner, and one space for every two employees. 
3.  Limit use to overnight lodging and allow for guest related activities involving 20 people or less. 
4.  Shall have no more than six bedrooms. 
5.  Limit breakfast to guests and guest related activities only and all breakfasts should be limited to indoor dining or dining in a structure attached to the bed and breakfast structure that is attached. 
6.  Business license subject to being revoked after three violations. Violations must be brought to the planning director's attention. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-53; Ord. No. 12-2004, § I, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 24-79. - Multifamily residential district (R-III). 
(a)  Purpose. The multifamily residential district (R-III) allows up to 20 dwelling units per acre with provisions for customary accessory uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-III district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the two-family residential district (R-II). 
(2)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(3)  Hospital or sanatarium, except a criminal or animal hospital. 
(4)  Institution of a religious, educational, charitable or philanthropic nature, but not a penal institution. 
(5)  Nursing or convalescent home. 
(6)  Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges, excepting those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-54) 
Sec. 24-80. - Manufactured home park district (R-IV). 
(a)  Purpose. This district is intended to provide areas for use as manufactured home parks at a medium density urban residential character with spaces and/or manufactured homes in such parks to be offered for rent. Such parks are to be located where public water and sewer systems are available. 
(b)  Permitted structures and uses. 
(1)  Manufactured homes. 
(2)  Mobile homes are strictly prohibited. 
(c)  Permitted accessory structures and uses. 
(1)  One office/maintenance building incidental to use by residents of the manufactured home park only; 
(2)  Recreation areas and structures owned, operated and maintained exclusively for the use of residents and guests of residents of the manufactured home park and further provided that such areas and structures are controlled by the manufactured home park's owners; 
(3)  Private streets to provide access only to the spaces and facilities within the manufactured home park, provided they meet city design standards. 
(4)  Coin-operated laundries for manufactured home park residents use only. 
(d)  Development intensity restrictions. The maximum intensity of development in this district is as follows: 
(1)  Minimum zoning district size: Ten acres. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet. 
(3)  Maximum gross density: Five per acre. 
(e)  Miscellaneous provisions. 
(1)  All manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park after the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section shall provide documentation of compliance with the National Home Construction and Safety Act or compliance with specifications presented by the American National Standards Institute. Existing manufactured homes within city manufactured home parks not in compliance with either of these standards are nonconforming. 
(2)  No manufactured home or accessory structure shall be located within 50 feet of any exterior boundary of a mobile home park. 
(3)  No manufactured home sales or repair facilities of any type (including automobile repair) shall be permitted; provided, however,that this shall not be construed as to prohibit the owner of a manufactured home from selling the manufactured home in which they are residing or to prohibit a person from performing minor repairs on an automobile which they own. 
(4)  Each manufactured home space within the approved park shall be clearly delineated by means of an iron pin at each corner; only one manufactured home will be allowed per lot. 
(5)  Each manufactured home space within the approved park shall abut, have access to and have 60 feet of frontage on an approved street of the park. Such street shall meet city requirements for pavement width and construction materials and methods as it were an accepted street; includes private streets. 
(6)  The business of renting or otherwise allowing recreational vehicles, or of operating a trailer park or campground is not a permitted use in this district. 
(7)  The planning department shall review and approve preliminary and final site plans; all provisions of chapter 21, subdivisions, shall apply. 
(8)  No manufactured home park shall be constructed or maintained on a lot or tract which has an average width of less than 400 feet or a total area of less than ten acres. 
(9)  At least two paved parking spaces shall be provided on each manufactured home space. 
(10)  Except for those in place upon the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, no manufactured home shall be allowed which has dimensions of less than 12 feet by 50 feet or a heated floor area of less than 600 square feet. 
(11)  The city may, at its option, provide roll-out carts and recycling baskets, or stationary dumpsters. 
(12)  Each manufactured home shall be connected with public water and sanitary sewer facilities in a manner approved by the city to their specification, and in compliance with the codes of the city. 
(13)  The manufactured home park and all manufactured homes located therein shall be in compliance with all regulations of the county and state health departments. 
(14)  All requirements of the city and state fire marshal's office shall be adhered to. 
(15)  No entrance or exit shall be through a residential subdivision. 
(f)  Manufactured home park criteria. 
(1)  A site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the planning department prior to development or expansion. No manufactured homes shall be placed in the new area of an existing park or a new park until the final site plan is approved; all provisions of chapter 21, subdivisions, shall apply. 
(2)  The minimum space limits and setback requirements shall be as set forth in section 24-121. 
(3)  No additions shall be made to a manufactured park that will violate setback requirements. All additions shall be approved by the planning department, according to the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  Each manufactured home unit shall be installed on a concrete block foundation, of which the base block shall be solid and equal in size to the pier block size (a minimum of eight inches by 16 inches). The top course of the foundation shall be a solid cap block with a minimum dimension of four inches by eight inches by 16 inches. The manufactured home unit shall be installed true and plumb. The tongue and wheels shall be removed and an approved permanent skirting shall be installed; the tongue may remain if it is skirted. 
(5)  All streets and driveways within the manufactured home park shall be lighted, at the owner's expense, between sunset and sunrise emitting light at an intensity of at least 5,000 lumens, and the light poles shall be no more than 250 feet apart. 
(6)  All streets shall be properly designed and shall have a minimum pavement width of 20 feet as approved by the city according to section 21-193. 
(7)  The area around and underneath each manufactured home unit shall be kept clean and free from collection of refuse, rubbish, glass bottles or other unsightly material. 
(8)  No open fires or burning of leaves or other refuse shall be permitted within the boundaries of any manufactured home park without approval of the Toccoa Fire Department. 
(9)  Each manufactured home in a manufactured home park shall be provided with safety tiedowns in conformance with city building code requirements. 
(10)  Manufactured home parks shall be surrounded by planted buffers at least 25 feet in depth on the sides and rear. All buffers shall be at least six feet in height and dense enough to be opaque. 
(11)  Coin-operated laundries for the use of the residents of the manufactured home park shall be permitted within enclosed buildings inside the park. Building structures containing such laundries may also contain vending machines and recreational rooms and activities. More intensive commercial uses than those specified herein are strictly prohibited. 
(12)  Each manufactured home space shall have the following: 
a.  A concrete patio at least four inches thick with minimum dimensions of 40 feet by eight feet; 
b.  A wooden deck having a surface area of at least 320 square feet; or 
c.  A combination of a concrete patio at least four inches thick and a wooden deck provided the combined surface area (excluding steps) is at least 320 square feet. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-55; Ord. No. 95-014, 3-27-95) 
Sec. 24-81. - Siting of manufactured homes. 
(a)  Manufactured homes as allowed herein will only be allowed in manufactured home parks as defined pursuant to this Code. 
(b)  Definitions: 
(1)  Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is 14 body feet or more in width or 60 body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is 840 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; or a structure that otherwise comes within the definition of a "manufactured home" under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5401-5445). 
(c)  Land use permit required. No manufactured home shall be installed on any site, nor shall any such manufactured home be occupied or used for any purpose until and unless the city issues a permit. The city will not issue a permit for installing, occupying, or using a manufactured home unless it is in conformity with all the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Basic installation requirements. The following requirements are applicable to all manufactured homes subject to this section: 
(1)  Foundation. Each manufactured home must be set on an appropriate foundation. 
(2)  Hauling mechanisms removed. The transportation mechanisms, including wheels, axles, and hitch, must be removed prior to occupancy. 
(3)  Installation regulations. The manufactured home shall be installed in accordance with the installation instructions from the manufacturer, as appropriate. 
(4)  Approved septic system. Each manufactured home shall be connected to the city's sewer system. 
(5)  Skirting. The entire perimeter area between the bottom of the structure and the ground of each manufactured home shall be skirted or underpinned with brick, masonry, finished concrete or siding (of like or similar character to the manufactured home) that completely encloses the perimeter of the undercarriage except for proper ventilation and access openings. 
(6)  Exterior finish. The exterior siding of the manufactured home shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, or plastic siding material. 
(7)  Roof pitch and materials. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a scope of at least three feet in height for each 12 feet in width. Roof materials shall be wood shake, tile, asphalt shingle, coated metal, or similar material. 
(e)  Any manufactured home presently within the corporate limits of the City of Toccoa will not be affected by this adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, and any manufactured home not within a manufactured home park will be considered a non-conforming use as defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-2005, § I, 8-8-05) 
Secs. 24-82—24-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - USE REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 24-91. - Neighborhood shopping district (B-I). 
(a)  Purpose. The neighborhood shopping district (B-I) is a district for planned shopping centers and limited retail activities conducted in a unified development designed to serve the surrounding neighborhood and community with convenience goods, retail services and personal services. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the B-I district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in multifamily residential district (R-III). 
(2)  Automobile parking lots. 
(3)  Banks. 
(4)  Clinics. 
(5)  Service stations, automobile. 
(6)  Florist shops or greenhouses. 
(7)  Offices and office buildings. 
(8)  Self-service laundries. 
(9)  Household appliances and furniture sales. 
(10)  Bakeries, but only when the products are sold at retail on the premise. 
(11)  Retail stores, provided that in connection with such stores there shall be no slaughtering of animals or poultry on the premises. 
(12)  Personal service uses including barber shops, beauty parlors, photographic or artist studio, messengers, taxicabs, newspaper or telegraphic, service stations, dry cleaning receiving stations, restaurants and other personal services of a similar character. 
(13)  Dressmaking, tailoring, shoe repairing, repair of household appliances and bicycles, catering, dry cleaning and pressing, and other uses of a similar character provided that no use permitted in this paragraph shall employ more than five persons in a single shift on the premises, not including employees whose principal duties are off the premises or temporary seasonal employees. 
(14)  Retail liquor stores. 
(15)  When located at least 25 feet from any residential district: 
a.  Used car sales and storage lot; 
b.  Sale of small boats. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-61; Ord. No. 94-024, § II, 10-10-94) 
Sec. 24-92. - Commercial district (B-II). 
(a)  Purposes. The commercial district (B-II) is a district for general business and limited manufacturing activities, including retail sales and personal services. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the B-II district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the neighborhood shopping district (B-I). 
(2)  Advertising sign or billboard, when located at least 50 feet from any residential district. 
(3)  Automobile or trailer display and sales room. 
(4)  Business or commercial school. 
(5)  Bowling alley when located not less than 100 feet from any residential district. 
(6)  Frozen food locker. 
(7)  Radio or television broadcasting studio. 
(8)  Hotel or motel. 
(9)  Restaurant. 
(10)  Animal hospital. 
(11)  Theater, but not a drive-in theater. 
(12)  Reserved. 
(13)  Mortuary. 
(14)  Farm implement display and sales room. 
(15)  Milk distributing station. 
(16)  Parking or public garage. 
(17)  When not employing more than ten persons on the premises; dyeing and cleaning establishment or laundry, painting, plumbing or tinsmithing shop, printing shop, tire sales and service including vulcanizing, upholstering shop not involving furniture manufacture. Any other general service or repair establishment of similar character. 
(18)  Accessory building or use customarily incidental to any of the above uses. 
(19)  Hardware store. 
(20)  Bus terminal, passenger. 
(21)  Recreational facilities. 
(22)  Car wash. 
(23)  Automobile repair garages. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-62; Ord. No. 94-024, § I, 10-10-94; Ord. No. 98-004, § I(a), 3-23-98) 
Sec. 24-93. - Central business district (B-III). 
(a)  Purposes. The central business district (B-III) is a district permitting the most intensive use of land in combination with a variety of retail and service uses. The district is intended to provide for the central and headquarter function of economic activity in the city. It is intended to keep this district centrally located and compact so that a maximum convenience is afforded the users and occupants of this central business district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the B-III district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the B-II commercial district, without restriction as to the number of employees. 
(2)  Storage warehouse, provided such warehouse is accessory to a retail establishment. 
(3)  Wholesaling establishment. 
(4)  Printing, publishing or engraving. 
(5)  Any other use of a similar character and which is not more objectionable by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes, noise or vibration than the uses herein enumerated. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-63) 
Sec. 24-94. - Wholesale business district (B-IV). 
(a)  Purpose. The wholesale business district (B-IV) is a district for those business activities that require more space than commercial uses serving the central business district and that require heavy vehicular access. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the B-IV district: 
(1)  Any uses permitted in the central business district (B-III). 
(2)  Animal hospital or veterinary clinic. 
(3)  Automobile parts sales store. 
(4)  Automobile sales and storage. 
(5)  Bowling alleys. 
(6)  Bus terminals. 
(7)  Business and outdoor advertising signs. 
(8)  Drive-in theaters. 
(9)  Dry cleaning and laundry establishments. 
(10)  Electrical repair shops. 
(11)  Fabricating shops of small size such as woodwork shops, cabinet shops and upholstery shops. 
(12)  Farm equipment sales and service. 
(13)  Gasoline service stations. 
(14)  Greenhouses or horticultural nurseries. 
(15)  Motels. 
(16)  Public and semi-public recreational facilities. 
(17)  Repair garages. 
(18)  Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants. 
(19)  Customary accessory uses and structures, when located on the same lot as the main structure. 
(20)  Miniwarehouses. 
(21)  Warehouses. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-64) 
Secs. 24-95—24-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 24-106. - Restricted industrial district (M-I). 
(a)  Purposes. The restricted industrial district (M-I) is a district intended to provide for uses permitted in the most highly restricted industrial, including certain related commercial uses, but not including residential uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the M-I district: 
(1)  Any nonresidential, warehousing, wholesaling, storage or manufacturing use permitted in the wholesale business district (B-IV). 
(2)  Bottling works. 
(3)  Lumber and storage yard, including construction yard and contractor's yard. 
(4)  Drive-in theater. 
(5)  Coal or wood yard. 
(6)  Storage of petroleum products, but only after the location of the premises have been approved by the fire chief and further provided that mobile home parks shall not be located within 500 feet of the location. 
(7)  Textile manufacturing or processing. 
(8)  Fabrication of wood and metal products. 
(9)  Industrial manufacturing plant where the process of manufacturing or the treatment of materials is not objectionable because of dust, odor, gas, smoke, vibration or noise, and not more than ten percent of the lot or tract is used for the open storage of products, materials or equipment. 
(10)  Truck or transfer terminal or freight house, or bus garages and repair shop. 
(11)  Ice manufacturing plant. 
(12)  Laboratory, experimental, film or testing. 
(13)  Ready-mix concrete plants where the process of manufacturing or the treatment of materials is not objectionable because of dust, odor, gas, smoke, vibration or noise. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-71; Ord. No. 86-025, 10-13-86) 
Sec. 24-107. - Heavy industrial district (M-II). 
(a)  Purpose. The heavy industrial district (M-II) is a district for general industrial, heavy manufacturing and related activities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the M-II district: 
(1)  Any industrial use, provided that such use shall not be likely to be dangerous, offensive or detrimental to the health, safety, welfare, or general character of this zoning district or of the community by reason of the emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, glare or otherwise. 
(2)  Any nonresidential uses permitted in the restricted industrial district (M-I). Only residential use by resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises are allowed. 
(3)  Business and outdoor advertising sign. 
(4)  Cold storage plants. 
(5)  Gasoline service stations. 
(6)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
(7)  Public utility structures. 
(8)  Repair shops. 
(9)  Restaurants, cafes and similar establishments. 
(10)  Truck terminals. 
(11)  Accessory uses and buildings which are clearly incidental to a permitted use and which will not create a nuisance or hazard. 
(12)  Any building or land may be used for any purpose not in conflict with any ordinance of the city regulating nuisances; provided, however, that no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered for residential purposes except for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises. 
(13)  No permit shall be issued for any of the following uses until and unless the location of such use shall have been approved by the city commission after report by the city manager and the planning commission. 
a.  Acid manufacture. 
b.  Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture. 
c.  Stockyards or slaughter of animals. 
d.  Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture. 
e.  Asphalt manufacture or refining. 
f.  Auto wrecking and junkyard. 
g.  Coal, tar products manufacture. 
h.  Linoleum manufacture. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-72; Ord. No. 85-027, 9-23-85) 
Sec. 24-108. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses shall not be permitted in any district: 
(1)  Distillation of bones and glue manufacture. 
(2)  Explosive manufacture or storage. 
(3)  Fertilizer manufacture. 
(4)  Garbage, offal or dead animals, reduction or dumping. 
(5)  Petroleum or its products, refining of. 
(6)  Paper or paper pulp manufacture. 
(7)  Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores. 
(8)  Hazardous waste disposal. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-72) 
Sec. 24-109. - Airport district (A-I). 
(a)  Purpose. The airport district (A-I) is a district for airports and surrounding areas, including related activities, and is intended to restrict places of assembly and to enforce the Federal Aviation Administration's airspace standards for airport approach zones. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the A-I district: 
(1)  Airport runways. 
(2)  Air passenger service. 
(3)  Express freight. 
(4)  Airplane storage. 
(5)  Repair shops. 
(6)  Automobile parking. 
(7)  Restaurants. 
(8)  Shops. 
(9)  Flight lessons. 
(10)  Fuel sales. 
(11)  Airplane and parts manufacture. 
(12)  Customary accessory uses and structures. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall not be permitted in this district: 
(1)  Places of assembly, including places of worship, hospitals and schools. 
(2)  Structures for residential purposes, except for resident watchmen and caretakers. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-73; Ord. No. 86-027, 12-22-86) 
Sec. 24-110. - Summary of permitted uses—Alphabetical. 

 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 1(b), 3-23-98) 
Sec. 24-111. - Same—Alphabetical by category. 

 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 1(b), 3-23-98) 
Secs. 24-112—24-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 24-121. - Table of requirements. 

 
(A)  Corner lots must have an additional width of 15 feet along the side street line. 
(B)  Detached, nonliving utility building shall require a rear yard setback of ten feet. 
(C)  Where a lot abuts any residential district there shall be a side or rear yard clearance of at least ten feet on the side and/or rear yard abutting the residential district. 
(D)  Upon any side or rear lot line which abuts a residential district there shall be a densely planted buffer strip at least six feet in height along the rear and/or side lot line abutting the residential properties. No such buffer shall however, extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the established building line of the adjoining residential lot. 
(E)  Whenever a building is built in an existing developed subdivision, the setback shall conform to existing setbacks, the above requirements notwithstanding. 
(F)  A minimum separation of 20 feet shall be required between all residential dwelling buildings and occupied commercial structures located on the same lot; duplexes, apartments and shopping centers can be considered as a single building without separation. 
(G)  Minimum lot size requirements for the R-III: Multifamily residential district shall apply to all residential buildings constructed in a business district. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-81; Ord. No. 88-008, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 95-014, 3-27-95) 
Secs. 24-122—24-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 24-141. - Existing lots. 
The owner of any lot or lots of official record in any district at the time of the adoption of this chapter or his successor in title thereto may use such lots as building sites provided, however, that the requirements of the district, other than lot size, are complied with or a variance is obtained. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-91) 
Sec. 24-142. - Front yard setbacks for dwellings. 
The front yard setback requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or partially within 100 feet on either side of the proposed dwelling and on the same side of the same block and use district and fronting on the same street as such lot is less than the minimum required front yard depth. In such case, the setback on such lots may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, or a distance of ten feet of the street right-of-way lines, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-92) 
Sec. 24-143. - Height limitations. 
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flag poles, radio towers, television towers, masts, aerials and similar structures, except as otherwise provided in the vicinity of airports. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-93) 
Sec. 24-144. - Visibility at intersections. 
On a corner lot in any district, except the B-II commercial district, no planting, structure, fence, wall or obstruction to vision more than three feet in height measured from the centerline of the street shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line connecting points on such street curb side each of which is 25 feet distant from the point of intersection. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-94) 
Sec. 24-145. - Corner lots. 
The front yard setback requirements for corner lots shall, for one frontage, be the same as the front yard setback requirements for the next adjacent lot, while the setback for the other frontage shall be one-half that distance. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-95) 
Secs. 24-146—24-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 24-166. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to: 
(1)  Encourage the development of tracts of land as planned neighborhoods or communities. 
(2)  Encourage flexible and creative concepts in site planning. 
(3)  Preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas within residential areas. 
(4)  Accomplish a more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of minimum requirements of the other articles of this chapter. 
(5)  Provide for the efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets and thereby lower development and housing costs. 
(6)  Provide an environment of stable character compatible with surrounding residential areas. 
(b)  Within the planned area, a variety of land uses may be permitted in an orderly relation to one another and to existing land uses, as well as with due regard to comprehensive planning in the city. The city commission does by the enactment of this article recognize that certain areas within the city are conducive to higher density development. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-111) 
Sec. 24-167. - Requirements. 
(a)  A planned unit development must contain a minimum of three contiguous acres. 
(b)  All planned unit developments shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  The development shall be compatible with the topography of the land and shall preserve any unusual natural features. 
(2)  The development shall not adversely effect developed or undeveloped neighboring properties. 
(3)  The development shall utilize design features that would not be possible under the lot-to-lot zoning regulations. 
(4)  Water, sewer, electrical and gas service, existing and proposed streets, schools and other public facilities shall be adequate for the development or there shall be a definite proposal for making them so. 
(5)  The development shall be included within private deed covenants running with the land to assure continuance of the development in accordance with the approved plans. 
(6)  Any change from the plans at any time must be reviewed by the planning department and approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-112) 
Secs. 24-168—24-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 24-181. - Development plan. 
(a)  An applicant shall file a petition with the city planning department for approval of a planned unit development. This application shall be supported by a development plan and written summary of intent, and shall show the relation between the proposed development and the surrounding area, both existing and proposed. The site plan shall be prepared by a competent designer and shall be of sufficient detail to insure compliance with this section. In addition, the applicant shall submit other necessary information to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The written statement submitted with the development plan shall include the following information: 
(1)  An explanation of the character of the proposed development, including a summary of the number of acres, the number of proposed dwelling units, and a statement which defines lot size, yard and space requirements. 
(2)  A general statement of the proposed development schedule. 
(3)  A description of any agreements, provisions and/or covenants which govern the use, maintenance and protection of the development. 
(c)  Approval: 
(1)  An application for approval of a planned unit development will be considered as a petition for rezoning and will be subject to the procedures established in section 24-279 concerning amendments to this zoning chapter. 
(2)  If the development plan is approved, the city will cause the official zoning map to be changed to indicate the planned unit development. If the plan is approved with modifications, the applicant shall file written notice of consent to the modifications and a properly revised site plan shall be filed with the city prior to changing the zoning map. No building permits shall be issued until the development plan has been approved as required by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-121) 
Sec. 24-182. - Revision of zoning approval. 
Upon approval of an amendment creating a planned unit development the construction shall begin within two years or if the applicant fails to maintain the approved development schedule approval of the development plan shall lapse. At its discretion and for good cause the city commission may extend the period for beginning construction for any phase of the project for one additional year. If the approval of a development plan lapses under this provision, the city shall cause the development to be removed from the official zoning map and shall reinstate the zoning district and regulations which were in effect prior to approval. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-122) 
Secs. 24-183—24-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - USE, DENSITY, AND OTHER REGULATIONS 

Sec. 24-196. - Permitted uses. 
The uses permitted within a planned unit development shall be primarily residential and may include the following uses: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Duplexes and townhouses. 
(3)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(4)  Public and semi-public facilities to include community and club facilities. 
(5)  Certain commercial or retail uses, including offices and clinics provided they meet the following criteria: 
a.  The location is appropriate in relation to other land uses. 
b.  The proposed use is designed so that it will primarily serve the planned development. 
c.  Accessory uses to those listed above. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-131) 
Sec. 24-197. - Density controls. 
The maximum number of dwelling units per acre in residential areas of planned unit development shall not exceed 15 dwelling units per acre. For the purpose of this section, density shall be interpreted as the number of dwelling units per gross acre devoted to residential development. Gross acreage shall include, in addition to land area and parcels used primarily for residential purposes, all open spaces including private lakes reserved for common usage. Gross acreage shall exclude areas reserved or dedicated for street rights-of-way. An overall higher density may be allowed provided the applicant can show that such higher density will not be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood. Unless topographical or other barriers protect the privacy of existing adjoining uses, the city commission may impose one or both of the following requirements: 
(1)  Structures or buildings located at the perimeter of the development shall be set back a sufficient distance to protect the privacy and amenities of adjacent existing uses. 
(2)  Structures or buildings located at the perimeter of the development shall be permanently screened in a manner which sufficiently protects the privacy and amenities of the adjacent existing uses. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-132) 
Secs. 24-198—24-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 24-221. - Administration. 
The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized and it shall be his duty to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall develop and maintain administrative procedures to include necessary forms, permits and applications to effect this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-151) 
Sec. 24-222. - Building permit required. 
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, extended or enlarged, or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced until the city has issued a building permit for such work. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-152) 
Sec. 24-223. - Application for building permit. 
(a)  Each application to the city for a building permit shall be accompanied by sufficient information to insure compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months of its date of issue or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-153) 
Sec. 24-224. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the city is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
(1)  A building hereafter erected, altered or moved. 
(2)  A change of use of any building or land. 
(b)  A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part of a building, shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the building or structural alteration of the building has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances of the city, including all pertinent and appropriate building codes. If the certificate of occupancy is denied, the city shall, at the request of the owner, state in writing the reasons for refusal and the applicant shall be notified of the refusal. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file by the city and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-154) 
Sec. 24-225. - Hardship variance. 
(a)  A hardship variance may be granted in an individual cause of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon finding by the city commission that: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography. 
(2)  The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create personal practical difficulty and/or unnecessary personal hardship. Such circumstances must be extraordinary, exceptional and well documented. The burden of proof shall be upon the individual requesting a variance. All such variances will be limited to 12 months duration. 
(b)  In order to make a variance permissible, certain conditions shall be shown: 
(1)  There must be a proved hardship by showing beyond a reasonable doubt the inability to make a reasonable use of the land. 
(2)  If the hardship is based on size, shape or topography, it cannot be self created, such as a case where the lot was purchased with knowledge of an existing restriction. 
(c)  No variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this chapter. 
(d)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-155) 
Sec. 24-226. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall not be issued a building permit or certificate of occupancy, and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished for each offense as provided by law. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed as a separate offense. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-156) 
Sec. 24-227. - Remedies. 
In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter, the city, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action for injunction, or mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such violation. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-157) 
Secs. 24-228—24-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - APPEALS 

Sec. 24-251. - Appeals to the city commission. 
Appeals to the city commission may be taken by any person aggrieved by any recommendation of the planning commission. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided in the administrative regulations, by filing with the city manager a notice of the appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city manager shall forthwith transmit to the city commission all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-171) 
Sec. 24-252. - Notice of hearing. 
The city commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matters referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon a hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-172) 
Sec. 24-253. - Stay of proceedings; exceptions. 
An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the city manager certifies to the city commission, after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the city commission or by a competent court; upon application, notice to the city and due cause shown. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-173) 
Sec. 24-254. - Powers of city commission enumerated. 
The city commission shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which such board is required to decide under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-174) 
Sec. 24-255. - Action on appeal. 
In exercising its powers, the city commission may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-175) 
Secs. 24-256—24-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 24-276. - Action by planning commission. 
This chapter may be amended from time to time by the city commission; but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the planning commission for a review and recommendation, unless this requirement is waived by the city commission. The planning commission shall have 35 days from its initial formal consideration of a request within which to submit a report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 35-day period, it shall be deemed to have favorably recommended the proposed amendment. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-191(A); Ord. No. 86-007, 3-17-86) 
Sec. 24-277. - Zoning map. 
The zoning classifications as set forth on the zoning map set forth by the city commission may be amended or rezoned from time to time by the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-191(B); Ord. No. 86-007, 3-17-86) 
Sec. 24-278. - Public hearing. 
Before enacting an amendment to this chapter or before any property is rezoned or before the city zoning map is amended and rezoned the city commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. 
(1)  If the city takes action resulting in a zoning decision, the city shall provide for a hearing on the proposed action at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days, prior to the date of the hearing. The city shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city a notice of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(2)  If the zoning decision of the local government is for the rezoning of property and the rezoning is initiated by a party other than the local government, then: 
a.  The notice, in addition to the requirement of subsection (1) of this section, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and 
b.  A sign containing information required by local ordinance or resolution shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-191(C); Ord. No. 87-007, 3-17-86) 
Sec. 24-279. - Time lapse for reconsideration. 
If the zoning decision of a local government is for the rezoning of property and the amendment to the zoning ordinance is defeated by the local government, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning by the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-191(D); Ord. No. 87-007, 3-17-86) 
Chapter 9.5 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; environment, § 7.5; fire prevention and protection, ch. 7.5; flood damage prevention, ch. 9; municipal court, ch. 12; nuisances, ch. 13; utilities, ch. 23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9.5-1—9.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADOPTION OF STATE AND COUNTY RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 9.5-31. - State promulgated rules and regulations. 
(a)  The following rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Public Health (DPH), including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, and which are expressly incorporated herein, are hereby adopted and approved for enforcement as set forth herein: 
(1)  Control of Rabies, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-2. 
(2)  Food Service, Comp. R, & Regs. § 290-5-14. 
(3)  Tourist Accommodations, Comp. R. & Regs. § 511-6-2. 
(4)  Portable Sanitation Contractors R. Regs. § 511-3-6 
(5)  On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Comp. R. & Regs. § 511-3-1, 
(6)  Drinking Water Supply, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-55, 
(7)  Solid Waste, Comp, R. & Regs. § 290-3-56. 
(8)  Special On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Comp, R. & Regs. § 290-5-59. 
(9)  The Georgia Smokefree Air Act of 2005, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-61. 
(b)  Copies of those DPH rules and regulations are on file in the office of the city clerk, where the same are available for inspection and copying by the public during regular city operating hours. 
( Ord. of 10-27-14, § I ) 
Sec. 9.5-32. - Local board of health enactments. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1, et seq., in addition to the above-referenced rules and regulations of the Georgia DPH, the following rules and regulations have been enacted by the Stephens County Board of Health and are hereby adopted by the city in accordance with state law, and are further hereby adopted and approved for enforcement as set forth herein: 
(1)  Rules and regulations concerning tattoo and body art, enacted by resolution, dated March 7, 2013, which are hereby set forth verbatim herein and adopted by the city upon lawful adoption of the ordinance from which his article derives. 
(2)  Rules and regulations concerning rabies control, enacted by resolution, dated May 5, 2010, which are hereby set forth verbatim herein and adopted by the city upon lawful adoption of the ordinance from which his article derives. 
(b)  Copies of those rules and regulations enacted by the Stephens County Board of Health, and having been adopted by the city, are on file in the office of the city clerk, where the same are available for inspection and copying by the public during regular city operating hours. 
(c)  In addition, the rules and regulations concerning minimum lot sizes for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems, having been enacted by the Stephens County Board of Health, are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set out at length herein. The city may, however, require larger minimum lot sizes for utilization of on-site sewage management systems in zoning or land use districts providing for septic service, and in the event there is a conflict between the minimum lot size(s) established by the Stephens County Board of Health and that established by the city, the larger lot size(s) established by the city shall control and take precedence. 
( Ord. of 10-27-14, §§ II, III ) 
Sec. 9.5-33. - Fees. 
A fee schedule for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-referenced DPH Rules and Regulations and local board of health enactments, including permit and inspection fees, has been established by the Stephens County Board of Health, and is hereby adopted by the city. A copy of this fee schedule, including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, is on file in the office of the city clerk and is available for inspection and copying by the public during regular city operating hours. 
( Ord. of 10-27-14, § IV ) 
Sec. 9.5-34. - Jurisdiction of enforcement and prosecution. 
The enforcement and prosecution of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the City of Toccoa and the Stephens County Board of Health, and their authorized designee(s) or agent(s), and all law enforcement personnel of the City of Toccoa, Georgia. 
( Ord. of 10-27-14, § V ) 
Sec. 9.5-35. - Violations, penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any natural person or persons or any legal entity including, and not limited to, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or trust, to violate any of the above-identified rules and regulations) and/or to fail or refuse to pay any fee established by the Stephens County Board of Health, and adopted by the city, for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-identified rules and regulations, including all permit and inspection fees. 
(b)  Any person or persons or any legal entity including, and not limited to, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or trust, violating any provision of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or six months imprisonment, or both; provided however, that for any single violation the period of imprisonment shall not exceed 120 days and provided, further, that the judge may probate any part or all of any punishment imposed pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Each day during which a violation of any provision of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this article shall constitute, and shall be considered, a separate offense. 
(d)  The Municipal Court of Toccoa, Georgia shall have original jurisdiction upon any offense charged pursuant to this article. 
(e)  In addition to the rights and remedies set forth herein, or as otherwise authorized by law, the city, and the Stephens County Board, of Health, retain and reserve the right to seek equitable relief, injunction, abatement, or any appropriate action or proceeding to protect, the public health, safety and welfare. Failure or refusal to pay any fee approved for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-identified rules and regulations, including all permit and inspection fees, may result in suspension and/or revocation of any permit issued by the Stephens County Board of Health. 
(f)  Violations of all DPH promulgated rules and regulations and all local board of health enactments identified herein may be prosecuted by an accusation or citation, with or without a prosecuting attorney; and the City hereby authorizes the city attorney or his designee to prosecute violations of this article. In addition, the Solicitor of Stephens County and his or her assistants shall also have the authority to prosecute all citations or accusations issued for violation of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this article. 
(g)  This article, and the enforcement and prosecution of this article by the city and the Stephens County Board of Health, and their authorized agent(s) or designee(s), does not in any way effect, estop, prescribe, regulate, limit, or in any way control or prohibit the Georgia DPH, and its agent(s) or designee(s), from initiating or undertaking any action or proceeding to enforce compliance with its rules and regulations. 
( Ord. of 10-27-14, §§ VI—XII ) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1985 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1985 Code, as updated through March 25, 1985, which are included herein. Sections of the 1985 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1985 Code, as updated through March 25, 1985, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1985 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede March 25, 1985, but which were never included in the 1985 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since March 25, 1985, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 