CODE OF ORDINANCES EMANUEL COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of 
EMANUEL COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
James R. Canady 
Desse E. Davis 
Hugh A. Foskey 
David A. Oglesby 
Keith R. Thompson 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
J. Franklin Edenfield 
County Attorney 
____________ 
James E. Price 
County Administrator 
OFFICIALS 
of 
EMANUEL COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Desse Davis 
Chairman 
____________ 
Jerry N. Cadle 
David A. Oglesby 
Keith R. Thompson 
Guy Williamson 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
J. Franklin Edenfield 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Roger L. Shaw 
County Administrator 
PREFACE 
This is a complete republication of the general and permanent ordinances of Emanuel County, Georgia. Additional ordinances not found in the Code as published in 2009 and supplemented through May 21, 2001 have been included. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1992 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1992 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of W. Eric Grant, Vice President, Regina Sosinski, Editor, and Janet Cramer, Electronic Publishing, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Ezra Price, County Administrator, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Emanuel County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Emanuel County, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and Emanuel County, Georgia. 2009. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—This Part I is a compilation of local legislation enacted by the Georgia General Assembly which was deemed advisable to print in this codification. Enacting language has been deleted from each act included herein. Words and punctuation added for clarity are indicated by brackets. Unless otherwise specifically noted, section numbers and catchlines have been supplied by the editor for the purposes of indexing and ease of reference.

ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein is 1919 Ga. Laws, page 646, which provides for the governing body of Emanuel County. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

Sec. 1. - [Creation.] 
(a)	There is created a Board of Commissioners for Emanuel County.
(b)	Commissioners holding office on the effective date of this Act shall continue in office until the expiration of the terms for which they were elected. 
(c)	The Board of Commissioners of Emanuel County shall be composed of five members elected from single-member districts. Such districts shall be known as Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. Each member from a district shall be elected by a majority of the votes cast by voters residing within the district. A member shall hold office for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. To qualify for election from a district, a candidate must be a resident of the district. 
(d)	Emanuel County shall be divided into single-member commissioner election districts as follows: 
(1)	District 1 shall have the following boundaries: 
BEGINNING at the intersection of Lamb's Bridge Road and Industrial Way; thence North on Industrial Way to East Main Street (Ga. Hwy. 26); thence West on East Main Street to Georgia Highway 56; thence North on Georgia Highway 56 to the City limits of Swainsboro; thence following the City limits East to Canoochee Road to County Road 444; thence Northeast on County Road 444 to Flat Creek; thence North following Flat Creek to County Road 54; thence Northeast on County Road 54 to County Road 48; thence North on County Road 48 to County Road 3; thence West on County Road 48 to County Road 50; thence North on County Road 50 to County Road 58; thence West on County Road 58 to Georgia Highway 56; thence South on Georgia Highway 56 to County Road 67; thence South on County Road 67 to County Road 59; thence West on County Road 59 to County Road 93; thence South on County Road 93 to County Road 98; thence Southwest on County Road 98 to Georgia Highway 4; thence South on Georgia Highway 4 to northern City limits of Swainsboro; thence following City limits South to Gumlog Road; thence East on Gumlog Road to West Street; thence South on West Street to Robin Road; thence South on Race Track Street to Project Street; thence Northeast on Project Street to Lewis Street; thence South on Lewis Street to Lee Street; thence Northeast on Lee Street to Green Street; thence South on Green Street to Church Street; thence East on Church Street to North Main Street (Ga. Hwy. 4); thence North on Georgia Highway 4 to Modoc Road; thence Northeast on Modoc Road to Central of Georgia Railway; thence south following said Railway to Rentz Street; thence South on Rentz Street to Gumlog Street; thence West on Gumlog Street to North Coleman Street; thence South on Coleman Street to Mill Street; thence East on Mill Street to Central of Georgia Railway; thence South following said Railway to Lamb's Bridge Road; thence East on Lamb's Bridge Road to Industrial Way, which is the point of beginning. 
(2)	District 2 shall have the following boundaries: 
BEGINNING at the intersection of Lamb's Bridge Road and Industrial Way; thence West on Lamb's Bridge road to Central of Georgia Railway; thence North on said Railway to Mill Street; thence East on Mill Street to Coleman Street; thence North on Coleman Street to Gumlog Street; thence East on Gumlog Street to Rentz Street; thence North on Rentz Street to Central of Georgia Railway; thence North on said Railway to Modoc Road; thence West on Modoc Road to Georgia Highway 4; thence South on Georgia Highway 4 to Church Street; thence West on Church Street to Bell Street; thence South on Bell Street to West Pine Street; thence West on Pine Street to Roberts Street; thence South on Roberts Street to Moring Street; thence West on Moring Street (Ga. Hwy. 56) to City limits of Swainsboro; thence Southeast following City limits to Old Nunez Road; thence Southeast following City limits to Meadowlake Parkway; thence East on Meadowlake Parkway to Central of Georgia Railway; thence South on said Railway to Empire Expressway; thence Southwest on Empire Expressway to County Road 461; thence South on County Road 461 to Georgia Highway 297; thence North on Georgia Highway 297 to Georgia Highway 4; thence South on Georgia Highway 4 to County Road 198; thence East on County Road 198 to County Road 275; thence South on County Road 275 to County Road 278; thence North on County Road 278 to Big Canoochee Creek; thence Northeast following Big Canoochee Creek to County Road 454; thence East on County Road 454 to County Road 360; thence East-Northeast on County Road 360 to County Road 361; thence North on County Road 361 to Georgia Highway 26; thence West on Georgia Highway 26 to Big Canoochee Creek; thence North following Big Canoochee Creek to Flat Creek; thence North following Flat Creek to County Road 444; thence West on County Road 444 (Canoochee Road) to City limits of Swainsboro; thence North following City limits to Georgia Highway 56; thence South on Georgia Highway 56 to Georgia Highway 26; thence East on Georgia Highway 26 to Industrial Way; thence South on Industrial Way to Lamb's Bridge Road, which is the point of beginning. 
(3)	District 3 shall have the following boundaries: 
BEGINNING at the intersection of Church Street and Green Street inside the City limits of Swainsboro; thence North on Green Street to Lee Street; thence West on Lee Street to Lewis Street; thence North on Lewis Street to Project Street; thence West on Project Street to Race Track Street; thence Northwest on Race Track Street to Gumlog Road, using a portion of Sherouse Street and West Street; thence Northwest on Gumlog Road to the City limits; thence North following the City limits to Georgia Highway 4; thence North on Georgia Highway 4 to County Road 98; thence East on County Road 98 to County Road 102; thence West on County Road 102 to County Road 111; thence Southwest following County Road 111 to County Road 110; thence South on County Road 110 to Georgia Highway 57; thence Southeast on Georgia Highway 57 to Rocky Creek; thence Southwest following Rocky Creek to Little Ohoopee River; thence North-Northwest following the Little Ohoopee River to County Road 136; thence West on County Road 136 to County Road 138; thence South on County Road 138 to County Road 139; thence West on County Road 139 to County Road 136; thence West on County Road 136 to the County line; thence following the County line Southwest-South-Southeast to the intersection of Georgia Highway 297 and the Ohoopee River; thence following the Ohoopee River to Georgia Highway 4; thence North on Georgia Highway 4 to Georgia Highway 297; thence South on Georgia Highway 297 to County Road 461; thence North on County Road 461 to Empire Expressway; thence Northeast on Empire Expressway to Central of Georgia Railway; thence North following said Railway to Meadowlake Parkway; thence West on Meadowlake Parkway to Old Nunez Road; thence South on Old Nunez Road to the City limits; thence Northwest following the City limits to Georgia Highway 56; thence Northeast on Georgia Highway 56 (Moring Street) to Roberts Street; thence Northwest on Roberts Street to Pine Street; thence Northeast on Pine Street to Bell Street; thence Northwest on Bell Street to Church Street; thence Northeast on Church Street to Green Street, which is the point of beginning. 
(4)	District 4 shall have the following boundaries: 
BEGINNING at the point where County Road 304 meets the Bulloch County line; thence Northwest along the Bulloch County line to the Jenkins County line; thence Northwest along the Jenkins County line to the Burke County line; thence West following the Burke County line (Ogeechee River) to the Jefferson County line; thence Southwest along the Jefferson County line to the Johnson County line; thence South along the Johnson County line to the northern boundary of District 3; thence following the northern boundary of District 3 to where it meets the northern boundary of District 1; thence along the northern boundary of District 1 to where it meets the northern boundary of District 5; thence along the northern boundary of District 5 to the Bulloch County line, which is the point of beginning. 
(5)	District 5 shall have the following boundaries: 
BEGINNING at the intersection of Georgia Highway 297 South and the Ohoopee River; thence South on Georgia Highway 297 to Pendleton Creek (County line); thence Southeast on County line (Pendleton Creek partway) to Georgia Highway 4; thence East-Northeast from Georgia Highway 4, following County line to the Ohoopee River; thence North-Northeast, following the County line to County Road 304; thence Northwest on County Road 304 to Georgia Highway 121; thence South on Georgia Highway 121 to County Road 303; thence West on County Road 303 to a creek; thence North following said creek to County Road 310; thence West on County Road 310 to County Road 459; thence West on County Road 459 to Nathan Creek; thence North following Nathan Creek to County Road 330; thence South on County Road 330 to County Road 332; thence West on County Road 332 to County Road 331; thence Northwest on County Road 331 to Georgia Highway 192; thence South on Georgia Highway 192 to County Road 344; thence Northwest on County Road 344 to County Road 336; South on County Road 336 to County Road 347; thence South on County Road 347 to County Road 345; thence West on County Road 345 to Little Canoochee Creek; thence South on Little Canoochee Creek to County Road 361; thence South on County Road 361 to County Road 362; thence Westerly and Southerly on County Road 362 to County Road 278; thence South on County Road 278 to County Road 360; thence West on County Road 360 to County Road 454; thence West on County Road 454 to Big Canoochee Creek; thence South on Big Canoochee Creek to County Road 278; thence South on County Road 278 to County Road 275; thence West on County Road 275 to County Road 198; thence West on County Road 198 to Georgia Highway 4; thence South on Georgia Highway 4 to the Ohoopee River; thence West following the Ohoopee River to Georgia Highway 297, which is the point of beginning. 
(e)	(1)	At the general election in 1984, commissioners shall be elected from District 1 and District 3 for terms of four years and until successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be likewise elected quadrennially and until successors are elected and qualified. 
(2)	At the general election in 1986, commissioners shall be elected from District 2, District 4, and District 5 for terms of four years and until successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be likewise elected quadrennially and until successors are elected and qualified. 
(3)	Terms of commissioners shall begin on January 1 following their election.
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 2360, § 1; 1962 Ga. Laws, page 2359, § 1; 1969 Ga. Laws, page 3124, § 1; 1984 Ga. Laws, page 3822, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Organization. 
Be it further enacted, That on the first Monday of January, 1920, on which date or as soon thereafter as practicable, said board shall organize, with full power to act as Board of Commissioners of said county, exercising jurisdiction over all county matters set forth by general enactment, as well as all matters specially mentioned in this Act. 
Sec. 3. - Oath. 
Be it further enacted, That each of the persons herein appointed, or any other persons who may hereafter be elected as commissioners, shall before entering upon the performance of their duties, take and subscribe before the judge of the Superior Court of said county, or the Ordinary of said county, an oath to faithfully perform the duties of a Commissioner of Roads and Revenues under this Act and the laws of this State. 
Sec. 4. - [Meetings.] 
The board shall hold its regular meeting on the second Tuesday in each month at 10:00 A.M. at the courthouse or other convenient place in the City of Swainsboro. The board may change the time or date of its regular meeting by resolution of the board published once in the legal organ of the county. Special or called meetings may be held, provided that each member shall receive at least 24 hours' prior notice. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3822, § 2)
Sec. 5. - [Quorum.] 
Three members of the board shall constitute the minimum number necessary to transact business at any regular or special meeting. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3822, § 3)
Sec. 6. - [Chairman.] 
At the first meeting of each year, the board shall elect from its membership a chairman to serve for the ensuing year. The chairman shall preside at all meetings and sign as chairman all orders and processes of the board. The chairman shall be entitled to make or second motions and to cast a vote on any matter. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3822, § 4)
Sec. 7. - Jurisdiction. 
Be it further enacted, that said Board of Commissioners shall have exclusive jurisdiction when sitting for county purposes, over the following subject matter, to wit: 
(1)	In building, maintaining and controlling all property of the county as they may deem expedient according to the law. 
(2)	In levying a general tax for general purposes, and special taxes for particular or special purposes, according to the provisions of the Code and special enactments of the General Assembly. 
(3)	In establishing, altering, building and abolishing all public roads, bridges, and ferries in the County of Emanuel, in conformity to the law. 
(4)	In establishing and changing election precincts and lines of militia districts.
(5)	In examining, settling and allowing all claims against the County of Emanuel.
(6)	In examining and auditing the accounts of all county officers who receive or pay out moneys of the county of [or] state, and concurrent jurisdiction in examining or reviewing, either by themselves or their appointees, all records of all county officers as required to be kept by law. 
(7)	In making such rules and regulations for the support and maintenance of the poor of the County of Emanuel, and for the promotion of health, as are permitted by law and to them may seem right and proper. 
(8)	And to regulate peddling and fix the cost of license therefor, not in conflict with law. 
Sec. 8. - [Additional powers and jurisdiction.] 
Be it further enacted that said commissioners shall furthermore have power to exercise exclusive and original jurisdiction and control in Emanuel County over all county matters that are now vested by law in the ordinaries of the various counties of the State, so far as relating to public roads, bridges, public buildings, property, misdemeanor convicts, management of the county jail and its fees, the control and maintenance of its paupers, assessing and collecting taxes, disbursing public money for county purposes and the execution of all laws in reference thereto. 
Sec. 9. - Orders on treasurer. 
Be it further enacted, that the treasurer of said county shall not disburse or pay out any of the funds from the county treasurer or any order, unless the same shall have been signed by the chairman of said board and the clerk; provided this shall not apply to jury script, and such orders drawn by the judge of the Superior Court, in which he has exclusive jurisdiction. 
Sec. 10. - Commissioners' clerk, superintendent of roads and bridges, and attorney; records open for inspection. 
Be it further enacted, that the Board of Commissioners may elect their own clerk, superintendent of roads and bridges, and attorney with such compensation as the board may allow, and it shall be the duty of said clerk to attend all meetings of the commissioners, and keep in a well-bound book, to be provided at the expense of the county, full and accurate records and minutes of all their transactions, to file in order of their dates, all original orders, vouchers and other papers, and to arrange and keep in order of their filing all petitions and applications and other papers addressed to said commissioners, and to record all orders given or approved by said commissioners for the payment of money by the county treasurer, and all books, files and records by this Act required to be used or kept, shall always be open at the county site for the inspection of any taxpayer of the county on demand. 
(1937 Ga. Laws, page 1324, § 1; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 741, § 1)
Sec. 11. - Election term, and duties of superintendent. 
Be it further enacted that said Board of Commissioners shall at their first regular meeting in January, 1920, or as soon thereafter as practicable, and every two years thereafter, elect a superintendent of roads and bridges to be selected on account of his efficiency, knowledge and skill in practicable road building, preference to be given to a civil engineer when he fully measures up to the other requirements. The superintendent may also be convict warden, but aside from his duties as warden, if elected to that position by said board, he shall not engage in any other business, trade or calling during his term of service. The superintendent shall have charge of laying out, building, repairing, improving and maintaining the public roads and bridges of Emanuel County under orders of Board of Commissioners. Said superintendent shall make request upon the clerk of said commissioners for all supplies needed in his department, said request to be in writing and filed with the clerk of said board on or before the regular meeting of the board in any month, and for all supplies and material received by the superintendent from the clerk, he shall give his receipt therefor. 
Sec. 12. - Oath and bond of clerk. 
Be it further enacted, that said Board of Commissioners shall require said clerk, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, to take the same oath taken by them, and enter into bond with good security, payable to said commissioners and their successors in office, conditioned to well and truly do and perform the duties of said office, such bond to be in the sum of two thousand dollars, and to be approved by said board. 
Sec. 13. - Sheriff to attend meetings, etc.; bailiff. 
Be it further enacted, that it shall be the duty of the sheriff of said county to attend all meetings of said board, and to serve all processes, orders, writs of notices issued by said board, for which service said sheriff shall receive such compensation as may be agreed upon by him and such board; provided, however, that if such board and the sheriff cannot agree as to the compensation he is to receive in said court, then said board shall have the right to appoint a special bailiff to serve them, paying him such compensation as they may deem just and right. 
Sec. 14. - [Compensation.] 
Each member of the board shall be compensated in the amount of $200.00 per month, except that the chairman shall be compensated in the amount of $500.00 per month and except that each member of the board elected to a new term of office after January 1, 1990, shall thereafter be compensated in the amount of $400.00 per month and each member elected as chairman of the board on or after January 1, 1991, shall thereafter be compensated in the amount of $700.00 per month during such person's term as chairman. Each member shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred while on official business of the board. All amounts shall be payable from funds of the county and be paid by the treasurer of the county on an order of the board signed by the chairman and the clerk. The commissioners shall be exempt from road, jury, and military duty and shall be subject to prosecution for malpractice in office in the same manner as magistrates. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, page 675, § 1; 1971 Ga. Laws, page 2514, § 1; 1975 Ga. Laws, page 3843, § 1; 1984 Ga. Laws, page 3822, § 5; 1990 Ga. Laws, page 4324, § 1) 
Sec. 15. - [Election.] 
Be it further enacted that the members of the Board of Commissioners of roads and revenues shall be elected by the voters of Emanuel County at the general election each four years. 
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 2360, § 2; 1962 Ga. Laws, page 2359, § 2; 1969 Ga. Laws, page 3124, § 2; 1984 Ga. Laws, page 3822, § 6) 
Sec. 16. - [Vacancies.] 
(a)	If a vacancy on the Board of Commissioners of Emanuel County occurs at any time except during the last six months of the term of office, the election superintendent of Emanuel County shall call and conduct a special election at the next date at which a special election may be called and conducted following that vacancy as provided by general law. The person elected to fill such vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term and until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(b)	When a vacancy on such board occurs during the last six months of a term of office or when a vacancy exists on such board during the interim period between the creation of the vacancy and the election and qualification of a successor to fill the vacancy, the remaining members of the Board of Commissioners of Emanuel County shall constitute the governing authority of the county until a successor is elected and qualified at the next general election or special election, respectively, and until such successor is qualified. 
(1962 Ga. Laws, page 2359, § 3; 1997 Ga. Laws, page 3637, § 1)
Sec. 17. - Commission. 
Be it further enacted, that said commissioners shall be commissioned in the same manner as the justice of the peace. 
Sec. 18. - Accounts. 
Be it further enacted that all the acts and doings of said board shall at all times be open for the inspection of the public, and they shall cause each county officer who handles the funds of the county, to make an itemized showing to the grand jury twice each year, showing the money received and from what source, and all money paid out and for what purpose. 
Sec. 19. - Quarterly reports. 
Be it further enacted, that it shall be the duty of said Board of Commissioners to publish once every three months in the official organ of Emanuel County, a full, complete, itemized statement of their acts and doings, showing all money taken in by them, its source and disbursements, to whom paid and for what purpose; the cost of publishing such statement shall be paid out of the county treasury. 
Sec. 20. - Chairman pro tem. 
Be it further enacted, that whenever the chairman of said board may be absent one of the other members of said board shall act as chairman pro tem, and have all powers and rights of the regular chairman of said board. 
Sec. 21. - Road districts. 
Be it further enacted, that all road districts as laid out in the Act approved August 16, 1912, is hereby abolished. 
Sec. 22. - Effective Jan. 1, 1920. 
Be it further enacted, that none of the provisions of this Act shall go into force and effect until the first day of January, 1920. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF EDUCATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein is 1982 Ga. Laws, page 4049, which provides for the election of the Emanuel County Board of Education. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

Sec. 1. - [Composition.] 
(a)	The Board of Education of Emanuel County shall be composed of seven members to be elected as provided in this Act. For the purpose of electing members to the board, Emanuel County shall be divided into seven election districts as follows: 
Election District No. 1 shall be composed of all that territory within Emanuel County embraced within the 1429th Election Precinct and the 1560th Election Precinct. 
Election District No. 2 shall be composed of all that territory within Emanuel County embraced within the 50th Election Precinct, the 58th Election Precinct, the 1502nd Election Precinct, and the 395th Election Precinct. 
Election District No. 3 shall be composed of all that territory within Emanuel County embraced within the 1748th Election Precinct, the 1452nd Election Precinct, the 1208th Election Precinct, the 57th Election Precinct, and the Cross-Green Election Precinct. 
Election District No. 4 shall be composed of all that territory within Emanuel County embraced within the 49th Election Precinct, the 1333rd Election Precinct, Swainsboro City Election Ward No. 1, and an area within the 53rd Election Precinct bounded on the North by the Swainsboro-Canoochee Road; East by the 1333rd Election Precinct and 1560th Election Precinct; South by the 58th Election Precinct; and West by County Road 269 and the City Limits for the City of Swainsboro, and the 1502nd Election Precinct. 
Election District No. 5 shall be composed of all that territory within Emanuel County embraced within Swainsboro City Election Ward No. 5 and Swainsboro City Election Ward No. 6. 
Election District No. 6 shall be composed of all that territory within Emanuel County embraced within Swainsboro City Election Ward No. 2 and an area within the 53rd Election Precinct bounded on the North by the 1208th Election Precinct and the 57th Election Precinct; East by the Swainsboro-Canoochee Road and the 1333rd Election Precinct, South by the City Limits of the City of Swainsboro and U.S. Highway 80 from Swainsboro to Adrian; and West by the 1748th Election Precinct and 1452nd Election Precinct. 
Election District No. 7 shall be composed of all that territory within Emanuel County embraced within Swainsboro City Election Ward No. 3 and Swainsboro City Election Ward No. 4 and an area within the 53rd Election Precinct bounded on the North by U.S. Highway 80 from Swainsboro to Adrian; East by the City Limits of the City of Swainsboro and County Road 269; South by the 1502nd Election Precinct; and West by the 395th Election Precinct. 
(b)	As used in this section, the term "election precinct" means an election precinct of Emanuel County as such precinct existed on January 1, 1984. 
Sec. 2. - [Election of district board members.] 
There shall be one member of the board elected from each election district. A person may not offer as a candidate for election to the board from any election district other than from the election district in which he or she is a legal resident. The board member representing each election district shall be elected by the voters residing in that respective election district. Board members shall be elected by a majority vote of the registered voters casting ballots in an election. 
Sec. 3. - [Election requirements.] 
No person shall be eligible to offer for election to the board or serve thereon unless that person is at least 21 years of age, has been a resident of the state at least one year, and has been a resident of the territory embraced within the election district from which that person offers as a candidate for at least six months immediately preceding the date of the election. In the event a member moves his or her residence from the election district he or she represents, his or her place on the board shall immediately become vacant. 
Sec. 4. - [Terms of members.] 
The term of offices of the members presently serving on the board shall expire at the end of December 31, 1982. At the general election in 1982, members of the board from Election District No. 1, Election District No. 3, and Election District No. 7 shall be elected to take office January 1, 1983, for a term of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified. At the general election of 1982, members of the board from Election District No. 2, Election District No. 4, Election District No. 5, and Election District No. 6 shall be elected to take office January 1, 1983, for a term of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Successors shall be elected to a four-year term in the general election in the year in which they terms of office expire and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election. 
Sec. 5. - [Election of chairman; quorum; compensation.] 
At the first meeting of the board in January, and at the January meeting biennially thereafter, the board shall elect one of their members as chairman to serve for a term of two years and such other officers as the board shall determine. Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. All members of the board shall be compensated in the amount of $100.00 for each meeting actually attended, plus actual and necessary expenses incurred in carrying out their official duties, except that the compensation of the chairman shall be $125.00 for each meeting actually attended plus actual and necessary expenses incurred in carrying out the chairman's official duties. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 3836, § 1)
Sec. 6. - [Vacancies.] 
(a)	In the event any vacancy occurs on the Board of Education of Emanuel County, such vacancy shall be filled as follows: 
(1)	If the vacancy occurs more than one year prior to the expiration of the term, such vacancy shall be filled at a special election to be held not less than 90 nor more than 120 days after said vacancy occurs; or 
(2)	If the vacancy occurs less than one year prior to the expiration of the term, the remaining members of the board shall, by majority vote, select a qualified person to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term and until a successor elected and qualified at the next general election takes office. 
(b)	The Board of Education of Emanuel County created by this Act shall be the successor to all the rights, powers, duties, and obligations of the old Board of Education of Emanuel County and shall be subject to all constitutional and statutory provisions relating to county boards of education not in conflict with this Act. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 5376, § 1)
Sec. 7. - [Appointment by Grand Jury.] 
In the event the voters of Emanuel County fail to approve the election of board members as set forth in this Act, the Board of Education for Emanuel County shall be appointed by the Grand Jury of Emanuel County, according to the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein is 1987 Ga. Laws, page 4470, which creates the Emanuel County Board of Elections. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

Sec. 1. - [Definitions; creation.] 
(a)	For purposes of this Act, the term:
(1)	"Board" means the board of elections created by subsection (b) of this section.
(2)	"County" means Emanuel County.
(3)	"Superior court" means the Superior Court of Emanuel County.
(b)	Pursuant to the authority of Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A., there is created a board of elections for Emanuel County which shall have jurisdiction over the conduct of primaries and elections in such county. 
Sec. 2. - [Composition.] 
The board of elections shall be composed of four members, each of whom shall be an elector and resident of the county and who shall be appointed as provided in this section. One member of the board of elections shall be appointed by the political party which received the highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for Governor in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of the member, and one member of the board of elections shall be appointed by the political party which received the second highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for Governor in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of the member. Each of the two appointments by political parties shall be made as follows: the member shall be nominated by the chairman and ratified by the county executive committee of each of the above-designated political parties at least 30 days before the beginning of the term of office or within 30 days after the creation of a vacancy in the office. The remaining two members of the board shall be selected by the county governing authority. In making the initial appointments to the board, the members shall be selected within 30 days following the effective date of this Act, except that the fourth member added to the board by the 1988 amendment to this section shall be appointed no later than July 1, 1988. Initial members of the board shall serve until December 31, 1988, and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be appointed for terms of four years and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. The governing Authority of the county shall designate one of the two members selected by it to be the chairman of the board. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 3846, § 1)
Sec. 3. - [Elective public office.] 
No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member during the term of such elective office, and the position of any member shall be deemed vacant upon such member qualifying as a candidate for elective public office. 
Sec. 4. - [Certification of members.] 
Certification of the appointment of each member shall be made by the governing authority of the county filing an affidavit with the clerk of the superior court no later than 15 days preceding the date at which such member is to take office, stating the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifying that such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. The clerk of the superior court shall record each of such certifications on the minutes of the court and shall certify the name of each such appointed member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members within the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for registrars. 
Sec. 5. - [Succession, resignation, removal of members.] 
Each member of the board shall be eligible to succeed himself, shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of his resignation to the appointing body and to the clerk of the superior court, and shall be subject to removal from the board by the appointing body at any time, for cause after notice and hearing, in the same manner and by the same authority as provided for removal of registrars. 
Sec. 6. - [Vacancies.] 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any appointed member before the expiration of his term, by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the original appointing body shall appoint a successor to serve the remainder of the unexpired term as provided for in Section 2 of this Act. The clerk of the superior court shall be notified of interim appointments and record and certify such appointments in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. 
Sec. 7. - [Oath.] 
Before entering upon his duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
Sec. 8. - [Duties.] 
The board of elections shall: 
(1)	With regard to the preparation for, conduct, and administration of elections, succeed to and exercise all duties and powers granted to and incumbent upon the judge of the probate court pursuant to Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. or any other provision of law; 
(2)	With regard to preparation for and conduct of primaries, succeed to all the duties and powers granted to and incumbent upon the judge of the probate court by Title 21 of the O.C.G.A.; and 
(3)	Formulate, adopt, and promulgate rules and regulations, consistent with law and the rules and regulations of the state executive committee of each political party, governing the conduct of primaries to the end that, insofar as practicable, all primaries shall be uniformly conducted by the board of elections, poll workers shall be properly trained, and voters shall be adequately informed and instructed. Any rule or regulation promulgated by a county executive committee under the provisions of Code Section 21-2-111 of the O.C.G.A. shall be null and void if in conflict with a valid rule or regulation of the board of elections. 
Sec. 9. - [Poll workers.] 
The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in primaries and elections and such workers shall be appointed, insofar as practicable, from lists provided to the board by the county executive committee of each political party. 
Sec. 10. - [Succession to chairman.] 
Thirty days after the effective date of this Act, the judge of the probate court shall be relieved from all powers and duties to which the board of elections succeeds by the provisions of this Act and shall deliver thereafter to the chairman of the board, upon the chairman's written request, the custody of all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities of every kind pertaining to such powers and duties. 
Sec. 11. - [Duties of chairman.] 
The chairman of the board of elections shall be the chief executive officer of the board of elections and shall generally supervise, direct, and control the administration of the affairs of the board of elections pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board of elections. The board of elections shall fix and establish by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. 
Sec. 12. - [Compensation.] 
Compensation for the members of the board of elections, clerical assistants, and other employees shall be such as may be fixed by the governing authority of the county. Said compensation shall be paid wholly from county funds. 
Sec. 13. - [Equipment; personnel.] 
The governing authority of the county shall provide the board with such proper and suitable offices, equipment, materials, and supplies and with such clerical assistants and other employees as the governing authority shall deem appropriate. 
Sec. 14. - [Definitions.] 
The words "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," "public office," "special election," and "special primary" shall have the same meaning ascribed to those words by Code Section 21-2-2 of the O.C.G.A., unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note—Printed in division 1 of this article is 1962 Ga. Laws, page 758, which provides for a constitutional amendment creating the Emanuel County Development Authority. This amendment was continued in force and effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4741. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 1. - [Amendments.] 
Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution, relating to the taxing power and restriction of contributions of counties, cities and political divisions, is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Emanuel County Development Authority" which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, its scope and jurisdiction to be limited to the territory embraced by Emanuel County. The County of Emanuel may contract with the Authority as a public corporation as provided by the Constitution of Georgia. 
Emanuel County is authorized to levy a tax on all the taxable property therein not to exceed one mill for the purpose of securing a fund to be set aside and used by said Authority for the general purposes hereinafter prescribed. 
The members of the Authority, their qualifications; terms, and methods of election or appointment shall be prescribed by law by the General Assembly. The Authority shall have such duties, powers, and authority as shall be prescribed by law and the General Assembly may pass all other necessary legislation for the implementation of this amendment. 
All lands and improvements thereon, the title to which is vested in the Authority, and all debentures and revenue bonds issued by the Authority, shall be exempt from State and local taxation. 
Said Authority is created for the purpose of developing, promoting, and expanding, for the public good and general welfare, industry, agriculture, commerce, natural resources, and vocational training and for the making of long-range plans for coordination of such development, promotion and expansion within its territorial limits. The Authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt against the State of Georgia or the County of Emanuel. The Authority is created for non-profit purposes and all property acquired by the Authority and any funds realized by the Authority shall be used continually and exclusively for the purposes for which the Authority is created. 
DIVISION 2. - ESTABLISHED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein is 1965 Ga. Laws, page 2770, which establishes the Emanuel County Development Authority pursuant to 1962 Ga. Laws, page 758. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known as and may be cited as the "Emanuel County Development Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following words and terms shall have the following meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)	The word "Authority" shall mean the "Emanuel County Development Authority," created herein. 
(2)	The words "Governing Authority of Emanuel County" shall mean the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Emanuel County, their successors or such other Authority that may be hereafter provided for the administering of the affairs of Emanuel County. 
(3)	The words "undertaking," "project," "undertaking or project" or "undertaking and project" shall be deemed to mean and include property, real and/or personal, acquired or held by the Authority for the assistance, promotion, establishment or development of a new industry or industries, or the assistance, promotion or expansion of existing industry, trade or commerce in Emanuel County, or any combination thereof; the acquisition of any such property for any such purpose or purposes; the improvement of any such property or properties; and/or the construction, installation and/or expansion of one or more buildings, plants, and/or articles of equipment for the purpose of using, selling, donating, leasing and/or renting such land, properties, improvements, structures or equipment to public or private persons, firms, corporations, and/or associations for such purposes. 
(4)	The term "cost of project" shall embrace: the cost of lands, buildings, improvements, machinery, equipment, properties, easements, rights, franchises, materials, labor and services acquired and/or contracted for; the cost of financing charges and/or of interest prior to and during construction; architectural, accounting, engineering, inspection, fiscal and/or legal expenses; cost of plans and/or specifications; and/or any other expenses necessary or incident to construction and/or improvements, and/or to determine the feasibility and/or practicability of the project, administrative expenses and/or the acquisition, construction, equipping and/or operating any project or any part thereof. 
Sec. 3. - Created. 
Pursuant to an amendment to Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution found in Ga. Laws 1962, page 758, there is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Emanuel County Development Authority" which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, its scope and jurisdiction to be limited to the territory embraced by the County of Emanuel. 
Sec. 4. - [Appointment of members; terms; reappointment; oath; quorum.] 
(a)	The Authority shall consist of five members appointed by the governing authority of Emanuel County. Those members of the Authority as such serving in those offices on January 1, 1993, and any person appointed to fill a vacancy in any such office, shall serve for terms which expire upon the date in 1993 upon which this section becomes effective and upon the appointment and qualification of their respective successors. Those successors shall be appointed for terms which begin upon the date in 1993 upon which this section becomes effective. Two of those successors shall be appointed for initial terms of office which expire June 30, 1994, two of those successors shall be appointed for initial terms of office which expire June 30, 1996, and one of those successors shall be appointed for an initial term of office which expires June 30, 1998. After the expiration of these initial terms, the terms of office of all members shall be staggered terms of six years. If at the end of any term of any member a successor to such member has not been appointed, the member whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until that person's successor is appointed. 
(b)	All members who have served on said Authority shall be eligible for reappointment to succeed themselves if they are reappointed by said governing Authority designated by this Act to appoint them. Members of the Authority shall be citizens of the United States who have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years, and who shall have been citizens of this State for two (2) years, and for one year a resident of Emanuel County immediately preceding his appointment as a member of the authority. Should any member resign, be unable to serve or move beyond the territorial limits of Emanuel County as it is now situated or may be hereafter situated, or should there be a vacancy for any reason, the successor shall be appointed to serve the remaining term of such member by the Governing Authority of Emanuel County. Prior to taking office the members shall subscribe to the following oath, to wit: "I do solemnly swear that I will fully and fairly perform the duties as a member of the Emanuel County Development Authority, So Help Me God." The members of said Authority shall be entitled to no compensation. Any three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of ordinary business of the Authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the authority must be approved by not less than three affirmative votes. No vacancy shall impair the power of Authority to act. 
(1993 Ga. Laws, page 4324, § 1)
Sec. 5. - Intent. 
The Authority is created by this Act for the purposes of developing, promoting and expanding for the public good and general welfare, industry, agriculture, commerce, natural resources, and vocational training and for the making of long-range plans for the coordination of such development, promotion and expansion within its territorial limits. 
Sec. 6. - Bonds. 
In addition to the purposes for which revenue anticipation obligations may be issued by counties, municipal corporations and political subdivisions as provided in said Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph V of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, Emanuel County Development Authority, herein created, be and is hereby authorized to issue revenue obligations to provide funds to be used by said Authority in developing, promoting and expanding for the public good and general welfare, industry, agriculture, commerce, natural resources, and vocational training and for the making of long-range plans for the coordination of such development, promotion and expansion within the territorial limits of Emanuel County, as herein provided. Said purposes are hereby found, determined and declared to be for the benefit of the citizens and residents of said County and to be an essential governmental function in providing vocational education, relieving unemployment, improving the economy, limiting poor relief assistance, developing natural resources and otherwise promoting the general welfare. 
Sec. 7. - Purpose. 
The Authority shall not be operated for profit, is an institution of purely public charity, and is an industrial development agency qualified to receive loans and other assistance from the Industrial Development Commission of the State of Georgia, or other governmental agencies. 
Sec. 8. - Powers. 
In carrying out the foregoing objectives, the Authority shall be deemed to be engaging in such functions of government, activities and transactions as the County of Emanuel is by law authorized to undertake. 
Sec. 9. - Contracts. 
Emanuel County, by and through its Governing Authority, shall be and is hereby authorized and empowered to contract with the Authority as a public corporation as provided by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 10. - Taxes. 
Emanuel County, by and through its Governing Authority, is authorized and empowered to levy a tax on all taxable property therein not to exceed one (1) mill for the purpose of securing a fund to be set aside, transferred to and used by said Authority for the general purpose of the Authority as herein prescribed. 
Sec. 11. - Powers. 
The powers of the Authority herein created shall include, but are not limited to, the power, for its corporate purposes. 
(1)	To have a corporate seal and alter the same at pleasure.
(2)	To contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead or be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, to contract with the State of Georgia and any instrumentality thereof, any county or municipality thereof, and any other political subdivisions, and with private persons, firms, corporations, and associations. 
(3)	To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trust.
(4)	To buy, acquire, receive as gifts, own, improve, expand, develop, operate, maintain, sell, donate, lease as lessor or lessee, mortgage, pledge, convey to secure debt, and/or otherwise encumber and/or dispose of land, buildings, equipment, furnishings, and/or property of all kinds, real and/or personal, within Emanuel County, Georgia, and to make a contract or contracts and/or to execute any instrument or document for the accomplishment thereof, or other purposes. 
(5)	To make contracts, and to execute any and all instruments necessary or convenient to, or in aid of, the accomplishment of any of the purposes of said Authority, and/or the exercise of any power or powers of said Authority. 
(6)	To enter into any contract or contracts for any period of time not exceeding thirty (30) years. 
(7)	To appoint and select officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
(8)	To construct, erect, buy, receive as a gift, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, equip, furnish, extend, expand, develop, improve, donate, sell, lease as lessor or lessee, equip, add to, operate and manage projects and to pay the costs of any such project from any income of the Authority, from the proceeds of revenue bonds issued and sold by the Authority or others, from any taxes levied for the purpose by the State of Georgia, Emanuel County, or any of the municipalities therein, or from any contributions or loans by political subdivisions or instrumentalities, persons, firms, or corporations, all of which the Authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(9)	To elect its own officers from the membership of the Authority; to elect and employ an executive director who is not required to be a member of the Authority; and to authorize and empower such officers to act for the Authority generally or in any specific matter. 
(10)	To borrow money and to execute debentures, bonds, notes, mortgages, deeds or bills of sale to secure debt, trust deeds and/or other such instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing. 
(11)	To issue and sell revenue bonds for the purpose of raising funds for the payment, in whole or in part, of the cost of any project of the Authority; to secure the payment of the obligations of such bonds by, but not limited to, selling, conveying, mortgaging, pledging and/or assigning any or all of its funds, income and/or property; and to exercise all the rights, powers and privileges, and to be subject to all the duties and liabilities, which a municipality may exercise and/or be subject to under the provisions of the "Revenue Bond Law" [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], as the same is now, or may hereafter be amended. The rights, powers and privileges of the Authority are not limited to those of such a municipality, however. 
(12)	To receive and use public funds made available to it, the rents, profits and proceeds from the projects erected, leased or sold, and other funds and income of the Authority, to provide for the operation and maintenance of such projects or other projects, to discharge the principal, interest and expenses of bonds, revenue bonds, and notes issued by the Authority, to pay other debts of the Authority, and to further and promote the objectives of the Authority. 
(13)	To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public corporations or authorities performing similar functions. 
(14)	To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested. 
(15)	To adopt, alter, amend and/or repeal its own bylaws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the powers granted to it may be enjoyed, as the Authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(16)	To do all things necessary and convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this Act upon the Authority. 
Sec. 12. - [Revenue bonds.] 
The acquisition, construction, improvement, betterment, expansion, or extension of any undertaking or project of the Authority, and the issuance in anticipation of the collection of revenues of such undertaking or project, of bonds to provide funds to pay the whole or a part of the cost thereof may be authorized by resolution or resolutions of the Authority which may be adopted at a regular or special meeting by a majority of the members of the Authority. Unless otherwise provided therein, such resolution or resolutions shall take effect immediately and need not be laid over or published or posted. The Authority in determining the cost of any undertaking or project for which revenue bonds are to be issued may include all costs as hereinbefore defined. Such bonds shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, not exceeding 30 years from their respective dates, bear interest at such rate or rates as established by the Authority, and may be in such denominations and may carry such registration privileges and be subject to redemption and may contain such terms, covenants, assignments, and conditions as the resolution or resolutions authorizing the issuance of such bonds may provide. Except as herein provided to the contrary, such bonds shall be issued and validated in the Superior Court of Emanuel County, Georgia, in the same manner as revenue bonds of municipalities are issued and validated under the Revenue Bond Law [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.] as the same is now or may hereafter be amended. In the proceedings to validate such bonds, the County of Emanuel and the Emanuel County Development Authority shall be named as party defendant. In the event no bill of exceptions is filed within the time prescribed by law, or if filed, the judgment validating the bonds shall be affirmed by the Supreme Court of Georgia, such judgment shall be forever conclusive as to the validity of such bonds and the security therefor against said Authority. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 4861, § 1)
Sec. 13. - [Tax exemption.] 
All property, real and personal, the title of which is vested in the Authority, and all debentures, notes, bonds and revenue bonds and certificates issued by the Authority, and interest thereon and income therefrom, shall be exempt from state, county, city and other local taxation for any purpose. All such property shall be exempt from any and all federal taxation, if and when so provided by the Constitution laws, rules, regulations and mandates of the United States or any of its various bureaus, agencies or other entity by whatever name called. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, page 3510, § 1)
Sec. 14. - [Employee bonding.] 
It shall be the duty of the Authority to have all persons handling funds of the Authority fully and adequately bonded for their faithful accounting for such bonds. 
Sec. 15. - [Exemption from debt.] 
The Authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligations, against the State of Georgia, Emanuel County, or any municipality therein. No debt, liability or obligation of the Authority shall be considered a pledge or loan of the credit of the State of Georgia, or any county, city or other subdivision thereof. 
Sec. 16. - Property. 
If the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall be in the County of Emanuel and/or any incorporated city or town in said county, the Governing Authorities of the County of Emanuel and of said municipalities, respectively, are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, without cost, to the Authority. Said county and/or said municipalities may donate to said Authority, real estate, personal property and services for any such property. Any such land, improvements, or personal property so conveyed or donated to the Authority may be mortgaged, conveyed, or pledged to secure obligations of the Authority. 
Sec. 17. - Purpose, etc. 
The Authority is created for non-profit purposes and all property acquired by the Authority and any funds realized by the Authority shall be used continually and exclusively for the purposes for which the Authority is created, unless the Authority for any reason is dissolved. Then in that event, the funds and property of the Authority shall be conveyed as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 18. - Title to property. 
Should said Authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the Authority at the time of such dissolution, shall be conveyed to Emanuel County subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property. No private interest shall exist in the property of the Authority. The Authority shall hold title only for the benefit of the public. 
Sec. 19. - Audits. 
The books and records of the Authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the Authority, by a competent independent auditor; and the minutes and records of the same shall be filed with the clerk of the Board of Commissioners of roads and revenues of said county, and shall be available for public inspection. 
Sec. 20. - Powers. 
The Authority shall exist and have all of said powers, and the right to exercise the same for its corporate purposes, regardless of whether or not it shall issue revenue anticipation obligations hereunder. 
ARTICLE V. - JAIL AUTHORITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein is 1998 Ga. Laws, page 3787, which created the Emanuel County Jail Authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

Sec. 1. - Emanuel County Jail Authority Act. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Emanuel County Jail Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Creation of authority; members. 
(a)	There is created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Emanuel County Jail Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation and instrumentality by that name, style, and title, and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority or the trustee acting under a trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents, and employees of the authority. The authority shall not be a state institution, nor a department or agency of the state, but shall be an instrumentality of the state, a mere creation of the state, having a distinct corporate entity and being exempt from the provisions of [O.C.G.A. § 50-17-20 et seq.], the "Georgia State Financing and Investment Commission Act." The authority shall have its principal office in Emanuel County, and its legal situs or residence for the purposes of this Act shall be Emanuel County. The authority is granted the same exemptions and exclusions from taxes as are now granted to cities and counties for the operation of facilities similar to facilities to be operated by the authority as provided under the provisions of this Act. 
(b)	The authority shall consist of five members who shall be residents of Emanuel County and who shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Emanuel County. The Board of Commissioners of Emanuel County shall initially appoint two members for a term of two years each and three members for a term of four years each. After expiration of the initial terms, the terms of all members shall be four years. If at the end of any term of office or any member a successor to such member has not been elected, the member whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until his or her successor is elected. A majority of the authority shall constitute a quorum. 
(c)	One member of the Board of Commissioners of Emanuel County may be appointed to serve as a member of the authority. 
(d)	Any member of the authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself or herself. Immediately after such appointments, the members of such authority shall enter upon their duties. 
(e)	Any vacancy on the authority shall be filled in the same manner as was the original appointment of the member whose termination of membership resulted in such vacancy, and the person so selected and appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(f)	The authority shall elect one of its members as chairperson and another member as vice chairperson. The clerk of the Board of Commissioners of Emanuel County shall be the secretary and treasurer. Said clerk shall not be a member of the authority. 
(g)	Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the Authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the authority. 
(h)	The members of the authority shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties out of the funds of the authority. 
(i)	The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(j)	Any member of the authority may be removed from office by the Board of Commissioners of Emanuel County for failure to perform his or her duties as a member of the authority. Such failure shall include without limitation the failure to attend a majority of the regularly scheduled meetings of the authority in a calendar year. Any office so vacated shall be filled by appointment by the Board of Commissioners of Emanuel County. The new appointee shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term to which he or she is appointed. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)	"Authority" shall mean the Emanuel County Jail Authority created in Section 2 of this Act. 
(2)	"Cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired, and the cost of all conveyances in fee simple of the authority's title thereto and leases thereof; the cost of all machinery, equipment, and financing charges and interest prior to and during construction; the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal, and legal expenses and of plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expenses and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized by this Act; and the cost of construction of any project and the placing of the same in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(3)	"Project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, and operation of a jail or other public safety facility designed to provide law enforcement, firefighting, emergency medical, or other public safety services for the citizens of Emanuel County, including specifically telephone emergency 911 or other notification and dispatching equipment, vehicles and other real and personal property to be used in connection therewith, and the lease and sale of any part or all of such facilities, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance, and operation of such jail or other public safety facilities deemed by the authority to be necessary, convenient, or desirable. 
(4)	"Revenue bonds," "bonds," and "obligations" shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], the "Revenue Bond Law," and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto and, in addition, shall mean obligations of the authority the issuance of which are specifically provided for in this Act. 
(5)	Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all properties used, leased, and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
Sec. 4. - Powers. 
The authority shall have the power: 
(1)	To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
(2)	To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)	To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or disposal of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority; and, if the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any property on any lands, the title to which shall then be in the State of Georgia, the Governor is authorized to convey, for and in behalf of the state, title to such lands to the authority upon payment to the State of Georgia for the credit of the general fund of the state of the reasonable value of such lands; and, if the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any lands, the title to which shall then be in Emanuel County or in any municipality incorporated in said county, the governing authority or body of said county or of any of the said municipalities is authorized to convey title to such lands to the authority upon payment for the credit of the general funds of said county or municipalities the reasonable value of such lands, such value to be determined by the mutual consent of said county or municipality and the authority or by an appraiser to be agreed upon by the governing authority or body of said county or municipality and the chairperson of the authority; 
(4)	To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys and fix their respective compensations; 
(5)	To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, including contracts for constructing, renting, and leasing of its projects for the use of Emanuel County; or any municipality in Emanuel County, and to dispose by conveyance of its title in fee simple of real and personal property of every kind and character; and any and all persons, firms, and corporations and the state and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and, without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations and counties and to the authority to enter into contracts and lease and sublease agreements with the State of Georgia or any agencies or departments thereof relative to any property which such department or other agency or department of the State of Georgia has now or may hereafter obtain by lease from the United States government or any agency or department thereof, and the authority is specifically authorized to convey title in fee simple to any and all of its lands and any improvements thereon to any persons, firms, corporations, municipalities, political subdivisions, the State of Georgia or the United States government, or any agency or department thereof, subject to the rights and interest of the holders of any of the bonds or obligations authorized to be issued pursuant to this Act and by the resolution or trust indenture of the authority authorizing the issuance of any of its bonds or obligations as provided in this Act; 
(6)	To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects, as defined in this Act, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(7)	To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(8)	To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may impose; 
(9)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same and to issue revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(10)	To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions which is not a conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; 
(11)	The authority and the trustee acting under a trust indenture are specifically authorized from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange, or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real and personal, or interest therein not required in the normal operation of, and usable in the furtherance of, the purpose for which the authority was created; 
(12)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes from any bank, banks, or other lending institutions and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same by assigning all rights to and pledging all funds to be received by the authority from a lease or leases entered into by the authority as the lessor and Emanuel County or any municipality located in Emanuel County as the lessee; and 
(13)	To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Sec. 5. - Revenue bonds. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created by this Act, shall have power and is authorized at one time or from time to time to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as defined in this Act of any one or more projects. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable from the special fund provided for in this Act for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated and shall bear interest at such rate or rates as determined by the authority and shall be payable on such dates as determined by the authority, and principal shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates and shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority and may be made redeemable before maturity at the option of the authority at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to and in conformity with [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], the "Revenue Bond Law," and all procedures pertaining to such issuance and the conditions thereof shall be the same as those contained in said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto. 
Sec. 6. - Bonds for essential purpose. 
All revenue bonds issued under this Act are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose, and said bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within this state. 
Sec. 7. - Sale of bonds. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority through negotiated or public sale, and the proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose provided in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
Sec. 8. - Conditions for issuance of bonds. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this Act and the Revenue Bond Law. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of its members. 
Sec. 9. - Revenue bonds not debt. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the State of Georgia or Emanuel County, nor a pledge of the faith and credit thereof, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the rentals, revenues, earnings, and funds of the authority as provided in the resolution or trust agreement or indenture authorizing the issuance and securing the payment of such bonds, and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the state or any political subdivision thereof, including specifically Emanuel County, to levy or pledge any form of taxation or make any appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their fact covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section; provided, however, that Emanuel County and any other political subdivision contracting with the authority may obligate itself to pay the amounts required under any contract entered into with the authority from funds received from taxes to be levied and collected for that purpose to the extent necessary to pay the obligations contractually incurred under this section and from any other source; and provided, further, that the obligation to make such payment shall constitute a general obligation and a pledge of the full faith and credit of the obligor but shall not constitute a debt of the obligor within the meaning of Article IX, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution of this State; and provided, further, that when such obligation is made to make such payments from taxes to be levied for that purpose, then the obligation shall be mandatory to levy and collect such taxes from year to year in an amount sufficient to fulfill and fully comply with the terms of such obligation. 
Sec. 10. - Sinking fund. 
The revenue, rents, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects and any and all revenue, rents, and earnings received by the authority, regardless of whether such revenue, rents, and earnings were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged, may be pledged by the authority to payment of the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds of the authority as may be provided in any resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or in any trust instrument pertaining to such bonds, and such funds so pledged, from whatever source received, may include funds received from one or more or all sources and may be set aside at regular intervals into sinking funds for which provision may be made in any such resolution or trust instrument and which may be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)	The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall become due;
(2)	The principal of the bonds as the same shall mature;
(3)	The necessary charges of any trustee or paying agent for paying such principal and interest; and 
(4)	Any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase.
The use and disposition of any sinking fund may be subject to such regulation as may be provided for in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument securing the payment of the same. 
Sec. 11. - Exemption from taxation. 
The exercise of the powers conferred upon the authority under this Act shall constitute an essential governmental function for a public purpose, and the authority shall be required to pay no taxes or assessments upon any of the property acquired by it or under its jurisdiction, control, possession, or supervision or upon its activities in the operation and maintenance of property acquired by it or of buildings erected or acquired by it or any fees, rentals, or other charges for the use of such property or buildings or other income received by the authority. The tax exemption provided in this section provided shall not include an exemption from sales and use taxes on property purchased by or for the use of the authority. 
Sec. 12. - Immunity from tort actions. 
The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the State of Georgia, and the officers, agents, and employees of the authority, when in performance of the work of the authority, shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as officers, agents, and employees of the State of Georgia. The authority may be sued the same as private corporations on any contractual obligation of the authority. 
Sec. 13. - Property not subject to levy and sale. 
The property of the authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process. 
Sec. 14. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Emanuel County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 15. - Validation of bonds. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedures of [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], the "Revenue Bond Law." The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States government or any department or agency of the United States government, if subject to being sued and if consenting to same, which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated, and the state or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as part of the basis of the security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation, shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and the interest thereon and against the authority issuing the same, the state and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the authority. 
Sec. 16. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds, and the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Act shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Sec. 17. - Trust funds. 
All funds received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds or as revenue, rents, fees, charges, or other earnings or as grants, gifts, or other contributions shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied by the authority solely as provided in this Act, and the bondholders entitled to receive the benefits of such funds shall have a lien on all such funds until the same are applied as provided for in any such resolution or trust instrument of the authority. 
Sec. 18. - Construction. 
This Act and any other law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of its purposes. 
Sec. 19. - Scope of operations. 
The scope of the authority's operation shall be limited to the territory embraced within Emanuel County. 
Sec. 20. - Conveyance of property upon dissolution. 
Should the authority for any reason be dissolved after full payment of all bonded indebtedness incurred under this Act, both as to principal and interest, title to all property of any kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall be conveyed to Emanuel County; or title to any such property may be conveyed prior to such dissolution in accordance with provisions which may be made therefor in any resolution or trust instrument relating to such property, subject to any liens, leases, or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at the time of such conveyance. 
ARTICLE VI. - SHERIFF[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein is 1966 Ga. Laws, page 2576, which placed the Sheriff of Emanuel County on a salary basis. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

Sec. 1. - Salary basis. 
The present mode of compensating the Sheriff of Emanuel County, Georgia, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished and in lieu thereof, said officer shall be compensated by an annual salary as hereinafter provided for. 
Sec. 2. - Salary. 
The Sheriff of Emanuel County shall receive an annual salary which shall not be less than $8,000.00. The exact amount of said salary shall be fixed by the governing authority of Emanuel County not later than the first Tuesday in January of each year. Thereafter, such salary may not be diminished during that calendar year. Said salary shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Emanuel County. 
Sec. 3. - Fees. 
The annual salary provided for herein shall be in lieu of all fees, costs, fines, forfeitures, commissions, emoluments, and perquisites of whatever kind heretofore allowed and collected as compensation for said officer, regardless of in what capacity said services for such fees, costs, fines, forfeitures, commissions, emoluments or perquisites were rendered as long as said services were rendered by virtue of the fact that said officer is the Sheriff of Emanuel County, irrespective of the consideration that said services may not have been rendered in his official capacity as sheriff of said county, but may have been personal. 
Sec. 4. - Same[—Collection by sheriff]. 
The sheriff shall diligently and faithfully collect and receive all fees, fines, forfeitures, costs, commissions, allowances, penalties, funds, monies, or any other emoluments formerly allowed him as compensation for his services in any capacity in his office and he shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies and shall pay the same to Emanuel County as directed by the governing authority thereof on or before the 10th day of each month next following the month in which they are collected or received. On or before the 10th day of each month, the sheriff shall prepare in duplicate a detailed itemized statement, under oath, showing the date[s], sources, and amounts of the funds collected by him during the previous calendar month. The original copy of said statement shall be furnished to the governing authority of Emanuel County, and the duplicate copy of said statement shall be retained on file as part of the records of the sheriff's office. 
Sec. 5. - Same[—Collection by employees]. 
Any official, officer or county employee charged with the responsibility of collecting, receiving, or disbursing any fees, fines, forfeitures, costs, commissions, allowances, penalties, funds, monies, or other emoluments formerly allowed the Sheriff of Emanuel County and who pays said funds directly into the county treasury upon their receipt in lieu of paying the same to the sheriff, shall on or before the 10th day of each month prepare in triplicate a detailed itemized statement showing the dates, sources, and amounts of such funds collected and paid into the county treasury during the previous month. The original copy of this statement shall be furnished to the governing authority of Emanuel County. A copy of said statement shall be furnished to the sheriff, and a copy shall be retained on file as a part of the records of said official, officer, or county employee. Such official, officer, or county employee shall be diligent in making the monthly accounting as herein provided. 
Sec. 6. - Same[—Use by county]. 
The procedure now or hereafter in force as to collection and distribution of all fees, fines, forfeitures, costs, commissions, allowances, penalties, funds, monies, or any other emoluments shall be followed, but as herein provided, all such funds to which the sheriff would, but for this Act, be entitled, shall be collected for the use of Emanuel County and said county shall be subrogated to the rights and claims of said sheriff in and to the same. 
Sec. 7. - Fees due. 
All fees, fines, forfeitures, costs, commissions, allowances, penalties, funds, monies, or any other emoluments which have accrued to the sheriff at the time this Act becomes effective and to which said officer is entitled and which remain uncollected at the time this Act becomes effective, shall, when collected, be paid to said officer and shall be retained by him as his own compensation. 
Sec. 8. - Deputy sheriffs, etc. 
The Sheriff of Emanuel County shall appoint such deputy or deputies, jailer or jailers, clerk or clerks, as may be necessary to efficiently perform the duties of his office and set their compensation which shall be paid from the funds of Emanuel County. However, Emanuel County shall not be liable for a sum for the salaries of such deputy or deputies, jailer or jailers, clerk or clerks, in excess of $12,200.00 per calendar year, unless sums in excess of said amount are approved in advance by the governing authority of said county. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the sheriff, during his term of office, to designate and name the persons who shall be employed or appointed as deputies, jailers and clerks, and prescribe their duties and assignments and to remove or to replace such deputies, jailers, or clerks at will and within his sole discretion. 
Sec. 9. - Automobiles. 
The governing authority of Emanuel County shall also furnish the sheriff with at least two automobiles equipped with the necessary equipment commonly on or in automobiles which are used by law enforcement officers. The automobiles so furnished shall be the property of Emanuel County and shall be used by the sheriff and his deputies only on official business. The governing authority of said county shall also furnish all of the necessary gasoline, oil, maintenance, and repair costs for said automobiles and replace said automobiles when necessary. The replaced automobiles may be disposed of in such manner as will be most advantageous to Emanuel County. 
Sec. 10. - Office expense, etc. 
The governing authority of said county shall provide the necessary books, records, stationery, postage, telephones, ammunition and other supplies and equipment for the sheriff's office in order to insure the proper and efficient operation of his office. The funds for the payment of the supplies, equipment and maintenance as herein provided shall come from the funds of Emanuel County. 
Sec. 11. - Prisoners. 
The Sheriff of Emanuel County is hereby charged with the responsibility of the feeding of the prisoners which are committed to his jurisdiction. It shall be the duty of the governing authority of Emanuel County to fix and pay to the sheriff a sufficient sum which will adequately satisfy the dietary needs of such prisoners in order that their strength and health should not suffer in consequence of any insufficiency of food. The amount so fixed and allowed shall be payable from the funds of Emanuel County. 
Sec. 12. - Emergency funds. 
The governing authority of Emanuel County is authorized to furnish the sheriff with such other supplies and equipment as may be necessary in an emergency or which are required in order to enable the sheriff to comply with the general laws of the State of Georgia. The funds for the payment of the supplies and equipment furnished as authorized by this section shall be payable from the funds of Emanuel County. 
Sec. 13. - Travel expense. 
The sheriff and his deputies in addition to any other compensation herein provided shall receive reimbursement for their actual expenses which are incurred when out of the territorial limits of Emanuel County attending official business or on business of the county as may be authorized by the governing authority. The funds for the payment or reimbursement of such expenses shall be payable from the funds of Emanuel County. 
Sec. 14. - Bonds. 
The premiums for all bonds and insurance policies required of the sheriff, his deputies and employees shall be paid from the funds of Emanuel County. 
Sec. 15. - Intent. 
It shall be proper and lawful for the governing authority of Emanuel County to pay out of the county funds the sums and amounts herein provided and authorized. 
ARTICLE VII. - TAX COMMISSIONER[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein is 1943 Ga. Laws, page 961, which creates the office of Tax Commissioner for Emanuel County. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

Sec. 1. - Tax receiver, tax collector abolished. 
The offices of Tax-Receiver and Tax-Collector of Emanuel County, Georgia, are hereby abolished, and the duties of the two offices aforesaid are hereby consolidated into one office. 
Sec. 2. - Tax commissioner created. 
Be it further enacted by authority aforesaid, that the office of Tax-Commissioner of Emanuel County, Georgia, is hereby created in lieu of said abolished office and the rights, duties, and liabilities of said office of county Tax-Commissioner of Emanuel County, Georgia, shall be the same as the rights, duties, and liabilities of the tax-receiver and tax-collector of said county, so far as the same are applicable. 
Sec. 3. - Term. 
Said tax-commissioner shall hold a term of office for four years, the first term beginning January 1st, after the expiration of the term of office of the present tax-receiver and tax-collector. 
Sec. 4. - Elected. 
Said tax-commissioner shall be elected at the general election held in the State of Georgia on Tuesday after the first Tuesday in November preceding the expiration of the present terms of tax-receiver and tax-collector of Emanuel County, Georgia; and shall take office upon the expiration of the term of the present Tax-Receiver and Tax-Collector; and said tax-commissioner shall be elected at the general election each four years thereafter in the same manner, time, and place as the Clerks of the superior courts are elected. 
Sec. 5. - [Qualification.] 
Said tax-commissioner shall be commissioned and qualified as the clerks of the Superior Court are. 
Sec. 6. - Vacancy. 
If a vacancy for any cause occurs in said office of tax-commissioner, it shall be filled in the following manner: 
(a)	If said vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the existing term, the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Emanuel County, Georgia, shall appoint some qualified person to discharge the duties of said consolidated office for the remainder of said term, and the person so appointed shall be commissioned and qualified as clerks of the superior court, and shall receive the pro rata of the compensation accruing to said office for the time so appointed. 
(b)	If said vacancy occurs more than six months prior to the expiration of the existing term, the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Emanuel County, Georgia, shall appoint some qualified person to discharge the duties of said consolidated office until a tax-commissioner is elected, and it shall be the duty of the Ordinary of Emanuel County to call a special election for the election of a Tax-Commissioner to serve the remainder of said term, which election shall be ordered not sooner than 20 days and not later than 40 days after said vacancy occurs; and the ordinary shall give notice of the date of said election by the publication thereof in the newspaper in said county in which sheriffs advertisement for sales of property appear, and before the courthouse door of said county at least ten days before the said election. The person elected on said day shall perform the duties of said consolidated office for the unexpired term of his predecessors. The term of said election shall be made to the Governor, who shall commission the person so elected. The person so temporarily appointed and the person so elected shall each receive his or her pro rata part of the compensation accruing to said office for the time he or she serves. 
Sec. 7. - [Tied votes.] 
Should any two or more candidates at an election to fill said vacancy, or at any regular election, have the highest and an equal number of votes, said ordinary shall call and advertise another election within twenty days, in the manner above provided, and so do until a choice is made. 
Sec. 8. - [Due date of taxes.] 
Be it further enacted by authority aforesaid, that all taxes that are due and payable at the time the provisions of this Act become effective, and all tax fi. fas. theretofore issued by the Tax-Collector of Emanuel County, Georgia, shall have full force and effect, and be collectible as issued. 
Sec. 9. - Fees paid into treasury. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all fees, commission, and all other compensation allowed to the Tax-Collector and Tax-Receiver of Emanuel County, Georgia, at the time this Act becomes effective, or that might legally be allowed to such officers thereafterward were it not for the provision of the Act, shall be collected by said county tax-commissioner and paid into the Treasury of Emanuel County, Georgia. 
Sec. 10. - [Compensation.] 
The Tax Commissioner of Emanuel County shall be compensated by an annual salary in an amount not less than $25,000.00 per year. Such salary shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Emanuel County. Such salary shall be in lieu of any and all fees, commissions, perquisites, or other form of compensation of any type formerly received. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 4254, § 1)
Sec. 11. - [Oath.] 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that before entering upon the duties of his office the said county tax-commissioner shall take the oath now prescribed by law for the tax-collector, and shall give bond in double the amount of money reasonably estimated by the County Commissioners of Emanuel County to pass through his hands annually, which bond shall be signed as surety by a bonding company legally authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, and the fee or cost for the suretyship on said bond shall be paid out of the funds of Emanuel County, Georgia, as part of the expense of county government. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TREASURER[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein is 1931 Ga. Laws, page 455, relating to the depository for Emanuel County. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

Sec. 1. - Abolition of treasurer's office. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that on and after the 1st day of January, 1933, the office of County Treasurer of Emanuel County, Georgia, shall be abolished, and said office from and after that date shall cease to exist. 
Sec. 2. - Selection of bank as depository. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the commissioners of roads and revenues of said Emanuel County, Georgia, shall, by a majority vote taken among themselves, select some duly incorporated bank or banks, or person, in said county, to act as depository or depositories, and Disbursing Agent or Disbursing Agents, of and for the public funds of said county. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 532, § 1)
Sec. 3. - Removal of depository. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the term of such depository and disbursing agent shall be for a period fixed by said commissioners; and said commissioners may remove said depository and disbursing agent for nonfeasance or malfeasance in the office, and appoint a successor thereto. Any person desiring to call attention of said commissioners to any nonfeasance, or malfeasance in office of said depository and disbursing agent shall do so in writing, and shall serve a copy on said depository five (5) days before the hearing set by said commissioners. 
Sec. 4. - Designation of depository. 
That the bank or banks, or person, selected by said county commissioners as provided in section 2 of this Act shall, when bond and security are given as hereinafter provided, become and be designated as County Depository and Disbursing Agent of Emanuel County, Georgia. 
Sec. 5. - Failure of bank, relief of sureties. 
In case any such depository or disbursing agent so selected, who or which shall have given a bond with corporate surety, shall, in the due course of transacting its or his duties as such, deposit the funds in its or his hands as such depository and disbursing agent in any bank open and transacting a general banking business, and such funds so deposited should be lost by the failure of such bank, then and in that event the sureties on the bond of such county depository and disbursing agent shall be relieved of liability as such sureties to the extent of the amount so lost by reason of the failure of such bank. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 532, § 2)
Sec. 6. - Bond. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no bank or person shall be allowed to act as such depository and disbursing agent until it, or he, shall have given bond, signed by some good surety company, in a sum to be fixed by said commissioners, but not less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), payable to said commissioners and their successors in office, conditioned for the safe-keeping and accounting for all funds that may come into its or his custody by reason of its or his acting as such depository, and faithful performance of all the duties pertaining to said depository, which said bond shall be approved by and filed with said county commissioners, and be recorded in the office of the Ordinary of Emanuel County, Georgia. It shall be within the power of said commissioners to call upon said bank or person acting as such depository to increase the amount of, or to strengthen, said bond at any time they may deem necessary; and, in default of the same being done, to revoke the appointment of such bank or person as depository and disbursing agent. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 532, § 3)
Sec. 7. - Duties. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall be the duty of any bank or person acting as such depository and disbursing agent: 
(1)	To pay without delay, when in funds of the county, all orders or warrants issued by said county commissioners and signed by their chairman, when presented for payment. 
(2)	To take a receipt on each order when paid, and carefully file it away.
(3)	To keep a well-bound book, in which shall be entered all receipts, stating when received, from whom, and on what account, and all amounts paid out, stating when paid, to whom, and on what account. 
(4)	To keep a well-bound book in which shall be entered a full description of all county orders or warrants, or other forms of indebtedness, as they are presented, and to record a copy of the order of the county authorities levying county taxes. 
(5)	To collect and receive from all officers and others all county funds, and to receive, hold, and disburse, according to law, all funds which a county treasurer might have heretofore received, held, or disbursed. 
(6)	To render reports to, and to appear before, said county commissioners whenever notified; and to appear before any grand jury of said county, on request, to render an account of its actings and doings as such depository and disbursing agent, and to exhibit its books and vouchers as such depository and disbursing agent to said grand jury whenever notified. 
(7)	To perform all other duties essential to the proper conduct of the county's affairs, which it has been necessary heretofore for the county treasurer to perform. 
Sec. 8. - Other duties. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that, said commissioners shall have the power and authority to prescribe, from time to time, other reasonable duties and regulations for the government of said depositories and disbursing agents, and said depositories and disbursing agents shall be just as much bound to observe the same as they are bound to observe those prescribed in this Act. 
Sec. 9. - Appointment of depository; transfer of funds, etc.; payment to depository. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said county commissioners shall appoint such depository and disbursing agent, who shall give bond as herein provided, on or before the day this Act shall go into effect; and the County Treasurer of Emanuel County then in office shall, on the day this Act shall go into effect, deliver to such depository or depositories, as he may be directed by said commissioners, all county funds then in his hands, and he shall at the same time deliver to said commissioners, or to the depository, or authority designated by them, all records, books, and papers that he may have pertaining to his office. After January 1st, 1933, all parties heretofore required by law to pay over to the county treasurer funds of said county, including the tax-collector of said county, shall pay over such funds to the depository so selected by said Board of Commissioners, and payment to said depository shall be as legal payment as when heretofore made to the county treasurer. 
Sec. 10. - Compensation of depository. 
The compensation, if any, of said person or bank so selected to act as County Depository and disbursing agent shall be fixed by said Board of Commissioners of roads and revenues of said county; but in no event shall it exceed the sum of fifty ($50.00) dollars per month; and said salary or compensation, if it should be necessary to pay any, shall be paid out of the funds of said county. All records necessary for the performance of the duties of the county depository and disbursing agent shall be provided by said commissioners out of the county funds. It shall be within the discretion of said commissioners as to whether they will pay all, or any part, of the premiums on the bond of said county depository and disbursing agent. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 532, § 4)
Sec. 11. - Liability. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said depository and disbursing agent, or depositories and disbursing agents, shall be liable, both civilly and criminally, just as county treasurers are now liable civilly and criminally, for any nonfeasance, misfeasance, or malfeasance of duties; and said commissioners shall have the same right to proceed against such depository and disbursing agent, or depositories and disbursing agents, and the security or securities on their bonds, in the same manner as they, or the ordinary of the county, may now proceed against a county treasurer and his securities in case of nonfeasance, misfeasance, or malfeasance in the conduct of his duties of his office. 
Sec. 12. - Disbursements. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that on and after the 1st day of January 1933, all county funds of Emanuel County, Georgia, except such as may be specially otherwise provided by law, shall be disbursed by the county commissioners of said county upon orders or warrants drawn by them on the county depository, as above provided. 
Sec. 13. - [Warrants, orders.] 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no warrants or orders drawn on such county depository shall be honored or paid by it, except such as are now authorized to be paid by the treasurer of Emanuel County. 
Sec. 14. - Receipts in duplicate. 
Be it further enacted by authority aforesaid, that all Officers or other persons making deposits with said depositories shall take receipts for such deposits in duplicate, keeping one and delivering the other to said county commissioners. 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note—This article is a compilation of various Special Acts of the Georgia General Assembly which do not justify treatment as an article or division of this Part I, Related Laws. History notes have been provided indicating the source of each section.

Sec. 1. - [Vehicle registration.] 
Effective January 1, 1994, vehicles shall be registered and licensed to operate for the ensuing calendar year and thereafter in Emanuel County during designated registration periods as provided in Code Section 40-2-21 of the O.C.G.A. 
(1993 Ga. Laws, page 4322, § 1)
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Related Laws and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3.

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Emanuel County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1992, § 1-1)
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Board; board of commissioners. The terms "board" and "board of commissioners" mean the board of commissioners of Emanuel County, Georgia. 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient. In all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Emanuel County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurement of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The terms "county," "the county" and "this county" mean Emanuel County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the county, whether the court is the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the county to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
Governor. The term "governor" means the governor of the State of Georgia. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month; year. The terms "month" and "year" mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
Names of officers or departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of Emanuel County" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number each includes the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" and "sworn." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation O.C.G.A. means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Officer. The term "officer" includes those officials appointed by the board of commissioners on a parttime or temporary basis, including the county attorney and magistrate court judge. 
Or; and. The word "or" may be read "and," and the word "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to buildings or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding; following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean, generally, next before and next after, unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Requirements. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another more general provision, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed controlling. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Right-of-way. The term "right-of-way" means land that is dedicated or otherwise legally established for public use. 
Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the county which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the county administrator, where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Shall; may. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of the street right-of-way which is improved and designated for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature; subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The terms "state," "the state" and "this state" mean the State of Georgia. 
Statute references. Whenever reference is made, for example, to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, it shall be construed to refer to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 1-3-3, as amended, or to whatever section is cited. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, lane, path, viaduct, bridge or any other name by which a street is commonly known, or any public place and the approaches thereto within the county when any part thereof is open to the use of the public and established for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory hereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance unless expressly so provided. 
Tenant; occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and the present. 
Titles of offices. The title of any office shall be construed to include the words "of Emanuel County, Georgia." 
Writing; written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1992, § 1-2)
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or to be any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section, and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code, are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1992, § 1-3)
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)	Any contract or obligation assumed by the county.
(4)	Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee.
(5)	Any right or franchise granted by the county.
(6)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)	Any appropriation ordinance.
(8)	Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term.
(9)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor.
(10)	Any zoning ordinance.
(11)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat.
(12)	Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county.
(13)	The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)	Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code.
(15)	Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county.
Such ordinance shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code. All ordinances listed in this section are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 1-4)
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1992, § 1-5)
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1992, § 1-6)
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Emanuel County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Emanuel County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________, which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or other provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1992, § 1-7)
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code. 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1992, § 1-8)
Sec. 1-9. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. 
(a)	Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)	Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
(Code 1992, § 1-9)
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code is declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 1-10)
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-11. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1992, § 1-11)
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty, continuing violations; authority granted to court. 
(a)	O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 gives the board of commissioners, for the purpose of protecting and preserving the public health, safety and welfare, authorization to adopt resolutions and ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, violations of which resolutions and ordinances may be punished by fine or imprisonment or both. 
(b)	The Georgia General Assembly, in 1991, amended O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20, relating to resolutions and ordinances for governing and policing unincorporated areas of the county, so as to increase the maximum fine from $500.00 to $1,000.00. 
(c)	O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 gives jurisdiction over violations of county resolutions and ordinances to the magistrate court of the county. 
(d)	O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 is hereby incorporated as a part of the official Code of Ordinances of Emanuel County, Georgia. 
(e)	Whenever in this Code or in any resolution or ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any resolution or ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such resolution or ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the county prison or in the county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the county, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 12 months or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any resolution or ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)	The judge of the magistrate court shall have the power and authority to:
(1)	Impose upon persons convicted in the magistrate court the fines provided for in this Code, the resolutions and ordinances of the county, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)	Sentence such person to community service work; or
(3)	Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(g)	The judge of the magistrate court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide funding for local victim assistance programs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-131; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; display of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(d). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-4(13); operation of rural volunteer fire departments, § 22-1; library, ch. 30; planning, ch. 42; taxation, ch. 58.
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Use of county property generally. 
(a)	The use of county buildings and property will be restricted to county-related activities and nonprofit uses. The county board of commissioners will set policies of use for all buildings, such as policies relating to food, smoking, etc. Requests for permission to use county property will be submitted to the board of commissioners with the following information: 
(1)	Date the property is requested.
(2)	Purpose of use.
(3)	Responsible individual.
(4)	Sponsor group.
(b)	The board of commissioners will consider requests for rental of county buildings and property depending upon space available at the time of request and the nature of use. Commissioners will set all fees and determine policies and procedures to be adhered to by any and all tenants, such as policies relating to written leases, janitorial service, fire insurance, etc. The tenant must sign an agreement, in case handicapped employees are involved, that the tenant will be responsible for their access to and from the ground floor to the floor of employment if rented space is in the county office building. 
(c)	Any change or addition to space being rented must be approved by the board of commissioners prior to any renovation or acquisition of other space. 
(Code 1992, § 2-1)
Editor's note— The form for the request for use of county property is on file in the county administrator's office. 
Sec. 2-2. - Use of county livestock barn. 
(a)	The board of commissioners has delegated responsibilities of rental and use of the county livestock facilities to the county administrator. Date and time of rental must be agreeable to the board of commissioners. 
(1)	For use by a profit-making group or individual, a fee shall be charged in an amount as provided in the schedule of fees and charges. A deposit in an amount as provided in the schedule of fees and charges must be paid at the time the key and telephone are picked up from the office of the board of commissioners. After use has been completed, the telephone and key are to be returned to the office of the board of commissioners. If the building has been cleaned and everything is in proper order after inspection by the county administrator or someone he may designate, a portion of the deposit will be refunded. The amount of the refund shall be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(2)	For use by a nonprofit group or individual, a fee shall be charged in an amount as provided in the schedule of fees and charges. A deposit in an amount as provided in the schedule of fees and charges must be paid at the time the key and telephone are picked up from the office of the board of commissioners. After use has been completed, the telephone and key are to be returned to the office of the board of commissioners. If the building has been cleaned and everything is in proper order after inspection by the county administrator or someone he may designate, the deposit will be refunded. 
(b)	If the building is not cleaned within five days after use, the board of commissioners will hire someone to clean the building and will retain the total deposit. 
(c)	Any charge to the telephone must be reported to the office of the board of commissioners, with the amount of the charge, at the time the deposit refund is claimed. Unpaid charges or damages will be billed to the group or individual, and future use will not be allowed until all charges are paid. 
(Code 1992, § 2-2)
Editor's note— The form to request use of livestock facilities is on file in the county administrator's office. 
Sec. 2-3. - Claims against county. 
Claims for personal injury or property damage presented to the county shall be immediately forwarded to the county's liability insurance agent. If the claim is covered by the terms of one or more of the county's liability policies then the decision to honor or reject the claim shall be solely that of the company issuing the coverage. If for any reason the claim is not covered by a policy of insurance or does not exceed the per-claim deductible the matter shall be investigated by the county administrator and the county attorney. They shall present their recommendation to the full board for consideration. 
(Code 1992, § 2-3)
State Law reference— Claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-4. - Defense of claims against public officials. 
(a)	The board of commissioners carries public official liability insurance which extends coverage to all public officers of the county for claims made against them arising out of performance of their official duties. If, for whatever reason, a particular claim is asserted against a public official or employee of the county which is not covered by insurance, then the board of commissioners reserves the right, pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 45-9-21 and 45-9-22, to provide a defense to the public official or employee and to pay any claim or judgment rendered against the official or employee on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)	Generally, all such claims would be defended except those alleging criminal violations in which the county is specifically prohibited from providing a defense. Additionally, certain claims might create a conflict between the board of commissioners and a particular public officer or employee and, in those instances, the providing of a defense or the payment of the claim will be determined by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. In that event, the county attorney will be requested to give to the board of commissioners a written opinion as to whether or not a conflict in fact exists and if, under the circumstances, the county would be legally authorized to provide a defense or pay such a claim, prior to any decision by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 2-4)
Secs. 2-5—2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-36. - Time and place of meetings. 
(a)	The board of commissioners shall hold regular meetings on the third Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. 
(b)	Special meetings may be held upon call by the chairman of the board of commissioners or any two members. Due notice of such meetings shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
(c)	Meetings shall be held at the board of commissioners hearing room, county office building, Swainsboro, Georgia. 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Secs. 2-37—2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF PROCEDURE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings and requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3.

Sec. 2-61. - Agenda. 
(a)	At every regular or special meeting of the board of commissioners, the board shall be presented with an established agenda delineating the subjects to be discussed at the meeting. This agenda shall be prepared by the county administrator in consultation with the chairman, the members of the board, the county attorney and, if he deems necessary, appropriate department heads or other elected officials. At the beginning of each meeting, members of the board will be given an opportunity to add subjects to the agenda for either regular or executive session discussion. With the permission of the chairman, other county officials in attendance may be granted the same privilege. Once the agenda is approved, other matters will not be discussed unless good cause can be demonstrated for their failure to be placed on the agenda prior to approval and a majority of the members present approve their inclusion. Once the agenda has been completed the chairman shall adjourn the meeting and no further official action will be taken. 
(b)	No later than 12:00 noon on the day preceding a regularly scheduled or called meeting of the board of commissioners the county administrator shall prepare a proposed executive session agenda and shall circulate the same to the members of the commission and the county attorney. Any commissioner wishing to place a matter on the agenda for executive session shall have the responsibility of communicating this to the county administrator in time for him to include the same on this proposed agenda. 
(c)	The county attorney, on his own initiative or at the request of a member of the board, shall review the proposed agenda and shall inform the county administrator if he considers any item on the agenda not to be proper for consideration in executive session. His decision in this regard shall be final unless overturned by a majority vote of the commissioners present at the regular or called meeting. Such discussion and vote shall take place in open session. 
(d)	If a member of the board, the county administrator, or the county attorney seeks to place a matter on the executive session agenda for discussion after the same has been disseminated and reviewed, it shall require a vote of at least three commissioners to amend the proposed agenda and add such additional matter. This discussion and vote shall also take place in the open session. 
(e)	No other matters except those set forth in the proposed agenda or added to the agenda by the method outlined above shall be discussed in an executive session of any regular or called meeting of the board. 
(Code 1992, § 2-32(a))
Sec. 2-62. - Requests to address board. 
Any person who is not a board member wishing to address the board on any subject at any regular or called meeting must contact the county administrator by 4:00 p.m. on Thursday prior to the scheduled meeting and request to be placed on the agenda, and shall advise the administrator as to the general subject matter which he wishes to discuss with the board. Upon good cause shown and with the concurrence of a majority of the members present the chairman may waive this prior notice requirement for a specific individual or group at a particular meeting. 
(Code 1992, § 2-32(b))
Sec. 2-63. - Imposition of time limits. 
In the interest of time, and so that the board may adequately consider all matters that come before it, the chairman may limit the time to be allocated to any individual or any particular subject presented for discussion. 
(Code 1992, § 2-32(c))
Sec. 2-64. - Requests for expenditure of funds. 
Any request presented to the commissioners that involves the expenditure of monies not previously allocated in the current year's budget may be considered and discussed if properly brought before the board. However, no such request shall be voted on at the first meeting at which it is presented except by unanimous consent of all members present. 
(Code 1992, § 2-32(d))
Sec. 2-65. - Voting members. 
All members of the board, including the chairman or acting chairman, are full voting members and are entitled to vote on any motion properly brought to the floor. 
(Code 1992, § 2-32(e))
Sec. 2-66. - Manner of voting. 
A general motion shall be passed or defeated by voice vote, except the chairman may, when he feels it necessary or it is legally compelled, call for a show of hands. 
(Code 1992, § 2-32(f))
Sec. 2-67. - Motions generally. 
In order to be a proper subject for discussion or action, all motions must receive a second. Motions to amend an existing motion take precedence and shall be passed or defeated before a vote on the main motion unless the amendment is consented to by the member who made the motion and the member who seconded the original motion. A motion to table any matter is to take precedence over all other then-pending motions. Motions to table, if properly seconded, shall be called for the question immediately, without further discussion. 
(Code 1992, § 2-32(g))
Sec. 2-68. - Reconsideration of motions. 
If a motion is defeated, or dies for lack of a second, it shall not be brought back for consideration at that meeting except with the unanimous consent of all members present. 
(Code 1992, § 2-32(h))
Sec. 2-69. - Suspension of rules. 
Except for those matters which require unanimous consent as outlined in this section, any specific rule or the rules in their entirety may be suspended at any given meeting by majority vote of the members present. 
(Code 1992, § 2-32(i))
Sec. 2-70. - Executive sessions. 
Unless set forth otherwise in the agenda for any particular meeting, executive sessions shall take place at the conclusion of the business set forth on the agenda for the regular session. Under those circumstances, a regular session cannot be reconvened at the completion of the executive session. 
(Code 1992, § 2-32(j))
Secs. 2-71—2-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LEGISLATION 

Sec. 2-97. - Legislative authority generally. 
The board of commissioners shall exercise the legislative functions of the county, and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the government of the county; provided, however, that such ordinance or resolution is not in conflict with the constitution or the laws of the state, or the Constitution or the laws of the United States. 
Sec. 2-98. - Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the county shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the manner provided in this division. 
Sec. 2-99. - Preparation of ordinances. 
Whenever possible, all ordinances shall be prepared by the county attorney. 
Sec. 2-100. - Introduction of ordinances, resolutions and other matters. 
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters of subjects requiring action by the board of commissioners must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-101. - Action restricted; emergencies. 
No ordinance shall be put on its final passage on the same day on which it is introduced, except that where an emergency exists and public health and safety require it, an ordinance containing a full statement of the facts and reasons for the emergency may be made effective upon its adoption, if approved by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-102. - Reading of ordinances. 
Each ordinance shall be read at two consecutive meetings of the board of commissioners. This section may be waived by two-thirds of those voting upon the question of waiver. 
Sec. 2-103. - Subject matter of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title, and no ordinance, or section of such ordinance, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed, and when practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
Sec. 2-104. - Adoption of ordinances, resolutions, etc. 
An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives an affirmative vote of a majority of the whole board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-105. - Effective date of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall take effect until ten days after its adoption unless deemed an emergency measure, in which case the ordinance shall take effect immediately. 
Secs. 2-106—2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Civil service system for county employees authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21; county manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5.

Sec. 2-131. - Duties. 
The county administrator shall perform the following duties: 
(1)	Be responsible for the day-to-day administration and management of the business office of the board of commissioners located in the courthouse. 
(2)	Act as a liaison between the board of commissioners and other elected officials and governmental entities. 
(3)	Supervise and carry out such policies and procedures as may from time to time be established or promulgated by the board of commissioners. 
(4)	Maintain close contact and communication with the members of the board of commissioners and shall obtain the approval of a majority of the members of the board prior to taking any action that might in any manner be an exception to existing rules, policies and procedures. 
(5)	Coordinate the activities of the other department heads of the county so as to ensure efficient and economical operation of county government and the maintenance of county services. 
(6)	Work diligently to secure for the county such grants and other funds as may become available that could be used for the benefit of the county and its citizens. 
(7)	Supervise and administer the disposition and expenditure of such grant funds as may be obtained. 
(8)	Make such reports to the board of commissioners as it may from time to time require, but no less than at each regular meeting, and such reports shall be sufficiently detailed so that the commissioners will be fully and completely aware of the status of all county business. 
(9)	Obtain whatever information the board requests for the purpose of allowing the board to plan and evaluate future county projects. 
(10)	Report no less than bimonthly, either formally or informally, to each member of the commission as to the financial status of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 2-56)
Secs. 2-132—2-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-4(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-4(3); any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-4(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-4(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-4(14); taxation, ch. 58.
State Law reference— County finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; designation of depository, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-14.

Sec. 2-166. - Bid and purchase procedures. 
The following procedures will be in effect for all departments and agencies that are funded by the board of commissioners: 
(1)	Any expenditures, other than for normal supplies, must be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(2)	Expenditures for items that were approved in the department or agency budget by the board of commissioners shall be made as follows: 
a.	A request for a purchase order must be submitted.
b.	The board of commissioners will make the decision on whether to authorize the purchase. The department making the request will be contacted. 
c.	The board of commissioners will, if the request is approved, make the decision on whether the purchase procedure is to be by bid or otherwise. 
(3)	Expenditures for items not included in the department or agency budget as approved by the board of commissioners shall be made as follows: 
a.	A request for budget amendment must be submitted to the board of commissioners, along with written justification. 
b.	The board of commissioners will take action on the request after discussion with the department or agency making the request. 
c.	The board of commissioners will, if the request is approved, make the decision on whether the purchase procedure is to be by bid or otherwise. 
(4)	The board of commissioners will notify the department or agency of its decision within 30 days after a request is submitted. 
(5)	For any purchase by department or agency staff, sales invoices must be signed.
(6)	General supplies that are available or that can be purchased from the stock of the board of commissioners, the state correctional institute or the department of administrative services must be ordered through the office of the board of commissioners. 
(7)	All requests for purchase orders, other than by the maintenance shop and road department, will be made to the county administrator. 
(8)	On any item for which bids are invited, specifications will be used so that no supplier is eliminated if at all possible. Bidding by telephone is not acceptable. 
(9)	All bids are to be submitted to the office of the board of commissioners and opened by the board of commissioners unless the commissioners authorize another person to open bids. All bids will be tabulated for accuracy and recorded in the minutes. 
(10)	An advertisement for bids will be placed in the county legal organ if the board of commissioners feel that public awareness will affect bidder response. 
(11)	A minimum of ten days shall be allowed for bidder response.
(12)	Any advertisement for bids shall state that the board of commissioners reserves the right to reject any or all bids. 
(Code 1992, § 2-76)
Sec. 2-167. - Bidding required for certain purchases. 
The county has established the following policy on purchasing: 
(1)	All purchases and contracts in the amount of $2,000.00 or more will be let to sealed bids, which shall be opened in the presence of at least two commissioners. 
(2)	All purchases of motor fuels, regardless of amount, will be covered by the policy set out in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)	Outside repair of heavy equipment and motor vehicles will not be covered under subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)	The policy set out in this section may be waived by the chairman of the board of commissioners or his authorized representative in case of emergency. 
(Code 1992, § 2-77)
Secs. 2-168—2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY OF EMANUEL COUNTY AND THE CITY OF SWAINSBORO 

Sec. 2-201. - Activation of the authority. 
It is hereby declared that there is a need for a joint development authority to function in the county and the City of Swainsboro. Such authority, to be known as the Development Authority of Emanuel County and the City of Swainsboro, is hereby activated. Such authority, herein called the "authority," shall transact business and exercise the powers provided by the provisions of the Development Authorities Law, codified in Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Chapter 62 of Title 36 [O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.], as the same now exists and as it may be hereafter amended. 
(Code 1992, § 2-100)
Sec. 2-202. - Joint authority. 
The authority provided for by this article is created and activated by proper resolution of the board of commissioners and the governing body of the City of Swainsboro as a joint authority pursuant to provisions of 1981 Ga. Laws, page 1419, codified in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1. 
(Code 1992, § 2-101)
Sec. 2-203. - Directors. 
(a)	The authority provided for by this article shall consist of five directors. Two directors shall be taxpayers residing in the City of Swainsboro and shall be appointed by the city council of the City of Swainsboro as their terms expire. Three directors shall be taxpayers residing in the county, who reside outside of the corporate limits of the City of Swainsboro, and shall be appointed by the board of commissioners as their terms expire. No director shall be an officer or employee of the county or the City of Swainsboro. The directors shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(b)	After expiration of the initial terms, the terms of office of all members shall be staggered terms of six years. Successors to initial appointees shall be named by the governing body of the city or board of commissioners, whichever made the original appointment. If at the end of any term of any member a successor to such member has not been appointed, the member whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until his successor is appointed. The majority of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the authority then in office shall be required for action by the authority. 
(Code 1992, § 2-102)
Sec. 2-204. - Officers. 
The directors of the authority appointed under this article shall elect one of their members as chairman and another as vice-chairman and shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer or a secretary-treasurer, either of whom may, but need not, be a director. The authority may, at its discretion, appoint an assistant secretary or an assistant secretary-treasurer, who may, but need not, be a director. 
(Code 1992, § 2-103)
Sec. 2-205. - Defending, indemnifying claims. 
The development authority of the county and the past, present, and future members of those respective authorities are to be considered public bodies and appointed officers for purposes of defending and indemnifying claims brought against those entities or their members, individually or in their official capacities, for any matters arising out of or related to development authority activities as allowed by O.C.G.A. §§ 45-9-21 and 45-9-22. 
(Res. of 6-1-1992)
Secs. 2-206—2-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PERSONNEL[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-4(4).
State Law reference— Social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14).

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-241. - Physical examination for prospective county employees. 
From and after September 17, 1986, any prospective new employee of the county or its departments shall undergo a physical examination by a physician licensed to practice medicine in the state after receiving an offer of employment but prior to beginning his employment. The physician shall certify in writing to the county that the prospective employee is in good health and shall further delineate in writing any physical or medical limitations that may serve to limit the prospective employee's ability to perform certain jobs. The cost of this physical examination shall be the responsibility of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 2-5)
Sec. 2-242. - Resignation of employee prior to running for office. 
Whenever a county employee is regularly and daily performing the duties of an office which is that of an elected official and such employee desires to stand for election to such office then the requirement of the personnel policy that such employee resign prior to qualifying shall be waived. 
Sec. 2-243. - Funeral leave. 
Regular employees shall be granted up to three days funeral leave with pay for death in their immediate family. The term "immediate family" shall be defined as any relative as close as first cousin by blood or marriage. 
Secs. 2-244—2-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.

Sec. 2-266. - Drug policy. 
(a)	The welfare and success of the county depends on the well-being of all of its employees. The abuse of drugs poses a serious threat to everyone involved. 
(b)	It is the responsibility of both the county and the employee to maintain a safe, healthful and productive work environment. The county is committed to fulfilling this obligation; therefore, the following policy of having a workplace free from substance abuse is adopted. Compliance with this policy is a condition of employment for all employees. 
Sec. 2-267. - Policy statement. 
(a)	The possession, sale, use, manufacture, distribution or dispensation of illegal drugs or controlled substances without a prescription during work time or on county premises at any time is prohibited. Applicants and employees may be requested to submit to drug testing and searches of personal property as a condition of employment in accordance with this policy. The county also reserves the right to search employees, work areas and any other county property used by employees. 
(b)	Any employee under the influence of illegal drugs or controlled substances without a prescription while on the job is subject to immediate discharge. The term "under the influence" is defined as being unable to perform work in a safe and productive manner; being in a physical or mental condition which creates a risk to the safety and well-being of the affected employee, other employees, the public or county property; and/or having any detectable level of drugs or controlled substances in the body. 
(c)	All employees are required to notify the head of their department if they are convicted or plead guilty or no contest to violation of any criminal drug statute. 
(d)	The county will fully cooperate in any accident investigation to determine if drugs were involved. 
Sec. 2-268. - Drug testing. 
(a)	To help ensure a safe, healthful and productive work environment, job applications and employees may be asked to provide body substance samples such as urine, saliva or blood to determine the use of illegal drugs or controlled substances as a condition of employment. Refusal to submit to drug testing, or the adulteration of the sample, may result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
(b)	Testing for the presence of drugs may occur for any reason including (but not limited to) the following: 
(1)	Random.
(2)	Job applicant testing after a conditional offer of employment has been made.
(3)	Post-accident.
(4)	Reasonable suspicion.
Sec. 2-269. - Corrective action. 
(a)	Regardless of the events which led to the drug screening, a positive test generally will result in termination of employment. Disciplinary action cannot be avoided by a request for assistance with a drug problem after being asked to participate in a substance test or after being involved in an event which requires testing. 
(b)	However, if any employee seeks assistance with a drug problem prior to being asked to submit to a test, a substance test will be conducted and a positive test result will not lead to immediate employment termination. Rather the employee will be expected to participate in a rehabilitation program and will subject to more frequent random substance tests; if any subsequent tests are positive, termination of employment likely would result. 
Sec. 2-270. - Searches. 
(a)	The county reserves the right to conduct searches or inspection of county property, including desk, vehicles, equipment or other areas, wherever located. Employee entry on the county's premises constitutes consent to such searches or inspections, and consent to such searches and inspections is a condition of initial employment. Consent to a search of the employee's clothing (including pockets), purse, briefcase, vehicle or other personal property at the time of the search is a condition of continuing employment, and refusal of consent is insubordination justifying termination of employment. 
(b)	Searches or inspections may be conducted at the discretion of the county from time to time without prior announcement. 
(c)	An employee's refusal to consent to a search of his clothing or personal effects or attempt to interfere with a search of county property will result in the immediate suspension of the employee pending a county investigation. The county will then make a determination concerning the appropriate discipline for the employee, up to and including discharge, on the basis of the evidence then available to the county, any inferences which the county draws from that evidence, and the employee's refusal to consent to the search or interfere with the search. 
(d)	The purpose of such searches or inspections under this policy is to determine whether any employee possesses or is under the influence of drugs or controlled substances in violation of the county rule which strictly prohibits any employee from being at work in possession of or under the influence of illegal drugs or controlled substances. 
Sec. 2-271. - Addendum to county personnel policy. 
All applicants for employment with the county in a safety-sensitive capacity, as that term is defined in the county's drug-free workplace policy, shall be required to submit to a pre-employment alcohol and drug screen. All non-safety-sensitive applicants will submit to a post-job offer screen. 
Secs. 2-272—2-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - 9-1-1 CHARGE ON PREPAID WIRELESS TRANSACTIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of 06-20-2011, §§ 1—4, effective Jan. 1, 2012, provides that each jurisdiction must adopt an ordinance imposing the charge in order to ensure receipt of the jurisdiction's share of the prepaid 9-1-1 revenues collected by the department of revenue.

Sec. 2-291. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75 cents. 
(Ord. of 06-20-2011, § 1)
Sec. 2-292. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8 with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Ord. of 06-20-2011, § 2)
Sec. 2-293. - Administrative provisions. 
The clerk of the county is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this article and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten days of enactment of this article. 
(Ord. of 06-20-2011, § 3)
Sec. 2-294. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this article shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by this county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(e). 
(Ord. of 06-20-2011, § 4)
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; governing authority to set forth ascertainable standards pertaining to the granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage permits or licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(b)(1); authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49; age of legal majority, O.C.G.A. § 39-1-1.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
Church means any permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes but is not limited to brandy. 
Gallon and wine gallon mean a United States gallon of liquid measure equivalent to a volume of 231 cubic inches, or the nearest equivalent metric measurement. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manager means the person in charge of the day-to-day operations of the business establishment for which application for a license is made under this chapter. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. 
Retailer and retail dealer mean, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
School property means property of state, county, city or church schools and such other schools as teach subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, including playgrounds, athletic fields, tennis courts and other instructional areas contiguous to such property which are used by any such schools for the purpose of teaching physical education, band or other subjects which constitute a part of the school's curriculum. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes but is not limited to all sparkling wines, champagnes and combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition. 
(Code 1992, § 6-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Excise tax on wine. 
There is hereby levied an excise tax, computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter, which shall be paid to the board of commissioners on all wine sold in the county. Such tax shall be paid to the board of commissioners by the wholesaler on all wine sold to retail dealers in the county, as follows. Each wholesaler selling, shipping or in any way delivering wine to any retail dealer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery to each retail dealer on or before the 15th day of the month following. The $0.22 per liter shall be prorated so that all containers of wine shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver in any manner any wine to a retail dealer without collecting the tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any wine on which such tax has not been paid. Each wholesaler shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of the tax. 
(Code 1992, § 6-2)
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; imposition of excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; authorization to levy tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 6-3. - Sale on election days. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages in the county shall be authorized on any election days; provided, however, nothing contained in this section shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days, during such times as the polls are open. 
(Code 1992, § 6-3)
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays, election days and Christmas Day, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Secs. 6-4—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of local governing authorities as to the granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage permits or licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; license from county or municipality required for wholesale or retail sales of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40.

Sec. 6-31. - Applicability of state law. 
All rules and regulations governing licenses for sale of alcoholic beverages enacted by the state or any proper administrative body thereof shall apply within the county when not in conflict with local criteria established by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 6-31)
Sec. 6-32. - Applicability of article to existing licenses. 
This article shall apply to all applications for a license to sell alcoholic beverages pending before the board of commissioners at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or filed in the future. This article shall not affect licenses issued prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or the yearly renewal of any licenses issued prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, nor shall it apply to applications for licenses involving existing premises where a license to sell alcoholic beverages has previously been issued and the premises where the alcoholic beverages are sold or the business located thereon is being transferred or sold by the licensee. This article shall apply if an existing license is revoked and reapplication is made. 
(Code 1992, § 6-32)
Sec. 6-33. - Qualifications of applicants. 
All applicants for a license under this article shall meet and must certify that they meet the following requirements: 
(1)	The applicant must be a person of good moral character;
(2)	The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude or maintaining a house of prostitution and shall not have been convicted within five years from the date of the application currently under consideration of a violation of the laws of this state or any other state relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages of any kind; 
(3)	The applicant shall be the owner of the premises for which the license is requested or the holder of a lease thereon; 
(4)	The applicant shall be active in and solely responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is requested; and 
(5)	The applicant shall understand that a violation of any of the regulations of the county or of any law or regulation of the state pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages, or the giving of any false information to the board of commissioners for consideration in determining whether or not to approve the application, shall subject a license to immediate revocation. 
(Code 1992, § 6-33; Amd. of 1-16-2007)
Sec. 6-34. - Information to be provided to applicant. 
Upon submission of an application in writing to the board of commissioners for a license to sell alcoholic beverages, on proper form prescribed by the board, each applicant shall be presented with a copy of this article and shall be notified of the date, time and place of the meeting of the board of commissioners at which the application shall be considered. 
(Code 1992, § 6-34)
Sec. 6-35. - Responsibilities of applicant. 
(a)	The applicant for a license under this article shall be required to personally appear at the hearing at which the application is to be considered. 
(b)	It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to identify on the application the proposed location of the licensed premises with a sufficient degree of specificity that the location can be ascertained from reading the advertisement of hearing notice. 
(c)	The applicant shall be responsible for the actual cost of advertising the notice of hearing, and this amount shall be payable in advance. 
(Code 1992, § 6-35)
Sec. 6-36. - Public notice of application and hearing. 
Notice that an application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages has been filed with the board of commissioners shall be published in the legal organ of the county for two weeks prior to any action being taken on the application by the board of commissioners. The advertisement shall state the name of the applicant, the type of license requested, any restrictions that may be imposed upon the license if the application is approved, the location of the premises for which the license is requested, and the date, time and place of the meeting of the board of commissioners at which the application for the license shall be considered. A deposit shall be required from the applicant to cover the cost of advertising. 
(Code 1992, § 6-36)
Sec. 6-37. - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)	At any meeting where the board of commissioners considers the approval or disapproval of an application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages, an informal hearing will be conducted by the commissioners in order to determine if the applicant meets the criteria and standards established by this article and by state law, and all interested parties, the applicant included, shall have an opportunity to present evidence for consideration by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	At any meeting where an application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages is being considered, if there are objections in any manner to the issuance of the license, then the hearing shall be continued to a date, time and place certain. At the continuance of the hearing, the board of commissioners, at its expense, shall see that the proceedings are recorded by a licensed court reporter or notary public, and all testimony shall be received under oath. 
(Code 1992, § 6-37)
Sec. 6-38. - Distance of premises from schools, churches. 
No license shall be issued to any applicant under this article if the premises upon which the alcoholic beverages will be sold will be located within 300 feet of any existing church or school building. In determining distance from schools and churches, the distance shall be measured from the nearest point on the property line of the premises where the alcoholic beverages will be sold to the nearest point on the property line of the school or church. 
(Code 1992, § 6-38)
State Law reference— Sales of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools or college campus, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 6-39. - Distance of premises from residences. 
No alcoholic beverage license will be issued if the proposed location is within 100 feet of an existing residence if alcoholic beverages have not been sold within 100 feet from that residence within the past five years. This distance shall be measured from the front door of the proposed license location to the front door of the closest residence. 
(Code 1992, § 6-39)
Sec. 6-40. - Imposition of restrictions on use of license. 
All applicants for a license to sell alcoholic beverages must understand and agree that the board of commissioners may, as a condition to approval of the application, impose reasonable restrictions upon the use of the license, such as but not limited to prohibiting consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, so long as the restrictions are not in violation of state law. 
(Code 1992, § 6-40)
Sec. 6-41. - Denial. 
If after proper consideration it is determined by the board of commissioners that any applicant does not meet the criteria and standards set forth in this article, the application shall be denied and the applicant shall be immediately notified in writing of the denial and the reasons for the denial. 
(Code 1992, § 6-41)
Sec. 6-42. - Duration and renewal of retail dealer's license. 
A retail dealer's license issued under this article shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon, and no such license may be renewed except upon approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 6-42)
Sec. 6-43. - Fee for retail dealer's license. 
The annual fees for a retail dealer's license issued under this article shall be as follows: malt beverages and wine, $300.00; distilled spirits, $1,750.00; and malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits, $2,050.00. Fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of such license. Payment of fees is to accompany the application, and fees shall be paid either in cash or by a bank-certified check. 
(Code 1992, § 6-43)
Sec. 6-44. - Applicant considerations. 
In determining whether or not any license applied for under this section shall be granted, the following, among other things, shall be considered as being in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)	The applicant's reputation, character, and mental and physical capacity to conduct the business. 
(2)	Any evidence of financial irresponsibility involving the applicant's past failure to pay all state and local taxes associated with any business selling alcoholic beverages. 
(3)	If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, whether or not applicant has violated any law, regulation, or ordinance related to such business. 
(4)	If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, the manner in which the applicant conducted the business under such license as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection or intervention in order to prevent or curtail the violation of any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business. 
(5)	The location for which the license is sought as it might effect traffic congestion; the general character of the neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(6)	The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
(7)	Whether the applicant is a person who has previously held a license issued under the police powers of the county that has been suspended or revoked. 
(8)	Whether the proposed location is in compliance with all state and local building and health related codes. 
(9)	Whether there is adequate ingress and egress from the location to the nearest public thoroughfare. 
(10)	If the applicant is a non-resident of the county and designates a resident to deal with all matters involving the license whether or not the person designated meets all the requirements of an original applicant. 
(Amd. of 1-16-2007)
Secs. 6-45—6-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF DISTILLED SPIRITS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to impose excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-131.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Distilled spirits include, but are not limited to, whiskey, rum, gin, brandy, vodka, tequila and all alcoholic beverages of a similar nature and a similar alcoholic content. 
Hotel means any building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this article for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. 
Licensee means a person holding a license to engage in the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises but does not include a person holding a license for beer and wine consumption only. 
Lounge means an establishment which shall have all booths, stools and tables unobstructed and open to view. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether room, shop or building wherein distilled spirits are sold by the drink. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served at least four days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-2, 3-3-20, 3-4-1, 3-5-1, 3-5-29, 3-6-1, 3-7-1. 
Sec. 6-77. - Employee restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any employees of such nightclubs or of lounges to dance or sit with customers in the premises or for any customer to be permitted to purchase food or drink for such employees in such premises. 
Sec. 6-78. - Service only by employees. 
Drinks shall only be served by the employees of the establishment. 
Sec. 6-79. - Employees to be instructed. 
It shall be the duty of the management of premises licensed under this article to maintain a copy of this article on such premises and to instruct each employee of the terms thereof. 
Sec. 6-80. - Premises to be kept sanitary; disturbances, obscenity. 
(a)	All premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices. 
Sec. 6-81. - Sale to minors or incapacitated persons. 
No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall sell or give away, or permit the sale or gift to, or the procuring for, any such beverages to any minor, to any person who is mentally incompetent or to any person who is physically or mentally incapacitated due to the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
State Law reference— Sale, etc., as to minors, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; sale, etc., to intoxicated person, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22. 
Sec. 6-82. - Minors prohibited on licensed premises unless accompanied by parent or guardian. 
No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall allow any minors to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises of a lounge unless such minors are accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; provided, however, that such minors shall be permitted in restaurants as defined in this article without being accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
Sec. 6-83. - Misrepresentation of age by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to falsely misrepresent such minor's age in any manner whatsoever. 
Sec. 6-84. - Service in back rooms. 
The sale of spirituous liquors for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to general public use is prohibited, except that private parties or conventions which have scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms; and provided further, that this prohibition shall not apply to the registered guests of any hotel or motel while in the motel or hotel. 
Sec. 6-85. - Advertising of liquor by drink. 
No licensee shall advertise in any news media or by any other means the fact that distilled spirits by the drink may be purchased at such establishment, provided that the licensees shall be permitted to use the words "your favorite beverages served." 
Sec. 6-86. - Size of containers. 
The holders of licenses may purchase from wholesalers licensed by the county, in sizes of one-fifth of a gallon, 750 milliliters, or larger containers unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size contents, and then such license holders may purchase such brand in the nearest size to the containers. 
Sec. 6-87. - Legal hours of sale. 
No license holder shall sell, give away or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 12:00 midnight Saturday and 8:00 a.m. Monday or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on other days. 
State Law reference— Sales on Sunday, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-7, 3-3-20. 
Sec. 6-88. - Refilling bottles; misrepresenting brand. 
It shall be unlawful for licensees to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
Sec. 6-89. - Outside sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any sales to be made outside of the building, premises or place of business licensed for such sale except as permitted in this article. 
Sec. 6-90. - Employment of minors. 
No licensees shall employ anyone under the age of 16 years in such licensee's establishment. 
Sec. 6-91. - Trains and airplanes exempt. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the servings of distilled spirits by the drink on dining or club cars of trains or on airplanes in transit on regular schedules. 
State Law reference— Dispensing by minors, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Secs. 6-92—6-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-116. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell distilled spirits for use or consumption on the premises without the license required in this division. 
Sec. 6-117. - Disqualifying factors. 
(a)	Conviction of crime. No original license shall be issued to any person or entity organized for pecuniary gain where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal or stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, or such person's spouse, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony of any state or of the United States. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, or shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere or allowed a bond forfeiture to any misdemeanor offense involving the sale of alcoholic beverages within 12 months from the date of application for a license under this article. 
(b)	Citizenship. No license shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States and a resident of this county. 
(c)	Insurance to restaurants, etc., only. No license shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a restaurant, hotel, lounge or nightclub as defined in this article. 
(d)	Interest in wholesale liquor business, financial assistance. No person shall hold a license who also has any direct financial interest in any wholesale liquor business. No financial aid or assistance to any licensee from any wholesaler or manufacturer of intoxicating liquors shall be permitted. 
Sec. 6-118. - Application filing; form. 
(a)	The board of commissioners shall have authority to prescribe forms for new or renewal applications. 
(b)	New applications shall be dated with the time of filing with the office of the board of commissioners and designated as to type of operation (nightclub, lounge, restaurant, hotel and motel, etc.), followed by a number to designate the order of filing; such numbers to begin anew with each calendar year; preference shall be given, in each category, whenever feasible, to the order in which such applications are filed. 
Sec. 6-119. - Notice. 
All applicants for new licenses shall give notice of the purpose of making such application by advertisement once a week for two weeks prior to a regular commission meeting in the legal organ of the county, which notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and the date and time the board of commissioners would hear the application. The advertisement referred to in this article shall be of type not smaller than six-point capital and lower case. 
Sec. 6-120. - Applicants must furnish requested information. 
(a)	All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the board of commissioners; and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. 
(b)	Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any persons requested by the board of commissioners, considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. The failure to produce any such person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of such application. 
Sec. 6-121. - Misinformation cause for denial or revocation. 
Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission from any original, renewal or transfer application for a license shall be cause for the denial thereof, and, if any license has been granted under these circumstances, there shall be cause for the revocation of such license. 
Sec. 6-122. - Public safety committee; authority. 
(a)	The board of commissioners is the authority to conduct the hearings in this article.
(b)	The board of commissioners is delegated the authority to suspend any license; such suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 6-123. - Factors considered in issuing licenses. 
In determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following, among other things, shall be considered, in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)	The applicant's reputation and character, and mental and physical capacity to conduct the business; 
(2)	If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, whether or not applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; 
(3)	If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, the manner in which the applicant conducted the business under such license as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; 
(4)	The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values; 
(5)	The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought; 
(6)	If dancing is to be permitted upon the premises for which the license is sought, and the applicant has previously permitted dancing upon any premises controlled or supervised by such applicant, the manner in which the applicant controlled or supervised such dancing to prevent any violation of any law, regulation or ordinance; and 
(7)	Whether the applicant is a person whose license issued under the police powers of the county has been previously suspended or revoked. 
Sec. 6-124. - Granting or denying. 
No license shall be issued until the application for the license has been approved by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 6-125. - Fee; amount, due date, proration; expiration of permit. 
(a)	An annual license fee of $2,000.00 shall be charged for the initial license issued to any licensee and for each renewal and in addition to any other alcoholic beverage license fees which the applicant must pay in order to obtain or renew the license for other than on-premises consumption of distilled spirits. 
(b)	All license fees shall be paid in advance on or before January 1 of each year and any new license granted during a calendar year shall require full license fee without proration. 
(c)	All licenses must be obtained and fees paid not later than two weeks from the date of the approval of the application by the board of commissioners; and if not so obtained, the permit shall be void. 
State Law reference— Maximum fee, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-50. 
Sec. 6-126. - Issuance; no refunds. 
No license shall be issued for less than a calendar year period or the remainder thereof, and in case of the revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar year period, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
Sec. 6-127. - Forfeited for nonuse. 
Any holder of a license who shall begin the operation of the business and sale of the products as authorized in the license, but who shall, for a period of nine consecutive months thereafter, cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized in the license, shall upon completion of the nine-month period automatically forfeit the license, which license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity of any further action of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 6-128. - Renewal. 
All licensees shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 6-129. - Nontransferable. 
(a)	Licenses shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided in this article. In case of the death of any person holding such a license, or any interest therein, the same may, in the discretion of the board of commissioners, be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person. 
(b)	Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(c)	Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee. The new location shall be considered as a new license. 
(d)	A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee personally received directly none of the additional capital invested. Under this section an additional partner or new principal stockholder must be approved by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 6-130. - Authorizes sales for consumption on premises only. 
Licensees shall not permit the sale of alcoholic beverages by the bottle or package. Nothing in this article is intended to repeal the hours of serving of malt beverages in any other type establishment not covered under licenses permitted by this article. 
Sec. 6-131. - Suspension and revocation. 
Except in cases of emergency, no license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the county shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause, and after a hearing and upon the prior three-day written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the violation of any law or ordinance regulating such business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business, or for the violation of any state or federal law, or for such other good and sufficient causes. 
State Law reference— Due process guidelines, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 6-132. - Purchases from wholesale distributors. 
A licensee shall be authorized to purchase distilled spirits from wholesale distributors and shall pay the same excise tax on such purchases as that charged by distributors to holders of licenses for packaged sales. 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1—8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CRUELTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of 9-15-2008 set out provisions intended for use as §§ 25-1—25-5. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. II, §§ 8-31—8-35.

Sec. 8-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide a method of prosecuting animal cruelty cases in the Magistrate Court of Emanuel County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 9-15-2008)
Sec. 8-32. - Humane care. 
No owner or custodian of any domesticated animal shall fail to provide the animal with humane care; adequate food and water; adequate shelter which has appropriate and adequate ventilation and adequate shelter from inclement weather including extreme heat. 
(Ord. of 9-15-2008)
Sec. 8-33. - Prohibited. 
The following are specifically found to be acts of animal cruelty and prohibited by this article: 
(1)	Chaining animals to a stationary location with a chain less than 12 feet in length.
(2)	Use of chains which are a gauge so heavy as to cause pain and/or discomfort.
(3)	Chaining animals without the use of a properly sized collar.
(4)	Abandoning animals on public or private property which includes the owner or custodian vacating the property where the animal is located. 
(5)	Organized dog fighting.
(6)	Failure to inoculate the animal for rabies.
(7)	Any intentional act or omission which causes physical injury or extreme discomfort to the animal except in the rendering of medical care by a licensed veterinarian or the rendering of a course of treatment prescribed by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. of 9-15-2008)
Sec. 8-34. - Investigating claims; prosecution. 
The Code Enforcement Officer of Emanuel County shall be responsible for investigating claims of animal cruelty under the terms of this article and the prosecution of same. Prosecution shall be initiated by service upon the owner or custodian of the animal a citation describing the manner in which it is contended this article has been violated and ordering such owner or custodian to appear at a time and date certain in the Magistrate Court of Emanuel County then and there to face charges. 
(Ord. of 9-15-2008)
Sec. 8-35. - Violations. 
Violations of this article are punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 per violation and imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 12 months for each violation. 
(Ord. of 9-15-2008)
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 26; manufactured homes, ch. 34; planning, ch. 42; roads, ch. 46; signs, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54; subdivisions, app. A.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Requests for county assistance in filling of wells on private property. 
Persons who desire assistance from the county in the filling of abandoned wells must make a request to the board of commissioners or the road superintendent. Requests will be investigated by the road superintendent or other person as the board of commissioners may direct. If conditions exist as stated in the request and the magnitude of the request is reasonable in the opinion of the road superintendent or commissioners, the request will be approved providing a document is executed containing a hold harmless agreement and certification of need prior to any county equipment or personnel going on the property. 
(Code 1992, § 10-2)
Editor's note— The form to request assistance in the filling of abandoned wells is on file in the county administrator's office. 
Sec. 10-2. - Self-inspection by plumbers, utility contractors. 
The county is exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d) relating to the self-inspection of certain water and sewer lines, and such provisions shall not be applicable in the county. 
Secs. 10-3—10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of 04-21-2014, effective June 1, 2014, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 10-36—10-42, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the original codification as amended by Ord. of 7-3-1989. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis.
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11.

Sec. 10-36. - Adoption. 
The administrative procedures set forth in this article are adopted for the enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction for and in the county. 
(Ord. of 04-21-2014)
Sec. 10-37. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs. The state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes" in this article. 
(Ord. of 04-21-2014)
Sec. 10-38. - Code remedial. 
(a)	Generally. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electric, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as "service systems." 
(b)	Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)	Permitting and inspection not to be construed as warranty. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the county nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. of 04-21-2014)
Sec. 10-39. - Scope of article. 
(a)	Applicability. 
(1)	General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)	Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(3)	Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)	Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(5)	Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(6)	Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewer system. 
(7)	Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(8)	Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(9)	International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. The provisions of the code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every one-family or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(b)	Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)	Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)	Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)	Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. of 04-21-2014)
Sec. 10-40. - Building department. 
(a)	Established; enforcing officer; qualifications of enforcement personnel. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The board of commissioners shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. 
(b)	Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by section 10-46(a), shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(c)	Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(d)	Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)	Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the proceeding year. He may incorporate in such report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustments and appeals during such year. 
(f)	Job description. Copies of the job description are on file with the personnel office. 
(Ord. of 04-21-2014)
Sec. 10-41. - Existing buildings. 
(a)	Alterations, repairs, etc. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)	Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(Ord. of 04-21-2014)
Sec. 10-42. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. of 04-21-2014)
Sec. 10-43. - Building official; powers and duties. 
(a)	Enforcement; interpretation. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(b)	Right of entry. 
(1)	Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect such building or premises or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)	When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as provided in this section, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)	Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)	Revocation of permits. 
(1)	Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)	Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)	Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the standard unsafe building abatement code. 
(f)	Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)	Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided that any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided that the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. of 04-21-2014)
Sec. 10-44. - Permits. 
(a)	Application. 
(1)	When required; exception. 
a.	Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
b.	Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work:
1.	Any portable heating appliance;
2.	Any portable ventilation equipment;
3.	Any portable cooling unit;
4.	Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the construction codes; 
5.	Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe;
6.	Any portable evaporative cooler;
7.	Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 w) or less. 
(2)	Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided that such work is shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(3)	Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)	Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)	Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided that the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)	Drawings and specifications. 
(1)	Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)	Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)	Design professionals; exception. 
a.	The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to such drawings, specifications and accompanying data for the following: 
1.	All group A, E, and I occupancies.
2.	Buildings and structures three or more stories high.
3.	Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 sq. m) or more in area or $100,000.00 or more in total cost. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
b.	Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)	Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)	Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)	Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.	General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.	Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquidtight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)	Examination of documents. 
(1)	Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(2)	Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided that the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)	Issuance. 
(1)	Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)	Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)	Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending the issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)	Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where such building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate such building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in chapter 32 of the International Building Code. 
(e)	Contractor responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before he is permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with his license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)	Conditions. 
(1)	Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)	Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, the architect or engineer shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. If such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)	Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(g)	Fees. 
(1)	Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(2)	Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)	Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)	Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee shall be paid as required at the time of issuance of permit, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the board of commissioners which are on file with the building official. 
(5)	Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(h)	Inspections. 
(1)	Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)	Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)	Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (h)(6) of this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)	Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)	Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)	Required inspections. The permit holder, his agent and the licensed contractor shall be jointly and severally responsible for ensuring that required inspections are called for before proceeding with construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder, his agent and the licensed contractor to provide access to and the means for conducting any inspections required by this code. The building official or his designee, upon notification from the permit holder, his agent or the licensed contractor, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder, his agent or the licensed contractor of any violations to be corrected in order to comply with the construction code: 
a.	Buildings. 
1.	Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected and before any backfill or concrete is poured. 
2.	Subfloor inspection.
3.	Slab: After all forms, rebar, wire and water proofing and before concrete is poured.
4.	Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents are complete and before work is covered. 
5.	Insulation inspection: After all insulation is installed and before it is covered.
6.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy.
b.	Electrical. 
1.	Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed and before any backfill is put in place or concrete poured. 
2.	Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.	Plumbing. 
1.	Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed and before any backfill is put in place or concrete poured. 
2.	Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all soil, waste and vent piping are complete and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
Note: See section 312 of the International Plumbing Code for required tests. 
d.	Mechanical. 
1.	Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed and before any backfill is put in place or concrete poured. 
2.	Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other concealed components are complete and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.	Gas. 
1.	Rough piping inspections: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected and before concrete is poured. 
2.	Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.	Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.	Energy. 
1.	Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
2.	Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)	Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(8)	Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)	Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(i)	Certificates. 
(1)	Certificate of occupancy. 
a.	Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Such certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.	Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
c.	Temporary or partial occupancy. A temporary or partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
d.	Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(2)	Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)	Service utilities. 
a.	Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.	Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.	Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)	Posting floor loads. 
(1)	Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)	Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)	Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. of 04-21-2014)
Sec. 10-45. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. of 04-21-2014)
Sec. 10-46. - Construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(a)	Appointment. There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of three members. The board of commissioners shall appoint the board. 
(b)	Membership and terms. 
(1)	Membership. The construction board of adjustment and appeals should consist of three members. Such board members should be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience in the construction codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(2)	Terms. The terms of office of the board member shall be a three-year term, staggered so no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(3)	Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of the construction codes, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. 
(4)	Secretary of board. The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (c) of this section, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(c)	Powers. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (d) of this section, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(d)	Appeals. 
(1)	Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.	The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.	The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case.
c.	That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.	The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations under such codes have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)	Variances. The construction board of adjustment and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.	Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.	The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.	Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
d.	The variance granted is the minimum variance that will made possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
e.	The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(3)	Condition of variances. In granting the variance, the construction board of adjustment and appeals may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed, or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(4)	Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(5)	Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(e)	Rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after a notice of appeal has been received. 
(f)	Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official, or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 04-21-2014)
Sec. 10-47. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or who shall fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 04-21-2014)
Secs. 10-48—10-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3.

Sec. 10-76. - Purpose of article. 
It is the purpose of this article to: 
(1)	Require the use of ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings; 
(2)	Require the certification of plumbing fixtures regarding flow rates and serviceability standards; 
(3)	Promote compliance with state laws for the purpose of conserving water;
(4)	Maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies; and
(5)	Reduce wastewater flows.
Sec. 10-77. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial building means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Plumbing fixtures means any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators. 
Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-78. - Standards for fixtures. 
No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 10-80. The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be April 1, 1992, and for commercial buildings the effective date shall be July 1, 1992. 
(1)	All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to in this section shall not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 

 
(2)	The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)	Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)	The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.1M-1989 Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in subsection (1) of this section. 
(5)	All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for low consumption water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME A112.19.6-1990 Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended. 
Sec. 10-79. - Product certification. 
The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards in section 10-78 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described in this section and providing, upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the county building official. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in section 8 of such standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
Sec. 10-80. - Exceptions. 
Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the building official. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building may be exempt from the standards of section 10-78 for the following: 
(1)	Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc. 
(2)	Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for the physically handicapped.
(3)	Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in a correctional institution which may require more water for proper operation. 
(4)	Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes that cannot be accommodated by existing technology. 
Sec. 10-81. - Enforcement; penalty for violation of article. 
Citations for violations of this article may be issued by the building official or his authorized representative. Any person violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, such person found guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
Secs. 10-82—10-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITS REQUIRED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—See the Editor's Note in Ch. 34, Art. III.

Sec. 10-115. - Building permit requirements. 
On and after the effective date of this section, any person, firm, or entity wishing to construct or erect a single family or multi-family residence within the geographical boundaries of Emanuel County, whether the same be site built, modular or manufactured, shall apply, on a form developed by the Emanuel County Tax Assessor's Office at the said assessor's office for a building permit. At a minimum, the application shall state the name of the property owner; the contractor or seller of the home if different from the property owner and the map and parcel number upon which the residence is to be located. The permit shall be displayed conspicuously on the property until such time as a 911 address is issued by Emanuel County 911. 
A fee of $75.00 shall be charged for the issuance of the permit which shall be paid to the general fund of Emanuel County, Georgia. 
If the said residence is to be constructed within the limits of any incorporated municipality and said municipality requires a similar permit then no permit from the Emanuel County Tax Assessor's Office shall be required. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2005, eff. 1-1-2006)
Sec. 10-116. - On-site sewage management permit—Required. 
Prior to the construction of any house or building, alteration or addition, from which sewage must be disposed of by means of a septic tank or alternative system in the county, and/or prior to location or relocation of any mobile home in the county, an on-site sewage management permit must be obtained from the county health department. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98(2), § 1)
Sec. 10-117. - Same—Contents of application. 
The application for the permit shall be filed with the county health department and disclose the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the property owner and/or the applicant.
(2)	The address of the location of the building that is to be constructed or the address of the building being repaired/renovated or the location and address of the mobile home being located or relocated upon the land in the county. 
(3)	The number of bedrooms in residential structures or the anticipated water usage for commercial structures. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98(2), § 2)
Sec. 10-118. - Same—Compliance. 
It shall be the duty of the county health department environmental health officer to evaluate and issue an on-site sewage permit for those sites that comply with the county board of health's rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems. Any cost of said permit for installation, upgrade or repair shall be set by the county board of health. It shall be the duty of the sewage disposal system contractor or property owner if no contractor is used, to request evaluation by the environmental health officer to determine if the septic system complies with the rules and regulations for on-site sewage management system as promulgated by the county health department prior to the commencement of construction. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98(2), § 3)
Sec. 10-119. - Mobile home site permit—Issuance. 
It shall be the duty of the county tax assessor to issue a mobile home site permit for the location or relocation of a mobile home. Renewal of the decals for mobile homes shall be issued each year thereafter upon timely application by the mobile home owner to the tax assessor. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98(2), § 4)
Sec. 10-120. - Same—Display. 
All mobile home site permits issued pursuant to this article relative to mobile homes upon arrival to its new site location shall be affixed to the mobile home in such a manner as to be clearly visible from the front and from the street or roadway. Mobile home site permits will remain on the mobile home until such time as it is replaced by a current tax decal. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98(2), § 5)
Sec. 10-121. - On-site sewage management permit and mobile home site permit required for location or relocation of mobile home. 
It shall be unlawful for any mobile home owner, mobile home dealer or mobile home mover to locate or relocate a mobile home on any land in the unincorporated areas of the county until the owner of said home has received a permit for an on-site sewage management system and obtained a mobile home site permit from the tax assessor and have the same affixed thereto. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98(2), § 6)
Sec. 10-122. - Violation of article. 
(a)	Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate the provisions of the ordinance from which this article derives, by erecting, constructing, or repairing a building, or by moving, locating, or relocating a mobile home in the county, without first having applied and been granted a permit for an on-site sewage management permit for the proposed location by the environmental health officer of the county; and in the case of locating or relocating a mobile home, without obtaining a mobile home site permit; shall be punished by fine or imprisonment or both not exceeding a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. (O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20) 
(b)	Violators of this section shall be prosecuted by the county environmental health officer or the county tax assessor in the magistrate court of the county without a jury. The magistrate court may suspend any fine or sentence upon statement by the person signing affidavit that satisfactory compliance with the requirements of this section have been met. Review of convictions shall be certiorari to the superior court. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98(2), § 7)
Sec. 10-123. - On-site sewage management permit required prior to sale of property. 
(a)	Any person, firm or corporation that desires to sell property that is less than three acres, and is advertised or stated in any manner to the potential buyer to be a lot suitable for construction of a residential unit or location of a mobile home; must obtain an on-site sewage management permit or subdivision approval from the county health department prior to closing of the sale. 
(b)	Violators of this section shall be punished by fine or imprisonment or both not exceeding a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. (O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20) 
(c)	Violators of this section shall be prosecuted by the county environmental health officer in the magistrate court of the county, without a jury. The magistrate court may suspend any fine or sentence upon statement by the person signing affidavit that satisfactory compliance with the requirements of this section have been met. Review of convictions shall be certiorari to the superior court. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98(2), § 8)
Sec. 10-124. - Violation of county department of health regulations for on-site sewage management systems. 
(a)	Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of the county department of health's rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems and has not fully corrected such violation after 30 days notice by the environmental health officer shall be punished by fine or imprisonment not exceeding a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. (O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20) 
(b)	Violators of this section shall be prosecuted by the county environmental health officer in the magistrate court of the county without a jury. The magistrate court may suspend any fine or sentence upon statement by the person signing affidavit that satisfactory compliance with the requirements of this section have been met. Review of convictions shall be certiorari to the superior court. 
(c)	The county board of health rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems used in this article shall be those adopted and approved for use by the county board of health. (O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5) 
(Ord. of 6-15-98(2), §§ 9, 12)
Sec. 10-125. - Health officer responsible for environmental health duties. 
The county environmental health officer as used in this article shall be the person appointed by the county board of health as the board's employee or agent responsible for the environmental health duties of the county board of health. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98(2), § 11)
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 26 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as a new Ch. 12, Art. II, §§ 12-31—12-65, was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table.
State Law reference— Authority to restrict adult entertainment establishments to certain zoning classifications, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3(b).

Sec. 12-31. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult entertainment establishments, their article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishment and patrons. 
(b)	Findings. Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including, which experiences, we believe are relevant to the issues faced by Emanuel County, Georgia, the board of commissioners take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the findings of the board of commissioners of the county that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood; increased expenditures for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order; increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior herein above described; and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude or partially nude conduct to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments that allow and/or encourage nudity. Based on these findings, this article is adopted to regulate certain types of businesses and to establish where such activity may or may not be conducted. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-32. - Definitions—Adult entertainment establishments. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult entertainment establishments. Under this article, the term adult entertainment establishment shall include, without limitation, the following types of establishments, which shall be defined as follows: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent or more of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means either: 
(1)	Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(2)	Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projections or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stick in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Bath house or adult massage parlor means a business or establishment in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainment, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified anatomical areas. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Lingerie modeling studio means a business or establishment whose primary business activity consists of live performers exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-33. - Same—General. 
Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same rituals and ceremonies; place where persons regularly assemble for worship; congregation; organization for religious purposes. 
Good moral character means a person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The county may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means, for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Person means an individual, association, club, society, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity. 
Premises means the building for which or upon which a license is issued here under and "premise" and "building" are further defined as a structure or edifice enclosing a space within its exterior walls, and covered with a roof or outside top covering of a building or connected or attached or joined with or by a wall, roof, walkway or breeze way. Any structure or structures of any nature that share a wall, roof, walkway or breeze way shall be considered a single premises and building for the purposes of this article. No building may be subdivided for the purpose of creating more than one premise for the purposes of this article. In addition, the word "premises" shall include the land and estate as well as it's appurtenances, including the entire parcel together with the boundaries thereof, upon which the licenses premises sits as well as the area of land surrounding said premises. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or public region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)	Human male genitalia in discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)	Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism; or 
(2)	Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual simulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)	Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(4)	Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, public region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)	Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)	Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)	Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-34. - Regulations. 
(a)	No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)	No later than March 1st of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)	An adult entertainment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed. 
(d)	No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer, a person under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)	No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment.
(f)	An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open on December 25th of each year or on Sunday. 
(g)	No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, self, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)	An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)	All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(j)	No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron.
(k)	No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)	No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer.
(m)	No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
(n)	All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths foot candles per square foot. 
(o)	Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)	Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)	Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.	Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.	Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.	All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
d.	The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned.
e.	The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)	Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(p)	All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this article shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(q)	All adult entertainment establishments shall permit representatives of the Emanuel County Sheriffs Department or any other county official acting in their official capacity to inspect the premises as necessary to insure the business is complying with all provisions of this article. 
(r)	If any portion, or subparagraph, of this section of this article or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-35. - Certain activities prohibited. 
(a)	No person, firm, partnership, corporation of other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or expose with less than a full opaque covering, any portion of a person's genitals, public area, or buttocks in a lewd and absence fashion. 
(b)	No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall engage in, or be allowed to engage in, any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)	No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-8. 
(d)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-8-24, no adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on or off the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, loiter for the purpose of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire. 
(e)	Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statue which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-36. - License required; automatic forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within Emanuel County any adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article, without a license so to do. No adult entertainment establishment license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal of unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(b)	Any holder of any license thereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-37. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid adult entertainment establishment license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-38. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a license to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-39. - Sales to minor unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-40. - Location; district requirements. 
No adult entertainment establishment or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)	Within 500 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)	Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, college campus, governmental building, library, civic center, children's day care facility, public park or neighborhood playground is located; 
(3)	Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other adult entertainment establishment is located; 
(4)	On a lot which contains less than 100 feet of road frontage.
(5)	Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is located. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from the nearest part of the premises of the establishment, as defined herein, to the closest property lines of the parcel of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-41. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)	Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 21 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises of an adult entertainment establishment for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)	Approval for employment. Before any person works on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the county of his/her intended employment on forms supplied by the sheriffs department that require the information set forth in provision (a) of this section. The county sheriffs department shall have 15 days to investigate the information required of the prospective employee. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the sheriffs department requires including fingerprinting by the department and consent to an NCIC and/or GCIC records check. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the sheriffs department shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the sheriffs department for a hearing. The decision of the sheriffs department after hearing may be appealed to the board of commissioners of the county which will use the appeals procedure contained in this article. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the county administrator evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)	Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the county, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the county shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of said license. Should any licensed employee of an adult entertainment establishment leave employment with said establishment for 60 or more days, that employee's license shall lapse automatically without any further action required. All adult entertainment establishments are required to notify the sheriffs department within five days of the termination, either voluntarily or otherwise, of any licensed employee of said adult entertainment establishments, giving the former employee's name, social security number, and date of termination. 
(d)	Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, all independent contractors, except those who are licensed in a trade or profession which is not involved in serving or entertaining customers at adult entertainment establishments, shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-42. - Application for license. 
(a)	Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the county administrator or her designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a non-refundable fee of $2,500.00 shall be paid to the county administrator to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and regulation required by this article. The county administrator shall issue a receipt showing that such regulatory fee has been paid. 
(b)	The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-43. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The full true name, and any other names used by the applicant;
(2)	The present address and telephone number of the applicant(s);
(3)	The previous addresses of the applicant(s), if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)	Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age;
(5)	The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth;
(6)	Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches × two inches taken within the last 30 days. 
(7)	Business occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and if a corporation, all shareholders holding five percent or more of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
(8)	The business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operation in this or any other city, county, state or territory under license has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment establishment of similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)	All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of such convictions; 
(10)	If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set for the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to a corporation shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(11)	The names and addresses of the owner and/or lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)	Such other identification and information as the county sheriffs department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)	The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, directors, or any stockholders of five percent or more of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)	If the applicant, any partners, or any of the officers or stockholders controlling five percent or more of the outstanding shares of the corporation, have been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)	The county shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant;
(16)	If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and current annual report filed with the Georgia Secretary of State; 
(17)	At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the adult entertainment establishment license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)	Address of the premises to be licensed;
(19)	Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)	A certified plat by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated in order to verify compliance with section 12-40 of this article. This provision may be waived if compliance can be readily determined. 
(21)	Such further information as may be required to review the applicant.
(22)	Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.	If the applicant is an individual, the individual;
b.	If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner;
c.	If a corporation, by the president of the corporation;
d.	If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-54. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, or a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the county administrator and produce proof that a non-refundable application fee has been paid; that the application containing the aforementioned and described information has been presented to the county administrator, and that all information contained therein is true and correct. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-55. - Application; investigation. 
The county administrator shall refer the application to the county sheriffs department for investigation. The sheriffs department shall have up to 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation and after an investigation report by the sheriffs department is furnished to the county administrator, the county administrator shall place the application on the next board of commission[er]s agenda at least five days but not later than 15 days after receipt of the report. 
The board of commissioners of the county may grant the license at that meeting if it finds: 
(1)	The required fee has been paid;
(2)	The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article;
(3)	The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation to the application;
(4)	The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application;
(5)	The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed, or attempted in this state would have been punishable as one or more of the above mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)	The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)	The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant complies with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)	The applicant is at least 21 years of age;
(9)	That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder controlling five percent or more of the corporation stock, or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitation for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)	That on the date the business for which an adult entertainment license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)	That the proposed premises is in compliance with those location restrictions as set out in section 10 of this article. 
(12)	That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the county, state or the United States. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-46. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)	No adult entertainment establishment license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)	An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes or special assessments duly imposed; 
(2)	Any person who is not of a good moral character;
(3)	Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding five percent or more of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)	Any partnership, association, or other entity, any of whose officers, partners, or members are not of good moral character; 
(5)	Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)	Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the State of Georgia or Emanuel County. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-47. - License refusal; appeal. 
If the board of commissioners of the county following investigation of the applicant, deem that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements set forth in this article, they shall notify the county administrator of such opinion and, within ten days of such notice, the county administrator shall notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied an adult entertainment establishment license may appeal such denial to the board of commissioners of the county by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the receipt of notice from the county administrator of such denial. A hearing before the board of commissioners of the county shall be scheduled within 45 days of such notice. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-48. - Licenses—Renewal. 
An adult entertainment establishment license may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the renewal application contains the same information required in the original application and that applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this article as they exist at the time the renewal application if filed. Applicants have no vested right to the renewal of said license. The renewal fee of $500.00 for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be based on an amount needed to defray the costs of regulating adult entertainment establishments an enforcement of this article. Renewal applications shall be due by November 1st of the calendar year prior to the year for which such license is requested. The adult entertainment establishment license shall be for a calendar year period or for a remainder of a calendar year if issued after January 1st of any calendar year. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-49. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner(s). An adult entertainment establishment license to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-50. - Change of location or name. 
(a)	No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location application and fee of $500.00 has been deposited with the county administrator and approval has been obtained from the board of commissioners of the county. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this article have been met. 
(b)	No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the adult entertainment establishment license. 
(c)	Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-51. - Appeal—Board of commissioners determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the board of commission[er]s agenda, the commissioners may take either of the following actions: 
(1)	Set a hearing date and instruct the county administrator to give such notice of hearing as my be required by law; 
(2)	Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for the hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The county administrator shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-52. - Board of commissioners hearing. 
Whenever the county administrator has scheduled an appeal before the board of commissioners of the county, at the time and date set therefore, the board shall receive all relevant testimony and evidenced from the licensee, from interested parties and from staff. The board may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-53. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-54. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The board of commissioners of the county and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-55. - Hearing officer; report. 
(a)	The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date a hearing before the hearing officer is terminated, submit a written report to the board of commissioners of the county. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the county administrator and shall be considered public records. 
(b)	A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/appellant the same day it is filed with the county administrator, with additional copies furnished to the board of commissioners and county sheriffs department. 
(c)	The county administrator shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular commissioners meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-56. - Hearing officer report—Action by the board of commissioners. 
Board of commissioners may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the board does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)	Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; 
(2)	Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-57. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. In addition to such fine, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. Every day that such violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation punishable as stated above. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-58. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings or abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take some other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or renovation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-59. - Revocation and appeal. 
The sheriffs department shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license previously granted herein. In the event the sheriffs department seeks to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license, he shall give written notification to the applicant of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the licensee at least five days prior to the notice of hearing. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(1)	The sheriffs department shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license in the event of any one or more of the following: 
a.	An applicant gave false or misleading information in the original application process;
b.	An applicant has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
c.	An applicant has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the county or a violation of any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; 
d.	An applicant has violated any provision of this adult entertainment article;
e.	An applicant has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the state or the county regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; and 
f.	An applicant fails to pay any fee, occupation or business license or tax, fine or other amount of money due to the board of commissioners of the county under this article or any other taxing ordinance or resolution of the county. 
(2)	In the event the sheriffs department shall suspend or revoke any adult entertainment establishment license hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the sheriffs department. Provided, however, that the applicant shall be authorized to continue its business operations until that date of the appeal hearing scheduled in accordance of this section. No applicant may apply for an adult entertainment establishment license during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing the sheriffs department shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension or revocation, and the duration of either. 
(3)	In the event of a suspension of revocation by the sheriffs department, the applicant may appeal the decision of the sheriffs department to the board of commissioners of the county by filing a written notice of appeal with the county administrator within ten days from the date of the decision of the sheriffs department. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled by the county before the board of commissioners of the county within 45 days after the date of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After hearing by the board of commissioners of the county, the board of commissioners may take such action as it deems appropriate, including upholding of the action of the sheriffs department or by the imposition of such action as the board of commissioners of the county may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of the board of commissioners of the county may be appealed in the form of a writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county filed within 30 days of the final action of the board of commissioners of the county. In the event the applicant does not file an appeal from any decision of the sheriffs department, as provided herein, the decision of the sheriffs department shall be final. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-60. - Change of location. 
There is established an administrative fee of $15.00 to apply for a change of location for an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-61. - Alcoholic beverages; prohibitions. 
(a)	No person, association, partnership or corporation allow licensed under this article of the Emanuel County Code after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall serve, sell, distribute or the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer, or wine, or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. Any licensee whose license was granted prior to the adoption of this article shall not be subject to this amendment until ten days after the effective date of this article, at which time all licenses within the county shall be subject to this provision, including those licensees licensed before the effective date hereof. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to nor prohibit the live performance of legitimate plays, operas, ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums or educational institutions holding a license, which derive less than 20 percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-62. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-63. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premise shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-64. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe condition. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his/her finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service to him or by posting in conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of the use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Sec. 12-65. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2002, § 1)
Chapter 14 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems by counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq.; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2.

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access channels means services provided by a cable television system on its public, educational, local government or leased channels, whether separate or composite. 
Additional service or additional subscriber service means any communications service other than a basic service provided over its cable television system by the franchisee directly or as a carrier for its subsidiaries, affiliates or any other person engaged in communications services including, by way of illustration but not limited to, pay or subscription television, burglar alarm, data or other electronic intelligence transmission, facsimile reproduction, meter reading and home shopping. 
Basic service or basic subscriber service means the delivery by the franchisee to television receivers, or any other suitable type of audiovideo communication receivers, to all subscribers to locations in the county of signals of over-the-air television broadcasters and channels required by the FCC; and other service at the option of the company. 
Channel means a signaling path provided by a cable television system to relay to subscriber terminals television broadcast programs or any other programs or signals from whatever source which may legally and technically be delivered to such terminal. 
Community antenna television system, cable television system and CATV are synonymous terms describing a system employing antennas, microwave, wires, waveguides, coaxial cables, fiber optics or other conductors, equipment or facilities, designed, constructed or used for the purpose of: 
(1)	Collecting and amplifying local and distant broadcast television or radio signals and distributing and transmitting them; 
(2)	Transmitting original cablecast programming not received from television broadcast signals; 
(3)	Transmitting television pictures, film and video tape programs not received through broadcast television channels, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers; and 
(4)	Transmitting and receiving all other signals, including digital, voice and audiovisual.
Provided, however, that any of the services permitted to be performed, described in this definition, shall be those performed by or through the franchisee for subscribers in the operation of a cable television system franchised by the county. 
Converter means an electronic device which converts signals from a frequency not susceptible to reception by the television receiver of the subscriber to a frequency which is susceptible of reception, and by an appropriate channel selector also permits the subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated dial locations. 
County clerk means the county clerk or any other person selected by the board of commissioners with regard to the administration of this chapter or any lawfully designated designee of such official. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Franchise means and includes any authorization granted under this chapter in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or authority to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system or components thereof within the county. Such authorization means and includes any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on the business within the county as required by other ordinances and related state laws of the county. 
Franchisee means Westinghouse Broadcasting and Cable, Inc., d/b/a/ Group W Cable, being the individual, company, corporation or firm granted the franchise by the board of commissioners under this chapter, and its lawful successors, transferees or assigns. 
Gross annual receipts includes those revenues derived from the supplying of basic subscriber service, that is, the installation fees, disconnect and reconnect fees, and fees from regular cable benefits, including the transmission of broadcast signals, and access and local origination, if any. However, it does not include revenues derived from per program or per channel charges, lease channel revenue, advertising revenue or any other income from the system. 
Road means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface, of all public streets, roads, highways, alleys, easements, boulevards, bridges, tunnels, public utility easements and all public grounds within or belonging to the county. 
Subscriber or customer means an authorized recipient legally receiving basic service or additional service, or both. 
User means a person utilizing a cable television system channel for purposes of transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. 
(Code 1992, § 12-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Franchise granted; duration. 
In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the conditions and reservations specified in this chapter, the nonexclusive right is hereby granted to Westinghouse Broadcasting and Cable, Inc. d/b/a/ Group W Cable, its successors and assigns, hereinafter referred to as the grantee, to erect, construct, maintain and operate a community antenna television system in the county for the purpose of transmission and distribution by cable of television impulses and television energy to the residents of the county in all forms, in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States and the state, and the ordinances and regulations of the county, for a period of 15 years. 
(Code 1992, § 12-2)
Sec. 14-3. - Scope of franchise. 
(a)	There is hereby granted by the county to the franchisee, the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, roads and public places now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the county, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary or convenient for the maintenance and operation in the county of a cable television system for the reception, sale and distribution of television and radio signals, or any other services which may legally and technically be provided. 
(b)	The rules, regulations and standards as legally adopted by the FCC from time to time shall apply to and shall govern the operations of the franchisee of the franchise and its operations under this chapter, and are hereby expressly declared to be a part of the franchise. 
(Code 1992, § 12-3)
Sec. 14-4. - Franchise territory. 
The franchise granted under this chapter and all the terms and conditions thereof relate to the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 12-4)
Sec. 14-5. - Rights reserved to the county. 
(a)	Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, in any way, the county's right and power of eminent domain. 
(b)	There is hereby reserved to the county every right and power which it is required by law to reserve, and the county is granting only those rights it has the power and authority to grant. 
(c)	Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the county. 
(d)	The board of commissioners may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter. The parties may agree upon a referee to determine any disputed questions of fact which may arise under this franchise. The board of commissioners, with the concurrence of the county attorney, is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust, settle or compromise with the franchisee any controversy or charge arising from the operations of the franchise under this chapter on behalf of the county, in the best interest of the public, and fairness to the franchisee. 
(Code 1992, § 12-5)
Sec. 14-6. - Franchise fee. 
(a)	In consideration of the granting and exercise of a franchise under this chapter, for the operation of a cable television system, the franchisee shall pay to the county during the life of the franchise a fee in the amount of three percent of its gross annual receipts from all cable services in the county, including all forms of consideration, and such other receipts and revenues if and when permitted by FCC regulations. 
(b)	All payments shall be made semiannually on July 31 and January 31 and shall be accompanied by a statement of gross receipts derived by the grantee from services located within the areas of the county, such statement to be certified annually to coincide with bookkeeping systems, as to correctness by a certified public accountant licensed to practice in the state. 
(c)	The franchise payments provided for in this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of ad valorem taxes assessed with respect to real or personal property of the grantee by the county. 
(Code 1992, § 12-6)
Sec. 14-7. - Insurance required; indemnification of county. 
(a)	The grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the county at all times during the term of this franchise from and against all claims for injury or death to person or physical damage to property, both real and personal, which result from the negligence of the grantee, his employees, agents or assigns in the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of any structure, equipment, appurtenances or product authorized or used pursuant to authority of this chapter. The grantee shall carry liability insurance in such form and with such companies as shall be approved by the county attorney so as to protect the county and the grantee from and against any and all such claims resulting from injury or death to persons or damages to property. The amount of such liability insurance shall be not less than $100,000.00 as to any one person and $300,000.00 as to any one accident, and property damage insurance for not less than $50,000.00 for any one accident. 
(b)	The grantee, and/or its insurance carrier, upon due notice in writing from the county, shall defend at its own expense any action or proceedings against the county in which it is claimed that the injury, death or damages was due to the grantee's negligence in the operation of its television system, and in the event of a determination of liability shall indemnify the county. 
(Code 1992, § 12-7)
Sec. 14-8. - Technical standards. 
(a)	Service standards. The franchisee shall maintain and operate the system and render efficient service in accordance with the rules and regulations as are, or may be, set forth by the FCC. The franchisee shall furnish to its subscribers and customers, for all services, with no discriminatory or unreasonable delay in the franchisee's installation of full service within the various neighborhoods in the serviceable franchise area, the best signals practicable under the circumstances existing at the time, and shall provide quality reception of its CATV service to each subscriber so that both sound and picture are produced free from visible and audible noise and distortion on standard television receivers in good repair. 
(b)	Maintenance of and service to the system. The franchisee shall put, and keep and maintain, all parts of the CATV system in good condition throughout the term of this franchise. 
(Code 1992, § 12-8)
Sec. 14-9. - Street occupancy conditions. 
(a)	All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the franchisee within the county shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, roads, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, roads, alleys or other public ways and places. 
(b)	In case of disturbance of any street, road, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved area, the franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the board of commissioners, acting through its authorized officers or employees, replace and restore such street, road, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved area in as good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of the work involving the disturbance. 
(c)	If at any time during the period of this franchise the county shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, road, sidewalk, alley or other public way, the franchisee, upon reasonable notice by the county, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
(d)	Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the franchises shall be placed in such manner as not to interfere with the usual travel upon such public way. 
(e)	The franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the county, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the temporary wire changes, and the franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given not less than five working days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(f)	The franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees upon or overhanging streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks and public ways and places of the county so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the franchisee. 
(g)	In all sections of the county where the cables, wires or other like facilities of county utilities are all placed underground, the franchisee shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground to the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the franchisee to do so. As to depth, such installation shall comply with county standards. 
(Code 1992, § 12-9)
Sec. 14-10. - Permits and construction. 
(a)	The franchisee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever reasonably possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different or additional poles, conduits or other facilities on public property unless and until the necessary permits have been secured. Whenever the franchisee shall not utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities, or whenever existing conduits and other facilities to be located beneath the surface of the streets or roads in any area or throughout the county, in the exercise of its police power or pursuant to the terms hereof, upon reasonable notice to the franchisee, any such conduits or other facilities shall be constructed, installed, placed or replaced beneath the surface of the streets or roads. Any construction, installation, placement, replacement or changes which may be so required shall be entirely at the expense of the franchisee. 
(b)	The county shall have the right to make additional use, for any public or county purpose, whether governmental or proprietary, of any poles, conduits or other similar facilities erected, controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the franchisee in any street, provided such use by the county does not interfere with the use by the franchisee; provided, further, the county shall pay a reasonable and fair price for such use. 
(c)	The franchisee, at its expense, shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove any property of the franchisee when, in the opinion of the county, such property is required by reason of traffic, conditions, public safety, street vacation, street or highway construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, transportation facilities, tracts or any type or manner of structure or improvements made by governmental agencies whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other structure of public improvement, including, but not limited to, movement of buildings, urban renewal and redevelopment, and any general program under which the county shall cause all such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. The franchisee shall in all cases have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligations, to abandon any of its property in place, as provided in this chapter. Nothing under this section shall be deemed a taking of the property of the franchisee, and the franchisee shall be entitled to no surcharge or extra compensation, rates excepted, by reason of anything under this section. 
(d)	Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of the franchisee to cause any work or other act required under this section to be properly completed in, on, over or under any street within any time prescribed therefor, or upon reasonable notice given, where no time is prescribed, the clerk may cause such work or other act to be completed in whole or in part, and upon so doing shall submit to the franchisee an itemized statement of the costs thereof. The franchisee shall, within 30 days after receipt of such statement, pay to the county the entire amount thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 12-10)
Sec. 14-11. - Rules, regulations by franchisee; connections for schools. 
(a)	The grantee shall have the right to prescribe reasonable service rules and regulations for the conduct of its business not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, and a copy of such rules and regulations shall be kept on file at all times with the county clerk. Prior to the commencement of service to any of its subscribers, the grantee shall file with the county clerk a copy of its proposed rate schedule governing charges for service to its subscribers. Any change in such schedule shall become effective 30 days subsequent to the filing of due notice of change with the county clerk. 
(b)	One connection to the television receiver in each public school in the county school system shall be provided if requested by the school, provided such school is within the existing service area of the franchisee. If such school is outside the franchisee's service area, the franchisee will extend service to such school at actual cost to the franchisee if it is technically feasible to do so. Service to additional receivers in the public schools shall be charged for at the same rate as that charged to other subscribers for comparable service in accordance with the terms and conditions prescribed by the grantee pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1992, § 12-11)
Sec. 14-12. - Service complaint procedure. 
(a)	System maintenance. The franchisee shall keep, repair and maintain all parts of the cable television system in such a manner that the entire system complies with section 14-8 throughout the entire franchise period. 
(b)	Customer service. The franchisee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest reasonable time practical. 
(c)	Complaint office. The franchisee shall maintain an office within the area of the county which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a publicly listed telephone, and be so operated that complaints and request for repairs and adjustments may be received on a daily basis during each day of the year. 
(d)	Complaint response. The franchisee shall maintain a capability for responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service within 24 hours after receipt of the complaint or request under normal circumstances. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the franchisee from seeking and receiving recompense for damages to its equipment. 
(e)	Subscriber notice of complaint procedures. The franchisee has established procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints in accordance with FCC regulations. These procedures shall be filed with the county clerk. The franchisee shall furnish a notice of such procedures to each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the system. The franchisee shall advise its subscribers when a change or alteration in complaint procedures occurs. 
(f)	County official responsible. In accordance with FCC regulations, section 76.31(a)(5)(iii), the county clerk is hereby designated by the county as having primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and implementation of complaint procedures. 
(Code 1992, § 12-12)
Sec. 14-13. - Sale or lease of franchise. 
(a)	This franchise shall be deemed a privilege to be held in personal trust by the grantee. It may not be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of in whole or in part either by forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise without the prior consent of the board of commissioners, expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may be prescribed. The board of commissioners shall not unreasonably withhold its consent to an assignment. 
(b)	The grantee shall not have such property rights in this franchise that the same may be effected, transferred or disposed of voluntarily or involuntarily without the consent of the board of commissioners. Any transfer or assignment or other distribution of any of the rights under this franchise shall be made only by an instrument in writing, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the county clerk at least 30 days after such transfer or assignment shall have been executed or effected and shall reflect therein the consent of the board thereto. The grantee, however, shall have the right at any time, to mortgage the whole of its system or any part thereof subject to the rights of the county under the terms of this franchise. 
(Code 1992, § 12-13)
Sec. 14-14. - Forfeiture. 
In addition to all other rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the county, the county reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct remedy the right to revoke this franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)	The grantee fails after 30 days' prior written notice to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or has, by act or omission violated any term or condition thereof; 
(2)	Any provision of this chapter shall be finally adjudged by a court of law invalid or unenforceable and the board of commissioners further finds that such provision constitutes at that time a consideration material to the continuance of the franchise granted under this chapter; 
(3)	The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt; 
(4)	All or part of the grantee's facilities should be sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by the grantee within 30 days from such sale; 
(5)	The grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations with the county under this franchise; or 
(6)	The county condemns all of the property of the grantee within the county by the lawful exercise of eminent domain. 
(Code 1992, § 12-14)
Sec. 14-15. - Removal of poles, wires and appurtenances upon termination. 
(a)	The television system of the grantee to be installed shall not be abandoned, in whole or in part, without the written consent of the board of commissioners. Upon termination or forfeiture of this franchise, in accordance with any of its terms, the grantee shall, within a reasonable time, remove its poles, cable, wires and appurtenances from the county streets, roads, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges, highways and other public places within the county. 
(b)	Upon failure of the grantee to perform such removal, the county shall have the right to make a written demand on the grantee to proceed to carry out the removal of such equipment within 60 days from the date of such demand and in the event that the grantee fails to carry out the terms and conditions of such demand, the county shall have the right to remove or maintain in its then status all or part of the grantee's equipment and to retain such equipment as the county's property. Such removal is to be accomplished without accounting therefor to the grantee, and the expense of such removal shall be charged to and paid by the grantee without credit for the value, if any, for the equipment removed by the county. 
(Code 1992, § 12-15)
Sec. 14-16. - Dealing in receivers restricted. 
The rights and franchises granted and extended under this chapter are so granted and extended upon the express stipulation that neither the grantee, nor any assignee or successor in interest of such grantee, will, within 15 miles of the areas of the county described in this chapter at any time during the primary or any renewed or extended term hereof, engage in the business of selling or servicing radio or television receivers either directly or indirectly, or through the medium of any person in whose activities such grantee, assignee or successor has any business or financial interest, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit such grantee, assignee or successor from maintaining such receivers as are used exclusively by them in the operation of the television system with respect to which this franchise is granted. 
(Code 1992, § 12-16)
Sec. 14-17. - Connection fee authorized. 
The franchise granted to provide service within the areas of the county shall authorize and permit the franchisee to solicit, sell, distribute and make a charge to subscribers within the county for connection to the cable television system of the franchisee. 
(Code 1992, § 12-17)
Sec. 14-18. - Prohibited activities. 
The franchisee shall be prohibited from directly doing any of the following: 
(1)	Imposing a fee or charge for the determination by the franchisee of the quality of its signal to the subscriber or for any service or repair to a subscriber-owned receiving devices; provided, however, that charges may be made for damage or destruction of the franchisee's equipment, including converters. 
(2)	Soliciting, referring or causing or permitting the solicitation or referral of any subscriber to any specific person or firm engaged in any business in this chapter prohibited to be engaged in by franchisee. 
(Code 1992, § 12-18)
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; health and sanitation, ch. 26; manufactured homes, ch. 34; planning, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 54; subdivisions, app. A.
State Law reference— The Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq.; abatement of abandoned wells or holes, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-14; authority to provide for stormwater collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6).

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Timber harvesting notice. 
(a)	Prior to initiating any timber harvesting activities in the county on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives (February 15, 1999), the timber harvesting contractor shall give written notification to the board of assessors of the county within 24 hours prior to commencing start up activities (moving in of equipment or cutting of any trees). The notice shall be in the following form: 
NOTIFICATION OF HARVESTING 
Harvesting contractor: _____ 
Contact person: _____ 
Address: _____ 
Telephone number(s): _____ 
Landowner: _____ 
Map:____________Parcel: _____ 
Location: _____ 
Beginning date: _____ 
Estimated ending date: _____ 
Upon completion of the harvesting of the timber identified in the above form, the timber harvesting contractor shall give oral notification in person or by telephone to the tax assessor's office that the harvesting activities at the above described location have been completed. 
(b)	The penalty for failure to comply with the reporting requirements set out in subsection (a) of this section shall be a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or 12 months imprisonment in the county jail. 
(c)	Citations for violation of this section shall be prosecuted in the magistrate court of the county. 
(Mo. of 2-15-1999)
Secs. 18-2—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c).

Sec. 18-31. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise that unreasonably or unnecessarily annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the county. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)	Any vehicle of the county while engaged in necessary public business.
(2)	Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)	The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses that are noncommercial in character. 
Sec. 18-32. - Enumeration. 
The acts contained in this article, among others, shall constitute a violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
Sec. 18-33. - Horns; signaling devices. 
The following shall be a violation of this article: 
(1)	The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the county except as a danger warning. 
(2)	The creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable period of time. 
(3)	The use of any signaling device, except a police whistle or one operated by hand or electricity. 
(4)	The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust.
(5)	The use of any such signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason.
Sec. 18-34. - Radios, phonographs, other machines or devices that produce or reproduce sound. 
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto shall be a violation of this article. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
Sec. 18-35. - Loudspeakers; amplifiers; other devices for production or reproduction of sound for advertising. 
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instruments, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure without a special permit from the county clerk or board of commissioners shall be a violation of this article. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer, in person, and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
Sec. 18-36. - Yelling; shouting; hooting; whistling; singing. 
Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-37. - Animals and birds. 
The keeping of any animal or bird that will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-38. - Steam whistle. 
The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper county authorities shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-39. - Exhausts. 
The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-40. - Defect in vehicle or load. 
The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-41. - Loading; unloading; opening boxes. 
The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-42. - Construction or repairing of buildings. 
The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except on urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the county building official shall be a violation of this article. Such permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and may be renewed by the board of commissioners for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the board of commissioners determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the board of commissioners may grant permission for such work to be done from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., upon application made at the time the permit for the work is applied for or during the progress of the work. 
Sec. 18-43. - Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. 
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while they are in session or adjacent to any hospital, and which unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed about such institutions indicating the presence of such institutions, shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-44. - Hawkers; peddlers; vendors. 
The shouting and crying of hawkers, peddlers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-45. - Noises to attract attention. 
The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale by creation of noise shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-46. - Transportation of metal rails, pillars or columns. 
The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-47. - Piledrivers, hammers, other such appliances. 
The operation from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise without a special permit from the board of commissioners shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-48. - Blowers. 
The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases of fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-49. - Sound trucks. 
The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes and the use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during such hours or in such places or with such volume as would constitute such use a public nuisance shall be a violation of this article. 
Secs. 18-50—18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-81. - Definition. 
A nuisance is anything within the county that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this article. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 18-82. - Enumeration of nuisances. 
(a)	The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
(b)	The following are hereby declared to be nuisances:
(1)	Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the community. 
(2)	Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood thereof. 
(3)	Discharging of offensive matter. The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)	Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the county. 
(5)	Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the county so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United States Geological Survey shall be the standard for such grading; and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(6)	Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)	Nonconforming structures, machines, etc. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or county ordinance. 
(8)	Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
(9)	Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the county. 
(10)	Depositing trash, garbage, refuse, etc., on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the county or which unreasonably annoys others. 
(11)	Unoccupied buildings. Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed. 
(12)	Unsafe vehicles, machinery, etc. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards). The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked. 
(13)	Gutters or spouts. Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the county. 
Sec. 18-83. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the county. 
Sec. 18-84. - Issuance of summons for abatement. 
Whenever any nuisance exists within the county, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the county that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the county, and the owner or other person responsible therefor refuses or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate the nuisance, the chief of police or the officer having responsibility for the enforcement of this section, may issue a summons and cause summons to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts thereof claimed to be violated thereby, and requiring such person to appear before the municipal judge at a time, date and place specified in the summons, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
Sec. 18-85. - Order for abatement. 
(a)	If the judge at the hearing required by section 18-84 shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code or the ordinances of the county is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his order and judgment so finding and shall order the property owner or other person responsible therefor to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated, including but not limited to rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property owner or other person responsible therefor shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the county shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever action deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition and the expense thereof shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for county taxes. 
(b)	Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of county taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as in the case of county taxes. 
State Law reference— Authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 18-86. - Special provisions for old, unused, stripped, junked automobiles. 
(a)	Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within the county is a nuisance. 
(b)	The owner, owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot within the county upon which the storage of property is made, and also the owner, owners and/or lessees of the property involved in such storage shall jointly and severally abate the nuisance by the prompt removal of the property into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes, if within the county, or otherwise by removing it to a location without the county. 
Sec. 18-87. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in sections 18-84 and 18-85. 
Sec. 18-88. - Service on nonresidents and others. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the county to proceed under sections 18-84 and 18-85 and the owner of the property or other person responsible therefor resides outside the county, or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 18-84 shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved, and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the county once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to the hearing. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the county, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
Sec. 18-89. - Other powers preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his order. 
Secs. 18-90—18-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEGETATION 

Sec. 18-111. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions. 
(a)	Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the county, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, brushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the county are hereby declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this article. 
(b)	Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section. 
(c)	The provisions of this article shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, and to the original county lots. They shall not apply to undeveloped areas of unsubdivided land within the county. 
Sec. 18-112. - Height permitted. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible for its management, maintenance or upkeep, to permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a height in excess of 12 inches above the ground. 
Sec. 18-113. - Notice to abate. 
(a)	For a violation of this article, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove such excess growth within seven days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail, or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. 
(b)	Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made. 
Sec. 18-114. - Abatement by county; notice of abatement. 
(a)	Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified pursuant to the provisions of section 18-113, the county is authorized to have the contractor enter upon the property; and the contractor is authorized to enter the property, and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. The county shall issue a lot cleaning order to the contractor, who shall promptly perform the work and submit his bill to the county. The county shall inspect the work, and if satisfactory, shall approve the bill for payment and forward it to the county for payment. 
(b)	The county shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment thereof on or before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than 15 days nor later than 45 days after payment to the contractor. 
(c)	If payment under subsection (b) of this section shall not have been made on or before the date named, the county shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the municipal judge, notifying such owner to show cause before the judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue against the property for its approval amount. 
(d)	If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this article, that the notice required of section 18-113 was given, that the work was performed and the cost thereof paid by the county, and that the county has not been reimbursed, execution shall issue for such amount, signed and executed by the chief of police in the same manner as tax executions are executed. 
(e)	If the owner of the property is unknown or cannot be located, the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply, but in lieu thereof a notice shall be published once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern," shall describe with reasonable particularity the property involved, a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation, and shall notify all persons interested to show cause before the municipal judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount. In such event, subsection (a) of this section will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in rem. 
Sec. 18-115. - Remedies. 
The remedies provided in this article are cumulative of all other remedies the county has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code, all ordinances, laws or regulations of the county, or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance, and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
Secs. 18-116—18-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 

Sec. 18-141. - Nuisance declared. 
A violation of any provision of this division is a nuisance. 
Sec. 18-142. - Keeping water in which mosquitoes may breed. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the county, any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is so treated as to effectually prevent such breeding. 
(b)	The collections of water prohibited by subsection (a) of this section shall be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, or other similar water containers. 
Sec. 18-143. - Treatment of collections of water. 
The method of treatment of any collections of water that are specified in section 18-142 directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes, shall be approved by the health officer and may be one or more of the following: 
(1)	Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way, or with any other material that will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)	Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers together with their thorough drying and cleaning. 
(3)	Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the health officer.
(4)	Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven days. 
(5)	Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish. 
(6)	Filling and draining to the satisfaction of the health officer, his agent or accredited representative. 
(7)	Proper disposal by removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
Sec. 18-144. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding. 
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the health officer, his authorized agent or representative, shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-145. - Failure to remedy conditions after notice. 
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the breeding, within three days after due notice has been given to him, the health officer or his authorized agent is hereby authorized to do so; and all necessary costs incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. 
Sec. 18-146. - Right of entry of health officer. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the health officer or his duly accredited agent under his authority, may at all reasonable times lawfully enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction. 
Secs. 18-147—18-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Board means the state board of natural resources. 
Buffer means an area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface; also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
District means the Ohoopee County Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity; also known as the plan. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition. This includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority which has been certified by the director as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., or the division, in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means the state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Emanuel County Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed, as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover;
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-172. - Exemptions. 
(a)	This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72.
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying.
(3)	Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; however, construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in division 3 of this article. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the State Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-20—12-5-53. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of division 3 of this article and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority. 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, which shall include:
a.	Raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard;
b.	Feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry;
c.	Producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chicken, hens and turkeys; 
d.	Producing plants, trees, fowl or animals;
e.	The production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; and 
f.	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting and farm buildings and farm ponds. 
(6)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(7)	Any project involving 1.1 acres or less; however, this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters; and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways that have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams that do not have water in them year-round; however, any person responsible for a project which involves 1.1 acres or less that involves land disturbing activity and that is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; and further, nothing contained in this section shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project that is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (8) or (9) of this section. 
(8)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by the county; however, such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in division 3 of this article. 
(9)	Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission; provided any such land disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in sections 18-232 and 18-233. 
(b)	Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in sections 18-232 and 18-233, the issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued; and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permitholders. 
Sec. 18-173. - Inspection of permitted sites; notice to comply; failure. 
The county will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-174. - Right of entry. 
The county shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may be reasonably deemed necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
Sec. 18-175. - Refusal of entry or access. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, district or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials; nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
Sec. 18-176. - Review of issuing authority's actions; deadline for corrective action. 
(a)	The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of the county which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission, or both, may provide technical assistance to the county for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(b)	The division may periodically review the actions of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include but shall not be limited to review of the administration and enforcement of this article and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the board of commissioners. If such review indicates that the board of commissioners has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the board of commissioners in writing. The board of commissioners so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county does not take necessary correction action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county as an issuing authority. 
Sec. 18-177. - Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. 
If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining such permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
Sec. 18-178. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the issuing authority or its agent, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
Sec. 18-179. - Bond forfeiture. 
If through inspection it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 18-207(e). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part of the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
Sec. 18-180. - Monetary penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, permitting conditions, or stop work order shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
Sec. 18-181. - Administrative remedies. 
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the board of commissioners within 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
Sec. 18-182. - Judicial review. 
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
Sec. 18-183. - Liability. 
(a)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)	The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
Secs. 18-184—18-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 18-206. - Review of ordinances regulating land development by applicant. 
The landowner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances that regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party that can obtain a permit. 
Sec. 18-207. - Application requirements. 
(a)	No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the board of commissioners to perform such activity. 
(b)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Such plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 18-233. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of sections 18-232 and 18-233. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(c)	A fee as provided in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged for each acre or fraction of an acre in the project area. 
(d)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 18-233(15) and (16), and bonding, if required as per subsection (e) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(e)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the erosion and sedimentation act, as amended, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction of an acre of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part of the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
Sec. 18-208. - Plan requirements. 
(a)	Generally. Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements contained in this section and section 18-207. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(b)	Data required. Data required for the site plan are as follows: 
(1)	Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
(2)	Description of existing land uses at the project site and description of the proposed project. 
(3)	Name, address and phone number of the property owner.
(4)	Name and phone number of a 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation control. 
(5)	Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres.
(6)	Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project, including the statement in bold letters that the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities. 
(7)	Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
(8)	Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for yearround seeding. 
(9)	Detailed drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(10)	Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection." 
(c)	Certification of plans; contents. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain: 
(1)	Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north.
(2)	Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets.
(3)	Boundary line survey.
(4)	Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary.
(5)	Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
(6)	Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., that might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
(7)	Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas.
(8)	Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
(9)	Delineate the 100-foot horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable.
(10)	Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6. 
(d)	Maintenance of control practices. Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
Sec. 18-209. - Permits. 
(a)	Issuance or denial. Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, provided that variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(b)	Approval of plan prior to issuance. No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by sections 18-207 and 18-208 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 18-207(e) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(c)	Phased development; separate permits. If the tract is to be developed in phases, a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(d)	Suspension, revocation or modification. The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(e)	Certification of payment of ad valorem taxes required for issuance. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the tax commissioner and the county clerk certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
Sec. 18-210. - Injury by permitholder to property of another. 
The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
Secs. 18-211—18-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 18-231. - Plans to contain control measures and practices; application and installation. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of sections 18-232 and 18-233. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
Sec. 18-232. - Best management practices. 
(a)	Best management practices as set forth in this section and section 18-233 shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of BMPs shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this section, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed' mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(b)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where BMPs have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten NTVs for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. 
(c)	Failure to properly design, install or maintain BMPs shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(d)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
Sec. 18-233. - Conservation and engineering practices. 
The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices, to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum.
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented.
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property.
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)	Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on the site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 18-232(b). 
(15)	Land disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 25 feet of the banks of any state waters, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; however, buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5 of chapter 5 of the Metropolitan River Protection Act shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. 
(16)	Land disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 100 horizontal feet, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, of the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the State Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-20—12-5-53, unless a variance for such activity is granted by the director except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
Sec. 18-234. - Adoption of requirements exceeding article standards. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions that contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 18-232 and 18-233. 
Secs. 18-235—18-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP REIMBURSEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of 1-16-2007, §§ I—IV, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. V, §§ 18-251—18-254, was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table.

Sec. 18-251. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous material cleanup means any cleanup activity requiring the specialized training and equipment of the fire department's Haz-Mat team. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2007, § I)
Sec. 18-252. - Reimbursable cost. 
(a)	Fire engine, per hour, per engine .....$60.00 
(b)	Haz-Mat unit, which consists of pickup truck and equipment trailer, per hour, per Haz-Mat unit .....40.00 
(c)	Personnel costs, per hour, per team member .....50.00 
(d)	Equipment costs of any damaged equipment, expended resources or resources rendered unusable .....Replacement cost. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2007, § II)
Sec. 18-253. - Reimbursement process. 
(a)	It shall be the responsibility of the Haz-Mat team leader involved in any cleanup activity to identify the equipment, personnel, and resources involved and present this documentation to the fire department chief. 
(b)	It shall further be the responsibility of the Haz-Mat team leader to obtain as much information possible concerning the identity, addresses, contact number, insurance policies, etc. of the party or parties involved or in any way responsible or potentially responsible for the hazard materials event. 
(c)	The chief shall then assess the cost as outlined herein, including the cost of any replacement equipment, damaged equipment, expended resources, or equipment or resources rendered unusable, and present such itemized breakdown to the county administrator for Emanuel County. 
(d)	The county administrator, in conjunction with the county attorney, are hereby authorized to pursue reimbursement for the cost of the hazardous materials cleanup event from any and all responsible parties through such efforts as they deem necessary including the filing of legal actions in courts of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2007, § III)
Sec. 18-254. - Disposition of recovered costs. 
Any and all monies recovered as a result of cost recoupment activities shall be deposited in a separate fund designated for the support of the Haz-Mat team and purchase of equipment, inventories, supplies, etc. for the team's use. If either the City of Swainsboro or the County of Emanuel incurs specific cost for a specific cleanup event then they shall be entitled the reimbursement of those costs from the Haz-Mat recoupment fund. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2007, § IV)
Secs. 18-255—18-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of 10-18-2010, §§ 1, 2, effective Jan. 1, 2011, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. VI, §§ 18-271 and 18-272, was at the editor's discretion.

Sec. 18-271. - Restrictions on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops, feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable Emanuel County ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)	Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)	Watering personal food gardens;
(6)	Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
(8)	Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
(9)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)	Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
(11)	Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or
(13)	Hydroseeding.
(Ord. of 10-18-2010, § 1)
Sec. 18-272. - Enforcement. 
(a)	No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)	The code enforcement office shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)	Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this article may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-18-2010, § 2)
Chapter 22 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10.
State Law reference— The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1).

Sec. 22-1. - Operation of rural volunteer fire departments. 
The following minimum requirements must be met by all rural volunteer fire departments in which county funds or equipment is or may be involved: 
(1)	Fire defenses and equipment training is required at least once each month.
(2)	A general membership meeting shall be held at least once each quarter (three months).
(3)	No alcoholic beverages are to be allowed on the property.
(4)	The elected fire chief is to be responsible for any county property on the site.
(5)	The county commissioners will communicate directly with the chief of each department.
(6)	Election of the fire chief and other officers must be held at a general membership meeting, and the procedures set out in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised are to be complied with. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1)
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-2. - Workers' compensation. 
County elected officials and county volunteer firefighters render a valuable service to the county and its citizens and as such the county elects to provide them workers' compensation coverage through the ACCG Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. 
Chapter 26 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 18; manufactured homes, ch. 34; planning, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 54; subdivisions, app. A.
State Law reference— Promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by state department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(a)(4); power of county board of health to adopt rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Requests for county assistance in disposal of dead animals. 
Persons who desire assistance from the county in the disposal of large dead animals must make a request through the county board of health (county health sanitarian). The health sanitarian must certify that a health hazard exists and that to the best of his knowledge the owner does not possess equipment to complete disposal of the animals. A fee in an amount as provided in the schedule of fees and charges must be paid, and the owner must sign a hold harmless agreement and certification before any disposal action is taken by employees of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 18-1)
Editor's note— The form to request assistance in the disposal of dead animals is on file in the county health department. 
Secs. 26-2—26-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6.

Sec. 26-36. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction, be punished for a misdemeanor in the magistrate court of the county. Persons convicted shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1992, § 18-26)
Sec. 26-37. - Fee. 
An annual fee will be charged for each food service establishment. These charges will be payable upon notification by health authorities. 
(Code 1992, § 18-27)
Sec. 26-38. - Display of inspection certificate. 
Every food service establishment in the county shall display, in a place designated by the county health department, the most recent inspection certificate of the food service establishment. 
(Code 1992, § 18-28)
Sec. 26-39. - Operation and maintenance standards. 
Operation and maintenance of food service establishments in the county shall be based upon the rules and regulations for food service as adopted by the state department of human resources on September 3, 1986. Such rules and regulations are attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 18-29)
Sec. 26-40. - Permit required. 
(a)	Prior to the commencement of operations of a new food service establishment, mobile food unit, temporary food service operation or a restricted food service operation in the county, and/or prior to transfer of ownership or relocation of an existing food service establishment, mobile food unit, temporary food service operation or a restricted food service operation in the county, a food service establishment permit must be obtained from the county health department. 
(b)	The application for the food service establishment permit shall be filed ten days prior to commencement of operations with the county health department environmental health section and disclose the following information: 
(1)	The name of the food service establishment;
(2)	The address of the physical location of the food service establishment or commissary in the case of a mobile unit; 
(3)	The name, address, telephone number of the business owner and authorized agent; and
(4)	The date operation is to begin and/or end;
(c)	It shall be the duty of the county health department environmental health officer to evaluate and issue food service permits for those sites that comply with the county board of health's rules and regulations for food service establishments. Any cost of said permit shall be set by the county board of health. It shall be the duty of the business owner to request evaluation by the environmental health officer to determine if the food service establishment complies with the rules and regulations for food service establishments as promulgated by the county health department prior to the commencement of operations. 
(d)	Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this section by operating a food service establishment in the county without first having applied for and been granted a permit for a food service establishment permit for the proposed location by the environmental health officer of the county, shall be punished by fine or imprisonment or both not exceeding a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. (O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20) 
Violators of this section shall be prosecuted by the county environmental health officer in the magistrate court of the county without a jury. The magistrate court may suspend any fine or sentence upon statement by the person signing affidavit that satisfactory compliance with the requirements of this section have been met. Review of convictions shall be certiorari to the superior court. 
(e)	Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of the county department of health's rules and regulations for food service establishments and has not fully corrected such violation after 30 days notice by the environmental health officer shall be punished by fine or imprisonment not exceeding a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. (O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20) 
Violators of this section shall be prosecuted by the county environmental health officer in the magistrate court of the county without a jury. The magistrate court may suspend any fine or sentence upon statement by the person signing affidavit that satisfactory compliance with the requirements of this section have been met. Review of convictions shall be certiorari to the superior court. 
(f)	The county environmental health officer as used in this section shall be the person appointed by the county board of health as the board's employee or agent responsible for the environmental health duties of the county board of health. 
(g)	The county board of health rules and regulations for food service establishments used in this section shall be those adopted and approved for use by the county board of health. (O.C.G.A. § 31-5) 
(Ord. of 6-15-1998(1), §§ 1—5, 7, 8)
Secs. 26-41—26-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 26-71. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction, be punished for a misdemeanor in the magistrate court of the county pursuant to 1955 Ga. Laws, page 3204. Persons convicted shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1992, § 18-51)
Sec. 26-72. - Suitable toilet facilities required. 
(a)	Each and every premises shall be provided with at least one separate pit privy or one separate flush toilet in accordance with the provisions of this article. No other types of toilets shall be permitted. 
(b)	All toilets shall be kept clean, sanitary and in good repair. No person shall abuse or misuse a toilet or place anything therein which the toilet was not intended to accommodate. 
(Code 1992, § 18-52)
Sec. 26-73. - Disposal of wastes. 
(a)	Disposal of human excrement. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any human excrement except in a toilet. 
(2)	In areas where permanent toilet facilities are not available, approved portable facilities shall be provided. These facilities shall be kept clean, sanitary and in good repair. 
(b)	Disposal of other wastes. 
(1)	All sinks, lavatories, basins, showerbaths, bathtubs, stationary laundry tubs or automatic washing machines, or similar plumbing fixtures or appliances, shall be connected to a public sewer or to septic tanks; provided that, where no sewer is available and where the use of a septic tank is not suitable or possible, other private sewage disposal facilities approved by the health officer shall be used. 
(2)	No industrial or commercial wastes shall be discharged into any watercourse, impoundment, storm sewer or public thoroughfare, except in such manner and after such treatment as the health officer may deem satisfactory. 
(Code 1992, § 18-53)
Sec. 26-74. - Flush toilets. 
(a)	Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer or to a septic tank; provided that, where a public sewer is not available and where the use of a septic tank is not suitable or possible, other private or semiprivate sewage disposal facilities approved by the health officer shall be used. 
(b)	Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(Code 1992, § 18-54)
Sec. 26-75. - Minimum size of residential lots when served by individual disposal system. 
(a)	A residential lot which will be served by a water supply other than an individual water supply, but which will require the installation of an individual sewage disposal system, shall have a minimum area of 16,000 square feet, except in special cases deemed to be a hardship. Upon a finding by the board of commissioners, based on information furnished by the developer at the time of the application for development plan approval, that safe and sanitary installations cannot be made on lots of 16,000 square feet, the board of commissioners may require that the lot size be increased. 
(b)	Except in special cases deemed to be a hardship, a residential lot which will require installation of a private water supply and private sewage disposal system shall have an area of not less than 32,000 square feet, exclusive of easements within which septic tank fields will not be permitted. Upon a finding by the board of commissioners, based on information furnished by the developer at the time of application for development plan approval, that safe and sanitary installations cannot be made on lots of 32,000 square feet, the board of commissioners may require that the lot size be increased. 
(Code 1992, § 18-55)
Sec. 26-76. - Operation and maintenance of individual disposal systems. 
Operation and maintenance of individual sewage disposal systems in the county, with the exceptions stated in this article, shall be based upon rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems as adopted by the state department of human resources on April 27, 1984. Such rules and regulations are attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 18-56)
Chapter 30 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.
State Law reference— Local and regional public libraries, O.C.G.A. § 20-5-20 et seq.; county and regional public libraries, O.C.G.A. § 20-5-40 et seq.; authority to provide for libraries, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(10).

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Name; purpose and general operation. 
(a)	The library organization shall be known as the Emanuel County Library, Swainsboro, Georgia. 
(b)	The object of the library shall be the furnishing of a complete library service to the people, adult and juvenile, of the county, under the terms and regulations set forth by the state governing public libraries (1935 Ga. Laws, page 409). 
(Code 1992, § 22-1)
Sec. 30-2. - Governing body. 
The governing body of the library shall be a board of trustees composed of ten residents of the county, as provided for in this chapter. The board of trustees may appoint an executive committee composed of the principal officers of the board to act upon matters between regular meetings of the board. 
(Code 1992, § 22-2)
Sec. 30-3. - Duties of librarian. 
The head librarian shall have charge of the library and have the care of books and other library property. He shall direct the staff members in all work pertaining to the efficient operation of the library. He shall select books and prepare orders for books, library supplies and other necessary items for the maintenance of the library, ascertaining at any time from the treasurer of the library board of trustees the amount of funds in the library budget for such expenditures as are needed. He shall prepare and submit in writing to the board of trustees at regular meetings a report of the operations of the library, including such recommendations as in his opinion will promote its efficiency. He shall prepare in writing an annual report showing fully the operations of the library and present this to the board of trustees and send a copy to the library extension service of the state department of education. 
(Code 1992, § 22-3)
Sec. 30-4. - Financial records. 
All bills or a duplicate of bills paid for the library shall be receipted and filed in the library as permanent records. In case the endorsed check is accepted as a sufficient receipt, the bill bearing the check number, with the cancelled check attached, shall be filed at the library. 
(Code 1992, § 22-4)
Sec. 30-5. - Library service. 
All services rendered by the library shall be free to the residents of the county. Loan periods for various types of books shall be specified by the library board of trustees, and such regulations shall be enforced by the librarian. A fine in the amount designated by the board of trustees, per day, shall be charged to all persons keeping books or other materials past the date set for their return to the library. 
(Code 1992, § 22-5)
Secs. 30-6—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Sec. 30-31. - Membership; term of office. 
The board of trustees of the county library shall consist of ten residents of the county representing a broad cross section of the population of the county, and shall include certain public officials as ex officio members as follows: 
(1)	The county school superintendent then in office.
(2)	A member of the board of commissioners designated by the board of commissioners.
(3)	A member of the City Council of the City of Swainsboro designated by the City Council of the City of Swainsboro. 
The other seven members of the board of trustees shall be appointed by the board of commissioners with the concurrence of the Mayor and Council of the City of Swainsboro for a term of three years, except that in the beginning the terms shall be staggered as follows: three members shall be appointed for three-year terms, two members shall be appointed for two-year terms, and two members shall be appointed for one-year terms. Vacancies among the members not ex officio shall be filled by the same method. 
(Code 1992, § 22-31)
Sec. 30-32. - Officers. 
The officers of the library board of trustees shall be a chairman, vice-chairman, secretary and treasurer, who shall be elected annually from the members. 
(1)	The chairman shall preside at board meetings, appoint committees and perform such other duties as generally pertain to that office. 
(2)	The vice-chairman shall perform the duties of the chairman in the absence of the chairman.
(3)	The secretary shall keep a record of attendance at board meetings, record the official actions of the board and have custody of its official books, which shall be housed at the library. He shall also notify the proper appointing powers of vacancies on the board. 
(4)	The treasurer shall receive all money for the board and deposit it in a local commercial bank, to be determined by the board, to the library account. He shall pay all bills certified by the librarian and shall report at each board meeting on the state of library funds. He shall notify the supporting agencies in writing if their appropriations are not paid in full up-to-date. His records shall be kept at the library. 
(Code 1992, § 22-32)
Sec. 30-33. - Meetings. 
(a)	Time and place of meetings. There shall be not less than six meetings of the library board of trustees, including the annual meeting, during each 12-month period. Each regular meeting shall be held at the time and date designated by the board of trustees in the library office or at such place as designated by the chairman. Special meetings shall be called by the chairman. Fifty percent of the membership of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(b)	Order of business. The order of business of regular meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)	Reading and approval of minutes.
(2)	Treasurer's report.
(3)	Report of the librarian.
(4)	Report of the committees.
(5)	Unfinished and new business.
(Code 1992, § 22-33)
Sec. 30-34. - Powers and duties. 
The library board of trustees shall define the general policies of the library and shall pass necessary rules and regulations for the government and control of the library. It shall employ as head librarian and other professional staff members persons holding library certificates issued by the state board for the certification of librarians, of the type required by law. Other staff members shall be employed and dismissed by the board of trustees upon recommendation of the head librarian. The board of trustees may accept and receive donations either in money, land or property for the purpose of maintaining or improving the library. 
(Code 1992, § 22-34)
Sec. 30-35. - Amendment of bylaws. 
The bylaws of the library board of trustees may be amended at any regular meeting of the board of trustees with a quorum present, by a two-thirds vote of the members present, provided all members have been notified in writing about the proposed amendment two weeks preceding the meeting. 
(Code 1992, § 22-35)
Chapter 34 - MANUFACTURED HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 26; planning, ch. 42; roads, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 54; subdivisions, app. A.
State Law reference— The Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq.; registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-38; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.; issuance of mobile home location permits, display of decals, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492; The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Setbacks. 
Setback lines for mobile home lots are established and shall be the same as for stick built homes as follows: 
(1)	Front setback—50 feet; 
(2)	Side setback (interior)—30 feet; 
(3)	Side setback (corner lots only)—40 feet; and 
(4)	Rear setback—30 feet. 
(Mo. of 11-20-2000)
Secs. 34-2—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PERMIT 

Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mobile home means a manufactured home as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131(2) of the act known as the Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act; provided, however, that those mobile homes which qualify the taxpayer for homestead exemption under state law shall not be considered mobile homes and shall not be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 26-26)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-32. - Compliance with article. 
(a)	No person shall initially locate any mobile home or relocate any mobile home within the limits of the county without having made the application and having obtained the permit required by this article. 
(b)	No person shall own or have located within the limits of the county any mobile home unless application for a permit has been made and a permit received as provided by this article. 
(c)	No person shall occupy any mobile home as a residence nor permit any other person to occupy the mobile home as a residence unless a mobile home permit has been obtained as provided by this article. 
(Code 1992, § 26-27)
Sec. 34-33. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall do any act prohibited by this article or shall fail to do any act required by this article shall be charged with each and every violation and shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county, and upon their being found guilty, pleading guilty or entering a plea of nolo contendere to a violation of any of the provisions of the article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1992, § 26-28)
Sec. 34-34. - Authority of tax commissioner. 
The tax commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered, subject to the specific provisions of this article, to prescribe application, permit and decal forms and thereafter to alter and change such forms, and the tax commissioner is empowered to require that applicants for a permit under this article furnish such information in writing as may be reasonably required to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 26-29)
Sec. 34-35. - Permit required prior to location or relocation of mobile home. 
(a)	Before any person shall locate or relocate a mobile home within the limits of the county, he shall apply for and obtain from the tax commissioner of the county a mobile home permit authorizing such location or relocation if such mobile home is to be used as a residence by the owner thereof, as a residence for others or for any other purpose. 
(b)	The owner of a mobile home used as a residence which is located within the limits of the county may not relocate the mobile home within the confines of the county or beyond such confines without first obtaining a mobile home relocation permit from the tax commissioner authorizing such relocation. 
(Code 1992, § 26-30)
Sec. 34-36. - Proof of payment of taxes. 
It shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any mobile home permit required by this article that the owner of the mobile home shall submit to the tax commissioner proof that all state and county taxes theretofore accruing and payable with respect to such mobile home have in fact been paid. If the mobile home which is to be located or relocated is then located within any portion of the county that lies within the limits of a municipality in the county, such owner shall likewise submit proof that all applicable municipal taxes have been paid before a permit may be issued. 
(Code 1992, § 26-31)
Sec. 34-37. - Fee. 
Each application for a mobile home moving permit required by this article shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount as provided in the schedule of fees and charges, which shall be paid to the tax commissioner before such permit shall be issued. All sums collected by the tax commissioner under the provisions of this article shall be paid into the county treasury. 
(Code 1992, § 26-32)
Sec. 34-38. - Issuance; decal. 
Any owner of a mobile home who has made application for the location or relocation of a mobile home and whose application meets the qualifications of this article shall be issued a mobile home permit and shall likewise be issued a decal. The decal to be issued with a mobile home permit authorizing location of a mobile home within the county shall be the same color as prescribed by state law and shall be affixed to the mobile home at all times it is being used as a residence within the confines of the county. The decal issued with the mobile home permit authorizing relocation of a mobile home shall be red in color and shall be affixed to the mobile home at all times such mobile home is being transported within the confines of this state. Such decals shall be designed in such manner and affixed to mobile homes in such a manner as to cause them to be easily visible for inspection. 
(Code 1992, § 26-33)
Sec. 34-39. - Notification of tax commissioner of other county when mobile home relocated in other county. 
Whenever a mobile home permit authorizing the relocation of a mobile home is issued and such mobile home is to be relocated within the confines of another county in this state, the tax commissioner of the county shall notify the tax commissioner of such other county of the date of the issuance of such permit. 
(Code 1992, § 26-34)
Sec. 34-40. - Annual permit and decal. 
Each year, beginning January 1, 1980, every owner of a mobile home subject to taxation under the provisions of this article shall, from January 1 to on or before April 1, make application to the tax commissioner for a mobile home location permit, and upon payment of a fee in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and proof of payment of taxes as provided in this article shall be issued a location permit. The issuance of the permit by the tax commissioner shall be evidenced by the issuance of a decal, green in color, which shall reflect the county of issuance and the calendar year for which such permit is issued. The decal shall be prominently attached and displayed on the mobile home by the owner. 
(Code 1992, § 26-35)
Sec. 34-41. - Compliance with planning and zoning requirements. 
The issuance of any mobile home permit under the provisions of this article shall in no way be construed as superseding any requirement for the location of mobile homes as such requirements may be contained within appropriate resolutions or other actions of any county planning and zoning commission that may be established in the county, and the issuance of a mobile home permit under the provisions of this article shall not prohibit any established planning and zoning commission from requiring a relocation of the mobile home to a place where such mobile home is permitted by any regulations promulgated by a county planning and zoning commission, but in such case the owner of such mobile home shall apply for and obtain a permit for such relocation as if such relocation were the result of his own initiative. 
(Code 1992, § 26-36)
Sec. 34-42. - Reports by mobile home dealers. 
All dealers in mobile homes shall furnish to the tax commissioner a list of all mobile homes in their possession, whether owned by them or not, on January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1992, § 26-37)
Sec. 34-43. - Responsibilities of park operators. 
No owner or operator of a mobile home park shall permit any mobile home to be located or relocated within the confines of such park for residential use unless the mobile home permit required by this article has been obtained. No owner or operator of any mobile home park shall permit any mobile home presently located within the limits of such park owned or operated by him to remain in such park after the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived unless a mobile home permit authorizing such continued location as required by this article has been obtained. 
(Code 1992, § 26-38)
Sec. 34-44. - Utilities. 
No person, firm, corporation, township, city or other entity supplying electricity, gas or water into, onto or for the use of any mobile home shall sell or otherwise supply to any such mobile home electricity, gas or water unless a current year's mobile home permit is affixed to the mobile home. 
Sec. 34-45. - Health department certification of sewage disposal. 
No person, firm, business or other entity shall occupy or allow others to occupy a mobile home unless the owner and/or occupier of such mobile home has obtained from the county health department a permit demonstrating that such home is adequately served by an approved septic tank or other approved sewage disposal method. 
Secs. 34-46—34-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITTING, USE AND PLACEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Former Art. III, superseded by an ordinance adopted May 20, 2000, pertained to mobile home site permits and derived from the Original Code. An ordinance adopted Sept. 18, 2000 has been included herein as a new Art. III at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 34-81. - Enactment and short title. 
The board of county commissioners hereby enacts and adopts the following ordinance, which shall be known and cited as the "Emanuel County Manufactured Home Ordinance." Those incorporated areas within the county are encouraged to adopt this or similar ordinances regarding manufactured homes for use within their jurisdictions. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 1)
Sec. 34-82. - Definitions. 
Board of commissioners means the Board of County Commissioners of Emanuel County. 
Building official means one of the persons, officers, officials or his authorized representative, whom the county administrator has appointed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. May also be referred to as "building inspector." 
Building permit (not a site permit or on-site sewage permit) means a written permit of certification issued by the building official permitting the construction, alteration, or extension of a manufactured home community. Also, that permit issued by the building official that is the final authority for the permanent installation of a manufactured home on an approved lot or parcel of land. The permit contains sections within itself, but is not limited to, those sections including: administrative details; a requirement, for certification from the tax assessors office, that the manufactured home is registered on the county tax digest; a certification by presentation of a valid permit from the county health department that the site will support on-site sewage management systems; a section for any required third party inspections or appraisals of the manufactured home; and a section detailing that all installation requirements are completed satisfactorily as a means of issuance of final permission to release the structure for residential occupation. 
Buffer strip means, not including the individual lot size requirements, a 50-foot wide area containing a scenic barrier along each exterior property line of a planned manufactured home community or a 50-foot wide area containing a scenic barrier when adjacent to a pre-existing conventional single-family residential community. 
Community water system (CWS) means a privately owned water system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption that meets the bacteriological and chemical requirements of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency's "Safe Drinking Water Act" and is permitted to operate under the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
Conditional use means a use, specifically designated in this article, that may cause harmful or undesirable effects on surrounding or nearby properties within a given area, but would in the opinion of the board of commissioners promote the public health, safety, morals, welfare, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare if such uses were controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood or upon any other standard provided by this article. 
County means Emanuel County, Georgia. 
DCA means the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
Driveway means a minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians for access from any street or road to a manufactured home lot. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof designed, arranged, or used principally for residential occupancy, not including motels, hotels, boarding houses, or rooming houses. 
Dwelling, single-family detached means a single residential detached building, manufactured home or site-built, designed for or containing one dwelling unit. 
Georgia Manufactured Housing Association means the not-for-profit trade organization representing the manufactured housing industry in Georgia. 
HUD means the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
IAW is an acronym meaning "in accordance with." 
Installation means the construction of a foundation system and the placement or erection of a manufactured home on the foundation system. Such term includes without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such home. Includes the connection to permanent utilities and placement of skirting and landing decks required by this article. The term "set-up" may be used interchangeably with the term installation. 
Installer means a person, agency, or entity responsible for performing an installation and who is required to be licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-164 and 43-14-13(k). 
(1)	Registered installer means an installer who has qualified, by completion of minimum educational requirements, to perform all aspects of installation, except the connection of the electrical service, sewer outlets and water system from the home to existing service supply. 
(2)	Licensed installer means an installer who has qualified, by completion of educational requirements above and beyond those of a registered installer to perform all aspects of an installation, including the connection of the electrical service, sewer outlets and water systems. 
Location permit means that term used by the county tax assessors office and the state that means the "tax decal" or "tax sticker" issued upon payment of required taxes. 
Manufactured home means a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and amended, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq. (The HUD Code, which became effective on June 15, 1976). 
Manufactured home community. See "planned manufactured home community." 
Manufactured home mover registration form means that form devised and used by the building official, completed by the applicant, that contains detailed information required to formally register for records purposes a manufactured home mover within the County. 
Manufactured home park. See "planned manufactured home community." 
Manufactured home, pre-HUD means any manufactured home that was not constructed to the HUD code, which was adopted June 15, 1976. All manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, et seq. 
Manufactured housing means a general term used to describe a type of housing that produced, either completely or partially in a factory, including manufactured homes, modular homes, and industrialized buildings. 
Manufactured housing rules and regulations means the rules and regulations of the Office of Commissioner of Insurance Safety Fire Division, Chapter 120-3-7. Such rules and regulations and their provisions are herein adopted. 
Mobile home means a term used to describe a manufactured home manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. See "manufactured home, pre-HUD." 
Mobile home park means a term used to describe a planned manufactured home park. See definition of "planned manufactured home community." 
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards means the national building code for all manufactured homes built since June 15, 1976, written and administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; also known as the HUD Code. 
Planned manufactured home community means a lot or series of lots used as a residential area occupied by manufactured homes; conforming to and approved in the site development plan, as provided in section 34-92 herein, with appropriate and adequate community services (for example: adequate garbage disposal, recreation facilities, utilities, streets, and sidewalks provided by the land owner) where the resident owns or rents the manufactured home and rents or leases the manufactured home space(s) but does not own the lot. 
Public water system (PWS) means a publicly owned water system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption that meets the bacteriological and chemical requirements of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency's "Safe Drinking Water Act" and is permitted to operate under the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
Public sewer means sanitary sewer service provided by the county or a municipality within the county. 
Recreational vehicle means a self-propelled or towed vehicle designed as a temporary dwelling for travel or recreational uses. See also the definition for "travel trailer." 
Scenic barrier means, either, a solid fence not less than ten feet in height of county commission approved, aesthetically pleasing, community compatible materials or the planting or use of fast growing evergreen trees, dense shrubbery, and other naturally growing plants of sufficient density and continuously maintained to accomplish the visual barrier purposes of a solid fence. It will encompass all areas of a planned manufactured home or subdivision community visible from the centerline of any public route, which abuts or is within 100 feet of the closest boundary line of the planned manufactured home community. Used in reference with a "buffer strip." 
Set-up. See the definition for "installation." 
Site-built home means a home built on-site for single-family occupancy. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, or building development and includes all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes further subdividing of the land or area subdivided. Subdivision does not include: 
(1)	The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are at least equal to standards set forth in this article. 
(2)	The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved or an existing street is not extended. 
Single-wide means an obsolete term used to describe a manufactured home having a width of between eight and 16 feet. 
Site permit means that form or permit used by the county tax assessor's office for the registering and de-registering of manufactured homes from the county tax digest. Not a location permit. 
Third party inspector means an inspector who has no financial or otherwise interest (other than compliance) in the manufactured home to be inspected, that is qualified by training, and experience in those areas of manufactured housing construction to inspect compliance with HUD/DCA code as set forth in credentials by either: the Georgia Office of Insurance and Fire Safety Commissioner or other state governments' equivalent commission; Georgia Manufactured Housing Association or other state's equivalent manufactured housing associations; or equivalent regional, county, or local governments' building inspection authorities. 
Trailer means an obsolete term used to describe a manufactured home. 
Trailer court means an obsolete term used to describe a planned manufactured home community. See definition of "planned manufactured home community." 
Trailer park means an obsolete term used to describe a planned manufactured home community. See definition of "planned manufactured home community." 
Travel trailer means a vehicle designed as a temporary dwelling for travel or recreational uses not more than eight feet in width and not more than 30 feet in length. 
Travel trailer park means a tourist court as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-28, which generally has spaces on which are designed to park two or more travel trailers or recreational vehicles for a period of use for less than 30 days (at a time) which is operated in accordance with tourist accommodations permits issued by the county health department. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 2)
Sec. 34-83. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to set forth requirements from the date of approval of the ordinance from which this article derives, for placement of manufactured homes or recreational vehicles in the county. These requirements include, among other things, the acquisition of a building permit, on-site sewage permit, tie-downs, connection to electrical, water, and wastewater systems, and annual manufactured home tax decal. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 3)
Sec. 34-84. - Registration. 
Every person, firm, corporation, or other entity holding title to or possessing a manufactured home which is placed or located within limits of the county, shall report the location of the manufactured home to and obtain a tax decal for the manufactured home from the tax commissioner of the county, annually, no later than May 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 4)
Sec. 34-85. - Authority. 
(a)	The tax assessor is hereby authorized and empowered subject to the specific provisions of this article, to prescribe application, and tax decal forms, and thereafter to alter and change the same, and said tax assessor is empowered to require that applicant furnish such information in writing as may be reasonably required to effectuate the purpose hereof. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the building official or other appropriate authority of the county as designated by the county board of commissioners to enforce the provisions of this article. Upon information constituting probable cause and known to any person authorized to enforce provisions of this article that a violation of same has occurred, a citation and summons may be issued to the alleged violator requiring him to appear before the Chief Magistrate of the Magistrate Court of Emanuel County, Georgia, on a day and at a time certain, to answer the charge contained therein. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 5)
Sec. 34-86. - Building permit required. 
(a)	No mover, hauler, person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall move a manufactured home to any location beyond the limits of the lot or parcel of land upon which it is presently located, or upon which it was originally located pursuant to the provisions of this article, without first obtaining a building permit from the building official's office of the county authorizing such relocation. No building permit shall be issued unless the person, firm, corporation, or other entity moving it specifies the new location to which it is to be moved. 
(b)	It is a violation of this article for any mover, hauler, person, or other entity to move, or to have moved, a manufactured home into Emanuel County whose designation is within the county or to move a manufactured home out of Emanuel County whose location has been within the county without first obtaining a site permit from the tax assessor of the county authorizing such relocation. 
(c)	The site permit authorizing the relocation of manufactured homes, shall be affixed to the manufactured home at all times such manufactured home is being transported within the confines of this county. 
(d)	It shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any permit required by this article that the owner of said manufactured home submit to the tax assessor proof that all state and county taxes theretofore accruing and payable with respect to such manufactured home have in fact been paid. 
(e)	No building permit will be issued by the building official until an on-site sewage permit for a new installation or an "existing on-site sewage management system performance evaluation report form" for connection to an existing system is obtained from the health department. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 6)
Sec. 34-87. - Tax decal required. 
Any owner of a manufactured home who had made application for the location of a manufactured home and whose application meets the requirements of this article, shall have or shall obtain a tax decal, upon payment of required charge for the same. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 7)
Sec. 34-88. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)	Only HUD Code or DCA approved manufactured homes, as defined in section 34-82, will be permitted for location in the county. Buildings or other structures designed primarily for storage which do not meet either the Georgia 1994, Standard Building Code, the HUD Code, or meet with DCA approval shall not be used for residential occupancy. Pre-HUD manufactured homes located within the county prior to the adoption of this article may be relocated outside the county, subject, however, to the other requirements for moving manufactured homes as provided herein. Only buildings or other structures, which were designed for human occupancy can be sold or leased for that purpose within the county. 
(b)	Site requirements. All manufactured homes must be located on an approved site which conforms with the standards outlined in this article and the county land use ordinance. Except that where such dwelling or structure shall be connected to an off-site central or public sewer system and public water system or community water system, the minimum lot size shall be one useable acre and conform to all other requirements of the county land use ordinance. 
(c)	Application procedure. 
(1)	No manufactured home may be moved into or relocated within the county or occupied until a building permit has been issued and properly completed, as applicable. 
(2)	Applications for a building permit shall be available at the county building official's office. 
(3)	The site permit and copy of the plat for the proposed manufactured home location may be obtained from the county Tax assessors office as provided herein. Plat copies that are not available at the tax assessors' office may be further obtained from the clerk of the superior court's office. 
(4)	The applicant, upon obtaining the building permit, will request from the county health department an on-site sewage permit for a new installation or an "existing on-site sewage management system performance evaluation report form" for connection to an existing system. The environmental health officer will annotate on the building permit that this step is completed and attach the appropriate document to the building permit. 
(5)	Installation must comply with section 34-89 below in order to obtain building official approval for occupancy. Such approval is necessary to obtain permanent electrical service. Manufactured homes will not be authorized to receive permanent electrical service until the provider of electrical service has been notified for approval for occupancy by the building official. 
(6)	Manufactured home dealers (sellers) responsible for the delivery and set-up of manufactured homes in the county shall comply with the installation requirements of this article and the statutes and regulations of the state, and shall, in any event, complete correction of such deficiencies as are identified by the building official within ten days. The failure to correct such installation and set-up deficiencies, unless prevented from doing so, shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(d)	Recreational vehicles. 
(1)	The above requirements do not apply to recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall not be approved for permanent installation or permanent occupancy and may only be used for a maximum of 90 consecutive days within any 12-month period as a temporary residence. All recreation vehicles must display a current state license and registration. Building permits will not be issued for recreational vehicles. 
(2)	Recreational vehicles known as park models, park cabins or park lodges to are allowed to be installed in the county requiring the same set-up requirements and permitting requirements as a HUD approved home. 
(3)	Non-HUD or non-DCA approved structures which were not designed for residential use may be renovated and refurbished for non-permanent occupancy, which is defined as occupancy, which does not involve more than seven consecutive overnight stays within any 30-day period. 
(4)	At the option of the homeowner, so long as a manufactured home is properly installed, and the front landing erected as required by section 34-89(e), an extension not to exceed 60 days may be granted to complete final compliance, with all of the provisions of the county's manufactured home ordinance. If this option is chosen, a second inspection fee of $75.00 will be charged. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 8; Amd. of 5-21-01; Amd. of 12-16-2002, § 8.4)
Sec. 34-89. - Manufactured home installation requirements. 
(a)	Utility connections. All manufactured homes must be permanently connected to water, sewage, and electrical service. 
(1)	Water. Water service may be public or private. All water service must be freeze proof at elevations above and below the ground. 
(2)	Sewer. Installation of and/or connection to a new or existing on-site sewage systems must be permitted and/or final inspection completed by the county health department. 
(3)	Electrical. Electrical service must meet minimum requirements for safety. 
(b)	Foundation. Unless placed on a permanent foundation, all manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with the Installation of Manufactured and Mobile Homes rules and regulations established and published by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-16, et seq.), installed with permanent skirting, secured with tie-down devices and provided with steps and landings. The installation of all required foundation requirements must be inspected and approved by the building official. 
(c)	Skirting. Installation, upkeep, and continuous maintenance of skirting shall be required. Installation of skirting shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Acceptable materials include vinyl, masonry, stone, fiberglass, simulated brick or stone, or other materials manufactured solely for the purpose of skirting. Metal skirting is allowed, so long as the following conditions are met: 
(1)	29 gauge metal or better.
(2)	Installed vertically with proper crimping.
(3)	Framed with treated lumber, no smaller than 2 inches × 4 inches.
(4)	Vented properly.
(5)	Uniform color.
(6)	Properly drained to prevent structural deterioration.
(d)	Tie-downs. Each manufactured home shall have tie-downs or other devices securing the stability of the manufactured home as per installation of Manufactured Homes and Mobile Homes rules and regulations established and published by Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq.). 
(e)	Steps and landings. Steps and landings are required for all homes at all exterior exits/entrances. A minimum landing size of four feet by six inches, of pressure treated lumber or elevated concrete is required. Install wood landings with support posts placed 24 inches into soil for stability. Landings should be installed at the same elevation, but shall be no less than six inches below the elevation of the entrance/exit. Loose, stacked steps are strictly prohibited. If the landing is over 30 inches from the ground, sturdy handrails and guardrails are required. 
(f)	Recreational vehicles. Permanent connection of recreational vehicles to water, sewer, or electrical service is prohibited. Installation of recreational vehicles on piers and jacks permanently is also prohibited. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 9; Amd. of 12-16-2002, § 9.3)
Sec. 34-90. - Manufactured homes not located in planned manufactured home communities. 
(a)	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes shall be allowed in all locations within the county and shall be regulated uniformly for compatibility with other housing constructed on-site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this article. 
(b)	Design standards. Manufactured homes not located in planned manufactured home communities shall meet the following design standards: 
(1)	The exterior siding shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, or aluminum (vinyl covered or painted, but in no case shall exceed the reflectivity of gloss white paint) comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in conventional residential construction. 
(2)	The skirting shall be unpierced except for required ventilation and access and shall be installed, and constructed as provided in subsection 34-89(c), supra. 
(3)	Landings of reasonable composition and size per subsection 34-89(e). 
(4)	Neither manufactured homes, pre-HUD homes, nor recreational vehicles shall be used as storage buildings. 
(c)	Compatibility standards. Compatability standards for manufactured homes not located in planned manufactured home communities are as follows: 
(1)	All towing devices, wheels, axles and bolt-on hitches must be removed.
(2)	Steps and landings are required for all homes at all exterior exits/entrances. A minimum landing size of four feet by six inches, of pressure treated lumber or elevated concrete is required. Landings should be installed at the same elevation, but shall be no less than six inches below the elevation of the entrance/exit. Loose, stacked steps are strictly prohibited. If the landing is over 30 inches from the ground, sturdy handrails and guardrails are required. 
(3)	Incorporated areas and municipalities are advised to develop and implement compatibility standards for location of manufactured homes into existing residential and nonresidential communities. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 10)
Sec. 34-91. - Other manufactured homes used for residential purposes. 
(This section has been reserved for future use.) 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 11)
Sec. 34-92. - Planned manufactured home community requirements. 
(a)	Jurisdiction. These regulations shall govern the construction, use and operation of all planned manufactured home communities within the county. 
(b)	Registration. Every person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity owning or operating a manufactured home park, and each such entity engaged in the sale or rental of manufactured homes or lots upon which to place them, shall furnish the tax assessor of the county on January 1 of each year with a complete list of all manufactured homes parked, rented or otherwise located upon the property of the entity or in a manufactured home park operated by the entity. 
(c)	Development of a manufactured home community plan. 
(1)	A manufactured home community plan shall be developed and drawn to a scale of one inch to 100 feet and shall include the following: 
a.	The name of the community, the name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) and the names and addresses of the designer or surveyor; 
b.	The date, scale, and north arrow;
c.	The boundaries of the community;
d.	The site plan of the community showing streets, driveways, open areas, parking spaces, service buildings, water courses, easements and manufactured home spaces; 
e.	Name(s) of adjoining property owner(s);
f.	The identification of all gas, water, electric, telephone, television cable, and sewage lines that will serve the community. Street lights, solid waste containers and surface water drainage plans shall also be shown on the plan. 
g.	A minimum of a Level 3, Soil Report from a state certified soil classifier for each individual lot, and all of those other requirements set forth by the board of health rules and regulations for on-site sewage management. 
h.	A copy of the department of natural resources, environmental protection division (EPD), written approval of the public or community water system. 
(2)	Review and approval of plan. Before a permit is issued for construction of manufactured home community, the plan for the community must be submitted with appropriate fees and approved in writing pursuant to environmental health rules and regulations with the environmental health officer at the county health department. Upon receipt of health department written approval, the plans will be submitted with the appropriate fees by the developer to the building official or designated county official in charge of plan approvals to insure that the proposed manufactured home community meets the standards of this article. If the plan meets the standards of this article, the building official and developer shall present the plan to the board of county commissioners for final approval. The board of county commissioners will then authorize the building official to issue the permit for construction of the manufactured home community. If slight variances from the approved plan are required to accommodate utilities, or otherwise, the building official shall have the authority to approve an appropriate remedy. 
(d)	Development standards. 
(1)	Density and area. 
a.	The maximum density within a manufactured home community shall not exceed two units per useable acre when using a public or community water system; one unit per useable acre when using an individual water well; or according to local, state, or federal guidelines currently in effect, whichever are greater. 
b.	A manufactured home community shall front on a public street, shall have a minimum frontage of 60 feet on the public street and shall contain a minimum area of five acres. 
(2)	Setbacks. 
a.	Along public streets. There shall be a 100-foot minimum building line along all exterior park boundaries that abut a public street. 
b.	Along rear and side property lines. All community exterior buildings not adjacent to a public street shall be provided with a ten-foot minimum building line. 
c.	Along community streets. There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between the manufactured home and any abutting community street. 
d.	Along any public route. A scenic barrier will be utilized and there shall be a minimum distance of 100 feet between the manufactured home community and the right-of-way of any public route. 
e.	Along adjacent property lines. Buffer strips (see section 34-82, definitions) are required along adjacent property lines and adjacent to pre-existing conventional single-family communities. 
f.	Required separation between manufactured homes. Manufactured homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least 30 feet. Porches and decks without opaque tops or roofs shall for the purposes of separation requirements, be excluded from this requirement. 
(3)	Lot area. Manufactured home lots/sites shall have a minimum lot width and area as follows: 
a.	Lots/sites served by both (community or public) water and sewers:

 
b.	Lots/sites served by community or public water and individual septic tanks shall contain a minimum lot area as established and as approved by the health officer. 
(4)	Community improvements. 
a.	Paving, soil and ground cover requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home community shall be continuously maintained with either pavement, covered with crushed stone, or other solid material, or protected with grass or other vegetative cover that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust. 
b.	Lot/site requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every manufactured home community shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface or storm water in a safe, efficient manner. 
(5)	Accessory storage buildings. One accessory storage building is allowed on an individual lot. The storage building is to be located in the rear of the lot behind the manufactured home and may be located within ten feet of the rear line of the individual lot/site. The maximum size of the storage building shall not exceed 120 square feet in size and shall only be used for storage items of the person(s) living in the manufactured home. 
(6)	Common open space. Each planned manufactured home community shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet set aside for common open space. In cases of communities larger than the minimum five acres, or in case of expansion of existing parks, 400 square feet of common open space shall be added for each additional manufactured home space. 
(7)	Convenience establishments. Establishments of a commercial nature, other than a coin operated laundry, may not be established in a planned manufactured home community. 
(e)	Manufactured home community street system and vehicle parking. 
(1)	Community street systems. Community street systems shall meet the following standards: 
a.	The entrance and exit street or streets shall be designed to provide safe and convenient access between the public street and the community interior street system. 
b.	Each site shall be accessible from abutting streets for all essential and emergency uses by vehicular equipment, including equipment used by public protective agencies such as fire, police, and ambulance services. 
c.	The street layout shall be designed to provide for the continuous flow of traffic, with cul-de-sacs, with a minimum radius of 50 feet, being permissible. 
d.	Traffic control signs such as "stop", "yield", "slow-children playing", and "speed limit", shall be placed throughout the community where necessary. 
e.	Each interior street shall have a permanent sign installed with a designated name identifying each street. 
f.	Streets and parking areas shall be maintained by the owner or management of the manufactured home community. 
(2)	Vehicle parking. Off-street parking areas or on-street parking lanes shall be provided for the use of park occupants and guests. 
a.	A minimum area of 400 square feet of parking shall be provided for each lot/site for two automobiles. 
b.	Minimum road widths of 24 feet of unobstructed width for two-way traffic; 14 feet for one-way traffic and at least nine feet shall be added for each parking lane if provided. Any road paving will be in compliance with standards set forth by the county road superintendent. 
c.	All off-street parking areas or spaces shall have direct access to an interior street, no direct driveway access shall be permitted between manufactured home lots to any exterior street. 
(f)	Manufactured home standards and required improvements. 
(1)	Tie-downs. Each manufactured home shall have tie-downs or other devices securing stability of the manufactured home as per Installation of Manufactured Home and Mobile Home rules and regulations established and published by Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner (O.C.G.A. § 8-2160 et seq.). 
(2)	Foundations. Foundations shall be installed in accordance with the Installation of Manufactured Homes and Mobile Homes rules and regulations established and published by Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq.). 
(3)	Steps and landings. Steps and landings are required for all homes. 
(4)	Skirting. Installation, upkeep, and continuous maintenance of skirting shall be required. Installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Acceptable materials include vinyl, masonry, stone, fiberglass, simulated brick or stone, or other materials manufactured solely for the purpose of skirting. Metal skirting is expressly prohibited and is not approved for use. 
(5)	Porches, decks, exterior additions. Porches, decks, and exterior additions will meet compatibility standards as to design, material, and appearance and be built IAW local building regulations and/or the provisions of the appropriate sections of the Southern Standard Building Code in their absence. 
(g)	Water supply, sewage and refuse disposal, and utilities. 
(1)	Water supply. An adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided for the manufactured home community park. The source of the water supply shall either be through a public water system with the community connecting to the water line, or when such a system is not available, the manufactured home community must be serviced by a supply approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, or local health officer. 
(2)	Sewage disposal. An adequate and safe sewage disposal system shall be provided in the manufactured home community. Collection systems, sewage treatments facilities of individual septic tank systems shall be approved by the county health department or the Georgia Department of Human Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
(3)	Refuse. There shall be sufficient refuse collection facilities, containers, and devices and frequent removal of the waste from those containers. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the manufactured home community shall be so conducted as to prevent health hazards, rodent harborage or insect breeding areas. 
(4)	Electrical equipment and installation. Lot/sites and communities shall have all equipment and installations designed, constructed and maintained in compliance with the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70) and/or state and local law, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 12)
Sec. 34-93. - Local registration requirement for installers. 
(a)	Anyone who moves, performs the set-up, or installs manufactured homes within the county is required to be registered, for records purposes, with the building official by completing the "manufactured home mover registration form" and paying required records fees. Registration records fees will be set by the board of county commissioners. 
(b)	Installers will re-register annually at the beginning of each new year. Individuals will be required, when registering, to present their state installer license, which is issued by the State of Georgia. Suspension or revocation of the license by the state will automatically void the installer registration with the county. 
(c)	The building official will maintain the list of registered installers and keep them informed of any changes or interpretations that may affect their proper installation of a home. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 13)
Sec. 34-94. - Installation of manufactured homes. 
All manufactured housing, whether in a subdivision, park, or planned community, shall be erected, tied down, underpinned and have utilities connected thereto in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Office of the State Fire Marshall, State of Georgia, as amended or modified from time to time. 
(1)	The building official will develop and make available all those minimally required forms, applications, checklists, and procedure guides necessary to assist the consumer and installer(s) in complying with and maintaining the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 14)
Sec. 34-94.1. - Required inspections. 
(a)	Set-up inspection. All of the following must be completed before calling for the inspection: 
(1)	The home must be completely set-up and tied down. The building official will inspect the piers, anchors, and straps. 
(2)	The sewage lines must be completely installed under the home. IAW manual for on-site sewage management, four-inch schedule forty pipe must be used from the edge of the building to the on-site sewage system. 
(3)	The electrical service must be connected. The building official will inspect the service pole, the outside and inside electrical panel. 
(4)	The water service must be connected.
Note: The inspector will need access to the inside of the home. Please leave the door unlocked or make the key available at the time of the inspection. 
Important: Do not underpin (skirt) the home until the set-up inspection has been approved. 
(b)	Final inspection. The following items must be completed before calling for this inspection: 
(1)	The manufactured home must be underpinned.
(2)	The landings and steps (porches or decks) must be completed and properly placed.
(3)	The owner's copy of the on-site sewage final inspection form must be presented to the building official. 
(c)	Permit and inspection information. The permit is valid for six months. Each time an inspection is made, it renews the permit for an additional six months. If the permit goes over six months without an inspection, it will expire unless you call for an extension before it expires. 
(Amd. of 11-20-2000)
Sec. 34-95. - Final inspection forms. 
(a)	A final inspection compliance document will be issued by the building official (and maintained on file therein), only upon satisfactory completion of the requirements of this article. 
(b)	Permanent utilities. 
(1)	All manufactured housing installations must meet the manufacturer's specifications and/or the specifications of this article before permanent utilities (water, sewage and electrical) may be activated or utilized. 
(2)	Permanent electrical service for the manufactured housing will not be activated, and may be disconnected by order of the building official, until such time as the manufactured housing installation: meets all of the requirement of this article; and the final inspection form from the building official is completed, and is provided by the citizen to the area electrical service provider. 
(3)	Hardship. In the case of hardship, temporary utility connections shall be approved, for a period not to exceed 60 days, in writing by the board of county commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 15)
Sec. 34-96. - Maintenance of minimal housing standards. 
(a)	All manufactured housing shall be continuously maintained IAW HUD/DCA standards.
(1)	All manufactured housing that is ten years old or older, on the date it arrives, or is planned to arrive on the property for installation, shall be pre-inspected at owner's expense by the building official or third party inspector for compliance with, and repaired to, the HUD/DCA Code or other applicable standard building codes for manufactured housing in effect at date of manufacture. Deficiencies and noncompliance items must be repaired prior to issuance of a final inspection form for the manufactured home's site installation. 
(2)	Any manufactured home which has been damaged by fire, natural, or manmade disaster must within 45 days, from when such damage has occurred, be either: inspected by the building official or third party inspector and completely repaired to HUD/DCA code; or removed from the premises and proper disposal made thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 16)
Sec. 34-97. - Variances. 
Upon application for a variance and consideration of the same, and a determination that extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with the provisions of this article due to unusual topographic, health, public safety, or other conditions beyond the control of the applicant, the board of county commissioners meeting in session may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided, however, that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent or purpose of this article. Any variance thus authorized is required to be entered in the minutes and the reason that justified the departure to be set forth. Ten days prior to issuance of a variance, all neighboring property owners within a 500-foot radius of the property requesting a variance, will have been duly notified by certified mail. This advanced notification is intended for their information only, and not for their approval or concurrence. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 17)
Sec. 34-98. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)	Violations. Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. The owner or tenant of any manufactured home and any dealer, builder, installer, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found equally guilty of a separate offense and be subject to the same penalties as mentioned below. 
(b)	Penalties. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved if ordered by the court. 
(c)	Nuisance. Any violation of any provision, requirement, term or condition of this article shall constitute a nuisance and any person aggrieved thereby may abate the same or the same may be abated as a public nuisance. Continuous violation thereof may be restrained in a court of equity having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 19)
Sec. 34-99. - Non-conforming use. 
The lawful use of land existing at the time of the adoption of this regulation, although such does not conform to the provisions herein, may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of one year, the existing community shall be in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. Any expansion or an addition to an existing community shall be in conformance with these regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 20)
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 62.
State Law reference— Violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt ordinances for the purpose of preserving public health, safety and welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2).

Sec. 38-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)	Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following within the confines of the county shall be guilty of disorderly conduct, which is prohibited: 
(1)	Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of his life, limb or health. 
(2)	Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)	Endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm.
(4)	Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property. 
(5)	Assemble or congregate with another or others and cause, provoke or engage in any fight or brawl. 
(6)	Collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities.
(7)	Assemble or congregate with another or others and engage or attempt to engage in gaming.
(8)	Frequent any public place and obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device, or attempt to do so. 
(9)	Use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil. 
(b)	Any person failing to comply with the mandatory provisions of this section or doing any act prohibited by this section shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction in the magistrate court of the county shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1992, § 30-1)
Sec. 38-2. - Removal of logging debris from roads; obstructing or damaging roads during logging operations. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or other entity to leave debris of any nature, either natural or manmade, on the rights-of-way owned by the county within the unincorporated areas of the county such as to impede or impair, in any manner, the county's ability to maintain such rights-of-way. Violation of this section shall subject the responsible party to prosecution in the magistrate court of the county and upon a plea of guilty, nolo contendere, or a finding of guilty shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or incarceration in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 12 months. In addition to such criminal penalties, violations of this section shall subject all responsible parties to a suit by the county for damages to cover any cost incurred in removal of said debris. Any action to collect such damages by the county shall be brought in a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(b)	At any time the road superintendent of the county deems that continued logging operations on any section of county roadway would cause extensive damage to the roadway, and if such decision is concurred in by the county administrator or the chairman of the board of commissioners, then the road superintendent may request in writing to the responsible parties that logging activities in this designated area cease for a period of 24 hours. Such cease and desist request may be extended for an additional 24 hours by the chairman of the board of commissioners. If the parties notified refuse to cease logging operations, then the road superintendent shall notify such parties that damages for repair will be assessed against them, and will deliver to them in writing a good faith estimate of the amount of damage and the cost of repair. If the responsible parties desire to continue such logging operations, then they shall post with the office of the board of commissioners a bond in an amount twice the amount of the good faith estimate of damage and cost of repair, and the county shall have the right to repair the damage and assess the costs against the bond or bondsman. If the responsible parties fail to cease operations and further fail to post the bond referred to in this subsection, then the county shall be entitled to take all appropriate action, including the seeking of a temporary or permanent restraining order from the court of proper jurisdiction, and action to collect such damages as are incurred, including expenses of litigation. 
(c)	Until further notice, all storm related vegetation debris in Emanuel County must be transported to a county approved disposal site to be designated by the county administrator or his designee. 
(Code 1992, § 30-2; Ord. of 5-14-2008)
Chapter 42 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-4(10); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 26; manufactured homes, ch. 34; roads, ch. 46; signs, ch. 50; subdivisions, app. A.
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq.; area planning and development commissions succeeded by regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-41.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAND USE 

Sec. 42-31. - Purpose. 
While the county does not have and is not presently considering the adoption of a comprehensive zoning ordinance, nonetheless, the county must consider policies and procedures affecting land use within the unincorporated areas of the county. The purpose of this article is to delineate the procedures that will be employed when a land use policy is being considered and the various factors that will be employed by the board of commissioners in considering the adoption of any new land use policy or any amendment to an existing policy. 
Sec. 42-32. - Notice of hearing. 
Anytime a policy or procedure affecting land use within the unincorporated areas of the county is to be considered by the commissioners the public shall be given notice by advertisement in the legal organ of the county at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the matters which will be brought before the commissioners for consideration and the time, place and date of the hearing. If third parties are requesting the consideration of the adoption of the new policy or a change in existing policy then it shall be their responsibility to comply with this provision for public notice; otherwise, it shall be the responsibility of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 42-33. - Hearing procedures. 
(a)	Hearings under this article before the board of commissioners shall be at all times public and all discussions and deliberations shall be conducted in an open meeting; provided, however, that nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the board from going into executive session for the purpose of discussing legal ramifications involving the matter under consideration with the county attorney and such discussions shall be considered occurring by virtue of the attorney-client relationship. 
(b)	The chairman or his designee shall conduct the hearing and shall have the right to reasonably limit the time which any person supporting the proposal or any person opposing the proposal shall have to address the commissioners. The chairman shall also, in his discretion, have the right to limit the number of persons who will be allowed to address the board. 
(c)	The proponents of the proposal shall be given the first opportunity to present their case and the opponents shall then follow. At the end of the presentations, one person representing the proponents and one person representing those opposing the proposal shall be given the opportunity to make a brief summary to the board. 
(d)	If either the proponents or those opposing the proposal are represented by an attorney, then such representation shall be disclosed to the chairman or his designee immediately prior to the hearing; and the attorney's clients' statements during the hearing will be limited to answering questions propounded by their attorney. 
(e)	Once the chairman has determined that all third party presentations have been completed the board shall then discuss the matter and vote upon any appropriately presented motion. Once board discussion has begun then no further evidence may be presented or arguments made either for or against the proposal. Nothing contained in this article shall limit the ability of the chairman or individual commissioners to ask questions of the proponents or opponents which may be raised as a result of board member discussions. 
Sec. 42-34. - Standards and factors to be considered for all land use proposals. 
(a)	The following are standards and factors to be considered for all land use proposals:
(1)	Existing land use patterns.
(2)	Changes in property conditions or land use patterns since the time of any prior consideration of a similar proposal. 
(3)	Effect upon the public health and welfare, if any, of the county as a whole or any particular segment of the county. 
(4)	The cost to local government for providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public services. 
(5)	Whether the proposal requires a major change in existing levels of public service which the county is not feasibly prepared to offer. 
(6)	Effect upon public transportation.
(7)	Effect upon public safety.
(8)	The general aesthetic affect, if any, of the proposal.
(9)	Impact on the environment, including, but not limited to drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality and water quality and quantity. 
(10)	Whether there exists a substantial need for the proposal.
(11)	The relative gain to the public, as compared to any alleged hardship that might be imposed upon an individual property owner and the relative loss to the public, as compared to any benefit that might be gained by any individual property owner. 
(12)	Whether there are other existing or changing conditions within the county affecting the use and development of the property which gives supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposal. 
(13)	Any other factors relevant to the balancing of the public interest in protecting and promoting the public health, safety and general welfare of the county and its citizens as compared to the right of unrestricted use of property. 
(14)	Any other good and sufficient cause mitigating either for or against the proposal so long as such causes can legally be considered by the commissioners in rendering a land use decision. 
(b)	Whenever any municipality within the county proposes to annex any portion of the unincorporated area of the county, the annexing municipality shall provide the county with reasonable notice in writing of the proposed land use classification, including zoning (if applicable), of the area that is proposed for annexation. Such written notice shall be provided to the county no less than 90 days prior to the final action necessary to accomplish the annexation. 
(c)	If the county objects in writing to any part of the proposed land use classifications, the municipality and the county shall each appoint representatives to negotiate and resolve the dispute. 
(d)	If the dispute cannot be resolved by the representatives appointed pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the municipality and the county will engage in mediation to resolve the dispute with a mediator selected from the list of mediators approved by the state department of community affairs. 
(e)	If the dispute cannot be resolved through mediation pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, the municipality and the county shall submit the dispute to a panel of three arbitrators. One arbitrator shall be selected by the municipality, one arbitrator shall be selected by the county, and the third arbitrator shall be selected by the two arbitrators selected by the municipality and the county. The parties agree that the results of the arbitration shall be binding on the municipality and the county, and either party may enforce the decision of the arbitrators in any court of competent jurisdiction through mandamus, specific performance or any other available equitable remedy. 
Chapter 46 - ROADS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county saved from repeal, § 1-4(6); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county saved from repeal, § 1-4(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; manufactured homes, ch. 34; planning, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62; subdivisions, app. A.
State Law reference— Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4).

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Art. I was added, at the discretion of the editor, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. of 3-17-2008 as Art. II, §§ 46-31—46-41. See also the Code Comparative Table.

Sec. 46-1. - Installation of driveways by county. 
(a)	The county will install a driveway to a residence or mobile home provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)	A certificate of approval of the septic tank and drainfield must be obtained from the county health sanitarian. 
(2)	In the case of a mobile home, a current mobile home site permit must be affixed or a letter must be obtained from the tax commissioner stating that taxes have been paid. 
(3)	Location, installation procedures and pipe size must be approved by the road superintendent.
(4)	Cost of materials must be paid in advance.
(b)	If other driveways are requested at locations other than where a residence or mobile home is to be located, subsections (a)(3) and (4) of this section will apply. 
(c)	No county equipment or personnel will be permitted to work on private property.
(Code 1992, § 10-1)
Sec. 46-2. - Installation of water lines under unpaved county roads. 
The board of commissioners will allow, after inspection by the road superintendent and a recommendation by the superintendent, the installation of a water line under county unpaved roads, providing the installation conforms to the following: 
(1)	The line is to be at least 48 inches below the roadbed and 24 inches below the bottom of the ditch line. 
(2)	Pipe is to be thick-wall PVC or metal.
(3)	Any removal or replacement will be the owner's responsibility.
(4)	Installation expenses and all other expenses will be paid by the owner.
(Code 1992, § 10-3)
Editor's note— A drawing and specifications for making service installations on unpaved roads in the county are on file in the county administrator's office. 
Sec. 46-3. - Requests for abandonment of county-maintained roads. 
(a)	Filing of request; contents. A written request to abandon a county-maintained road shall be filed with the office of the board of commissioners. The request shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the person requesting the abandonment.
(2)	The relationship of the person to the road.
(3)	A plat or sketch of the section of the road for which abandonment is requested or a copy of the county road map with the section marked in red. 
(4)	The names and addresses of all property owners located on the section of roadway for which abandonment is being requested. 
(5)	The reasons why the person is requesting that the road be abandoned.
(6)	A statement that the section of road for which abandonment is being requested no longer serves a substantial public purpose and any data or documentation which the person has in support of such statement. 
(b)	Notice of hearing. A date for a public hearing shall be obtained from the county administrator, which date shall be sufficiently in the future so as to allow a notice of the hearing to be published in the legal organ of the county at least two weeks prior to the date of the hearing. The cost of the advertising shall be borne by the person requesting the abandonment, and the request for abandonment shall be accompanied by a check or cash, in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, to cover advertising costs. 
(c)	Conduct of hearing. At the hearing, it shall be the responsibility of the person requesting abandonment to present all the facts and circumstances to the board of commissioners to enable it to make a fair and enlightened decision. Opponents of abandonment shall be given an equal opportunity to appear and present opposing facts and data. The hearing shall be conducted as informally as possible, although any interested parties are entitled to legal representation at the hearing if they so choose. It shall be the responsibility of the county attorney to serve as the hearing officer and to rule on any and all evidentiary matters and to advise the board of commissioners of its duties and responsibilities in the conduct and consideration of the matter. 
(d)	Decision by board of commissioners. Within 30 days from the date of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall render its decision, which shall be in writing, certified by the county administrator and entered in the minutes. A copy of the decision will be sent to the person requesting abandonment and shall be published at least once in the legal organ of the county. 
(e)	Distribution of information. A copy of this section shall be given to any person making inquiry as to the method by which county-maintained roads can be abandoned. 
(Code 1992, § 34-1)
Sec. 46-4. - Paving of county roads. 
(a)	Whenever any county road in the county is placed upon the paving priority list and reaches a position on the list such that paving is feasible, a paving contract may be awarded if 51 percent of the adjoining landowners have executed or agreed to execute voluntary conveyances of the necessary right-of-way. Any additional right-of-way needed for paving shall then be acquired by condemnation at the expense of the county. 
(b)	In the discretion of the board of commissioners, this policy may also be applied to county roads that are not currently listed on the paving priority list if the board of commissioners determines that right-of-way should be completely acquired prior to inclusion on the list. 
(Code 1992, § 34-2)
Sec. 46-5. - Removal and replacement of farm fences by county in connection with road improvement projects. 
(a)	The county will remove farm fences and posts for the owner if the fence is located on property which has been voluntarily and without compensation deeded to the county as right-of-way for public road construction or improvement if, in the opinion of the county commissioners or the county road superintendent, the wire or posts are reusable by the property owner. 
(b)	The county will further assist the owner in reinstallation of the fence or posts under the same conditions and requirements as outlined in subsection (a) of this section. If the fence is not reusable, the county will assist the owner in refencing the affected property if the owner furnishes the fence and posts. 
(Code 1992, § 34-3)
Sec. 46-6. - County road policy. 
It is the policy of the county to acquire right-of-way for paving purposes by donation whenever possible. However, if 51 percent of the affected landowners on any road submitted for a paving project agree to donate the needed right-of-way, then the county may obtain the required right-of-way from the nonconsenting landowners by condemnation. In determining if a road is to be submitted for a paving contract, the cost of acquisition, including the cost of right-of-way and condemnation, if necessary, shall be one of the factors considered by the commissioners. Additionally, the board of commissioners retains its inherent power to acquire any right-of-way through condemnation if, in their discretion, the commissioners determine that the right-of-way is necessary for public transportation purposes. 
Sec. 46-7. - Enhanced 911 system. 
(a)	The county has implemented a county-wide enhanced 911 system. In order for such system to function effectively it is essential that persons driving emergency vehicles be able to quickly ascertain the 911 number of a structure or residence from the roadway. Every structure and/or residence in the county has been assigned a 911 number. 
(b)	Within six months from the date of the ordinance from which this section is derived every owner and/or occupier of a structure, residence or other building in the county which has been assigned a 911 number shall have posted as outlined in subsection (c) of this section the number assigned to such structure, residence and/or other building. 
(c)	The 911 number shall be attached to the owner/occupier's mailbox, a post or like structure at the corner of the property line which abuts the roadway and driveway or other entrance way which services the such structure, residence and/or building. The numbers shall be no less than three inches in height and shall be located at least two feet above the existing ground level and shall be posted on both sides of the mailbox, post or other structure such that the numbers are visible from either direction on the roadway. They shall also be of a color which contrasts with the background of the numbers and/or the color of the structure to which they are attached. Any cost involved in complying with this section shall be the sole responsibility of the owner/occupier. 
(d)	On and after six months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived any owner/occupier subject thereto found not to be in compliance will be subject to prosecution in the magistrate court of the county for violation of a county ordinance which is a misdemeanor and carries a maximum penalty of $1,000.00 fine and/or 12 months in the county jail. 
(Res. of 2-19-1996)
Sec. 46-8. - Driveway repair policy. 
(a)	Driveways which tie in or access county roads are there for the convenience of the owner/occupier of the property which the driveway serves. The repair and maintenance of such a driveway is the responsibility of the owner/occupier using it to access their property. However, there are situations in which the tie-in is actually located on county right-of-way; and if that section of the driveway is allowed to deteriorate, it can adversely affect the adjacent roadway. Under limited circumstances, the county may provide assistance to the owner/occupier in repairing that portion of the driveway only. 
(b)	If the tie-in to a private driveway and a county road is entirely upon the county right-of-way; if the driveway was initially installed with the knowledge and permission of the county; if the condition of the tie-in, due to no fault of the owner, is such that it constitutes a danger to the county roadway or adjoining right-of-way, then the county may assist in repair or restoration of the tie-in portion of the driveway by providing and spreading dirt or other fill material on the portion located upon the county right-of-way. In order to adequately accomplish such repair or restoration and protect the county's property, it may be necessary to incidentally spread such material on a small portion of the driveway located on private property. In this instance, the owner's permission will be obtained prior to initiation of any such work. Under no circumstances will county forces go further on private property than is absolutely necessary to complete the restoration required to protect the county's interest. 
Secs. 46-9—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TIMBER OPERATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of 3-17-2008 set out provisions intended for use as §§ 39-31—39-34 and 39-41—39-47. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. II, §§ 46-31—46-41. See also the Code Comparative Table.

Sec. 46-31. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide regulations governing use of public roads by persons engaged in timber operations in the county and establish procedures for the conduct of such operations in order to assure the public safety and to protect the county roadways and environment. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008)
Sec. 46-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Landowner means the person or legal entity holding title to the real property for which a timber operations permit is being requested. 
Permit means the permit issued by the road department to do timber operations in the county. 
Road department means the Emanuel County Road Department. 
Road superintendent means the Superintendent of the Emanuel County Road Department. 
Surety bond means a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or a bond issued by a licensed surety authorized to do business in the state. 
Timber means softwood or hardwood trees harvested for commercial purposes. 
Timber operations means buying, cutting, harvesting, loading and/or hauling timber. 
Timber operator means any person or entity engaged in timber operations. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008)
Sec. 46-33. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Upon notice from the issuing authority, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the permit holder, the person in charge of the operations, and the owner of the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may resume. When an emergency exists, written notice shall not be required. 
(b)	If the conditions are not brought into compliance within five working days of the notice, the road department shall accomplish the work and deduct the costs from the posted bond. Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008)
Sec. 46-34. - Concluding operations. 
(a)	The timber operator shall be given written notification to the road superintendent upon completion of operations. The road superintendent shall inspect the site to assure that the area has been restored to its original condition, including any shaping of ditches, grading or seeding as required. The timber operator shall be notified in writing of any deficiencies and given 15 days to correct those deficiencies. If not accomplished during that period, the road department shall complete the work and deduct the cost from the posted bond. 
(b)	When the road superintendent has determined that the road and access site are in a proper state of repair, the superintendent shall provide a written release of liability to the timber operator. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008)
Sec. 46-35. - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in timber operations in the county without first obtaining a permit and furnishing a surety bond. 
No landowner shall permit timber operations on their property without first insuring that the timber operator has obtained the permit and furnished the surety bond required by this article. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008)
Sec. 46-36. - Permit application. 
(a)	A timber operations permit may be obtained upon application to the road department. The applicant shall furnish all information requested on the permit application regarding location and duration of the operation and the persons involved. The permit shall be valid for only the particular operation for which it is issued. 
(b)	A timber operator shall be given two copies of the permit one of which will be laminated. The laminated copy is to be posted at the entrance of the timber operation site and remain there until operations are complete. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008)
Sec. 46-37. - Surety bond. 
(a)	A timber operations permit will be issued only after posting a surety bond. The amount of the bond shall be $2,500.00 for an operation on five acres or less; if greater than five acres, the bond shall be $5,000.00. The bond shall indemnify the county against any and all damage caused, as a result of the timber operations, to any county roads, rights-of-way, points of egress or other public property. The bond shall also indemnify the county for any costs incurred in the cleanup of waste or debris left on public property as a result of the timber operations and may be used to pay the landowner's timber tax obligations which it is the responsibility of the timber operator to satisfy. 
(b)	Upon completion of any necessary repairs to public property and removal of all waste and debris, and payment of taxes the county will release the permit holder from the bond. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008)
Sec. 46-38. - Culverts. 
Prior to the timber operator's commencing operations, the road superintendent shall inspect the point of access to the county road from the operation site to determine its suitability. If a culvert is required at the point of access, it shall be installed by the timber operator as directed by the road superintendent. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008)
Sec. 46-39. - Signs 
The timber operation shall post two signs in each direction from the point of access onto the county road. One sign at a distance of 1,000 feet stating "Warning: Logging Operations Ahead," and one sign at a distance of 500 feet stating "Slow Truck Entering Highway." Signs shall be 36 inches × 36 inches, erected in a diamond shape, painted orange with black legend and posted at least three feet from the travel surface of the roadway. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008)
Sec. 46-40. - Timber operations. 
During the period of operations the timber operator shall comply with the following: 
(1)	All harvesting operations shall be conducted on the selected site and off the county roads and rights-of-way. Logging and skidding of logs on county roads and rights-of-way are strictly prohibited. 
(2)	Ditches shall be kept clear of all debris and residue at all times to permit proper drainage. 
(3)	There shall be no blockage of county roads at the access site, and roads must remain open at all times. 
(4)	No equipment, trucks or trailers shall be allowed to park on any public road or right-of-way.
(5)	Mud shall not be carried onto paved roads by logging vehicles. Where necessary, a temporary construction exit of gravel shall be maintained by the timber operator to eliminate any hazard to traffic or unsightly conditions on the public right-of-way. 
(6)	During periods of rain or inclement weather, logging vehicles shall not be operated over the county's unimproved roads when such travel causes sufficient damage to the road system that the passage of smaller and lighter vehicles is hampered. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008)
Sec. 46-41. - Prosecution of violations. 
(a)	Any person, firm, or entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor prosecutable in the Magistrate Court of Emanuel County and punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not longer than 12 months. 
(b)	The county code enforcement officer shall be authorized to issue citations in order to initiate such prosecution. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008)
Chapter 50 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; planning, ch. 42.
State Law reference— Prohibited placement of posters, signs and advertisements, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58; control of signs and signals, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq.; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Home occupation signs. 
One nonilluminated professional or business nameplate not exceeding two square feet in area is permitted on the premises where a home occupation is conducted. 
(Code 1992, § 38-33)
Sec. 50-2. - Construction project signs. 
One nonilluminated sign not exceeding 40 square feet in area, displaying the name of the building, the contractors, the architects, the engineers, the owners and the financial, selling and development agencies is permitted upon the premises of any work under construction, alteration or removal. Such sign shall be removed from the site within 30 days after the completion of the project. 
(Code 1992, § 38-34)
Sec. 50-3. - Temporary subdivision signs. 
Temporary signs not exceeding 40 square feet in area announcing a land subdivision development are permitted on the premises of the land subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced not less than 300 feet apart. They shall be removed when 75 percent of the lots are conveyed. 
(Code 1992, § 38-35)
Sec. 50-4. - Private directional signs. 
Signs indicating the location and direction of premises available for or in the process of development, but not erected upon such premises, and having inscribed thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder or agent may be erected and maintained, provided: 
(1)	The size of any such sign is not in excess of six square feet and the sign is not in excess of four feet in length; and 
(2)	Not more than one such sign is erected on each 500 feet of right-of-way frontage.
(Code 1992, § 38-36)
Sec. 50-5. - Roof signs. 
Not more than one roof sign structure may be erected on the roof of any one building. No roof sign structure shall extend more than 25 feet above the elevation of the roof. 
(Code 1992, § 38-37)
Sec. 50-6. - Wall signs. 
Signs on the walls of a building, including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs and projecting signs, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Area of signs on front surface of building. The total area of signs on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed 25 percent of the front surface of the building. 
(2)	Area of signs on side or rear surface of building. The total area of signs on a side or rear surface of a building shall not exceed 50 percent of the exterior side or rear surface of the building respectively. 
(3)	Projecting signs. Wall signs attached flat against a wall may extend not more than 24 inches from the wall. 
(Code 1992, § 38-38)
Sec. 50-7. - Illuminated signs. 
Illumination devices shall be so placed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast into any residential district, sleeping rooms in any district or the eyes of the driver of an automobile or other vehicle. 
(Code 1992, § 38-39)
Secs. 50-8—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGNS ALONG INTERSTATE HIGHWAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Outdoor advertising near state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq.

Sec. 50-31. - Applicability of article. 
This article shall apply to all outdoor advertising signs abutting or visible from the Interstate 16 right-of-way in the county. 
(Code 1992, § 38-26)
Sec. 50-32. - Compliance with article. 
No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 38-27)
Sec. 50-33. - Compliance with state and federal regulations. 
All signs located on sites abutting or visible from the Interstate 16 right-of-way shall conform with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq., the state Outdoor Advertising Code, and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under such code. In instances where the sign controls of this article are more strict, the regulations of this article shall apply. 
(Code 1992, § 38-28)
Sec. 50-34. - Maintenance. 
Signs must be constructed of durable materials, must be maintained in good condition and must not be permitted to become dilapidated. 
(Code 1992, § 38-29)
Sec. 50-35. - Removal of signs on cessation of business operations. 
Any sign which advertises an activity, business, product or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six months of the discontinuance of the activity. 
(Code 1992, § 38-30)
Sec. 50-36. - Nonconforming signs. 
Any legally erected sign which would become nonconforming as a result of this article shall be allowed to remain until purchased by the state department of transportation or the county, provided that the sign owner meets the requirements of state laws and rules and regulations governing such signs. 
(Code 1992, § 38-31)
Sec. 50-37. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)	Signs imitating warning signals are prohibited. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles, nor shall any sign use the words, slogans, dimensional shape and size, or colors of governmental traffic signs. 
(b)	No signs, except traffic signs and signals and informational signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
(c)	Signs painted or attached to natural features such as trees or rocks, telephone poles, utility poles or fence posts are prohibited. 
(d)	Fluttering ribbons and banners are prohibited.
(e)	Animation and running lights are prohibited.
(f)	Signs within 300 feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument, are prohibited. 
(Code 1992, § 38-32)
Sec. 50-38. - Requirements. 
(a)	Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per each location. This permits back to back or "V" formation signs but prohibits two side by side signs facing the same direction. 
(b)	The sign location shall be no less than 500 feet apart measured from the two closest points. 
(c)	Up to three outdoor advertising signs may be placed in the quadrant of any interchange adjacent to the interstate highway. Such signs are restricted to an area 1,200 feet long beginning 500 feet from the point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp. 
(d)	A business, subject matter, product or service advertised on any outdoor advertising sign allowed by this chapter shall be limited to businesses, products, services, events, etc., principally located or offered within the geographical boundaries of the county. 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 26; manufactured homes, ch. 34.
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2).

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Solid waste disposal fee. 
Effective February 22, 1996, the fee for disposal of solid waste at the county landfill shall be $32.00 per ton. 
(Code 1992, § 42-2; Mo. of 5-17-1999)
Secs. 54-2—54-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Littering public and private property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249.

Sec. 54-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Normal household trash and garbage means animal, vegetable and fruit refuse matter and other refuse matter ordinarily generated as byproducts of a household such as tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics and wrapping or packaging materials, and specifically does not include items such as industrial waste, fence wire, building material, household appliances, furniture and dead animals. 
Trash dumpsters means those certain trash containers owned by the county and placed along the rights-of-way in various locations in the unincorporated areas of the county for use by the citizens of the county for the disposal of normal household trash and garbage. 
(Code 1992, § 42-1(a); Mo. of 5-17-1999)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-37. - Applicability of litter control law. 
The state litter control law, which is defined for purposes of this section as O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-40—16-7-48, is expressly incorporated as part of this section. 
(Code 1992, § 42-1(b))
Sec. 54-38. - Violation of section or litter control law prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to violate any of the terms or provisions of the state litter control law now in existence or as hereafter amended, and it shall further be unlawful to violate any of the additional terms and conditions as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1992, § 42-1(c))
Sec. 54-39. - Use of trash dumpsters for disposal of items other than household garbage. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit in any trash dumpster provided for the citizens by the county, or to place in or near the right-of-way surrounding such dumpsters, any articles not covered by the definition of household garbage as provided in this article, or any articles specifically excluded from the definition of household garbage. 
(Code 1992, § 42-1(d))
Sec. 54-40. - Penalties. 
Violation of any of the terms of this article shall be prosecuted to the fullest extent possible in the magistrate court of the county. Violators may be subject to a maximum punishment of a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. In addition, violators may be required to remove from any public street or highway or area adjacent to a county trash dumpster all litter which has been deposited in the area within one mile along the right-of-way adjacent to the dumpster. 
(Code 1992, § 42-1(e))
Sec. 54-41. - Enforcement. 
The sheriff of the county is requested and directed by the board of commissioners to vigorously pursue violations of this article and to enlist, if necessary, the cooperation of the state patrol, officers and agents of the state department of natural resources and any and all other government or law enforcement agencies that may assist in the investigation and prosecution of violations of the terms of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 42-1(f))
Secs. 54-42—54-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE AND SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of 8-16-2004, §§ I—VII, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. III, §§ 54-61—54-68, was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table.

Sec. 54-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. (O.C.G.A. § 12-9-22(4.1).) 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final disposition of solid waste occurs and includes but is not limited to land filling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(8).) 
Industrial solid waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste regulated under Part 1 of Article 3 of O.C.G.A. Title 12, Chapter 8, the "Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act." Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food and related products and by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(12.1).) 
Inert waste means wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed herein. Section 391-3-4-.06 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Litter means discarded materials of every kind as referenced in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(1). 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multi-family residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(18).) 
Open dump means a disposal facility at which solid waste from one or more sources is left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment as referenced in Section 391-3-4-.01(44) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park; playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(2). 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling as referenced in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(25). 
Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials as referenced in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(26). 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect as referenced in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(31). 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires as defined in section 391-3-4-19(2.i) of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management. Scrap tire generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county and state governments. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted under section 391-3-4-.19(5.g) for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility as referenced in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(3.2). 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires as referenced in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(39). 
Landfill means any disposal facility where any amount of waste (of any variety) is disposed of, and includes "disposal facilities" as defined above. 
Recycling center means any facility designed to collect recovered materials or recyclable materials such as glass, newspaper, cardboard, metal, and so forth, but which is not designed for the processing, reuse, or disposal of such material. 
Waste collection center means any facility designed to collect waste in connection with repacking, shipping and so forth, but which is not designed for the processing or disposal of such waste. 
(Ord. of 8-16-2004, § I)
Sec. 54-62. - Waste disposal—General. 
(a)	The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposing of all litter, scrap tires, and municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste or any other type waste on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to dump, open dump, or permit the dumping of litter, scrap tires, municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste, recyclables or any other type waste at any place in this county including, and without limitations, any public or private property in the county or any waters in this county unless: 
(1)	The property is designated and approved by the board of commissioners for the disposal of litter, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, scrap tires, recovered materials or any other type waste and the person dumping is authorized to use such property; 
(2)	The litter, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, recyclables, scrap tires and any other type waste are placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such purpose on the respective property. In the event no receptacle or container being designated to hold the particular type waste being disposed, said waste shall be placed on the property as directed by the county board of commissioners, its agents or employees; and 
(3)	The property carrier all necessary waste handling permits required by EPD and any other applicable regulatory agency. 
(c)	All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, or tire retailers shall be subject to rules as defined in the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-4-19 Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. and the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-4 which are applicable to solid waste management. 
(d)	All tire generation stations within the county upon removal of a scrap tire from any vehicle within the boundaries of their facility located within the county shall retain full and unqualified possession of said scrap tire at the facility where it was removed and may obtain those customary fees necessary to dispose of said scrap tire in accordance with EPD directives and guidelines; which said disposal fee total shall not exceed $1.00 over the net disposal cost of the tire retailer, rounded up to the next whole dollar amount. 
(Ord. of 8-16-2004, § II)
Sec. 54-63. - Transporting solid waste and litter. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle in the county hauling municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or any other type waste when waste leaks, flows freely or spills from said vehicle. 
(b)	Any litter or municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or any other type waste hauled on a moving vehicle shall be covered or secured in such manner that litter will not blow or escape from said vehicle while moving or parked on public or private property in the county. 
(Ord. of 8-16-2004, § III)
Sec. 54-64. - Regulation of waste containers and receptacles. 
(a)	The county board of commissioners has placed waste collection containers in several locations or collection areas and the county may, from time to time, hereafter provide for other such collection containers and collection areas in the unincorporated areas of the county and only household garbage trash sufficiently small in size as to not impair the intended use and maintenance of the collection containers may be dumped or placed in such containers provided by the county. 
(b)	All waste containers or receptacles shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with their use for disposing of waste. 
(c)	Persons using waste containers or receptacles shall deposit only authorized waste and refuge inside the container or receptacle. No person shall dump or place any item outside or around the container or receptacle or in the collection area. 
(d)	No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any such container or receptacle unless such container or receptacle is specifically designated for that purpose. 
(e)	No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in such container or receptacle.
(f)	No person shall set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle.
(g)	No person shall in any way attempt to damage or destroy any waste container or receptacle.
(h)	No person shall deposit any unauthorized items into the said containers or receptacles. Unauthorized items include, but are not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, bed springs, tree limbs, leaves, air conditioning units, furniture, etc. 
(i)	No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacle. 
(j)	No dead animals shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle.
(k)	No person shall alter the location of any such container or receptacle without the written consent of the county board of commissioners. 
(l)	No person, without the written consent of the board of commissioners, shall enter, examine, sift through the contents of, scavenge or remove any manner from any collection container or receptacle. 
(m)	No person shall deposit waste at a county recycling center unless such waste is contained in a manner that it can be handled by the attendant and shall be deposited only during official hours of operation. 
(n)	No person shall deposit waste, water or litter of any kind at a county solid waste collection and recycling center into county-owned receptacles or containers designated for the collection of recovered materials. Only authorized materials such as glass, aluminum, newspaper, cardboard, plastic, and tin and other accepted material may be deposited in the appropriate container designated for recovered materials. 
(o)	No person shall deposit bricks, blocks, rocks, lumber, asphalt, cement, concrete, concrete products or waste, roofing, sheet rock, leaves, limbs, bushes, trees, or roots, into any container or receptacle except those containers or receptacles that may be specifically designated for those purposes only. 
(Ord. of 8-16-2004, § IV)
Sec. 54-65. - Use by non-residents and commercial collectors. 
(a)	The placement of household garbage and household trash in waste collection containers and receptacles in several locations or collection areas in and around the county is for the convenience and use, in accordance with the provisions of this article, of county residents only. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this article for any person to dump, place or leave any item at such waste collection area or in any collection container or receptacle unless such waste was generated in the county or the person disposing of the waste is a guest of a county resident or a casual visitor to the county. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful and in violation of this article for any person engaged in the business of any type of garbage and waste collection to dump, place or leave garbage and waste collected in the conduct of business any garbage or waste collection area or any collection container or receptacle. 
(Ord. of 8-16-2004, § V)
Sec. 54-66. - Regulation of landfills and waste collection and recycling centers. 
(a)	Upon the enactment of this, no new landfills, waste collection or recycling centers shall be operated in the county without the written approval of the county board of commissioners. 
(b)	No person shall deposit waste of any kind outside the gate of the landfill, waste collection or recycling center. 
(c)	No scavenging operation of any kind shall be allowed at a landfill, waste collection or recycling center. 
(d)	No person shall move, remove or cross any fence, gate or barrier at a landfill, waste collection or recycling center. 
(e)	Fees (dumping, tipping, etc.) on waste brought to public landfills, waste collection or recycling centers will be set by the county board of commissioners to defray costs of these operations. 
(f)	Hours of operation will be set to maximize the convenience of residents of the area.
(g)	All rules above apply to all public and/or private property in the county, all waters and/or waterways of the county, and all waste and recycling centers and the county landfill. 
(Ord. of 8-16-2004, § VI)
Sec. 54-67. - Special use permit required. 
A special use permit is required for permission to operate a landfill, waste collection center, recovered materials processing facility, or recycling center. 
(1)	Application procedure. An application for a special use permit must be submitted by the owner of the subject property, or the authorized agent of the owner, as shown by notarized affidavit. The applicant must submit a fee as indicated below with the application. An application form shall be provided by the county. The applicant is required to submit the following information with the application: 
a.	A site plan showing the subject property, containing (a) a survey of the boundaries of the subject property, (b) all lots within 500 feet of the subject property, and (c) the names of the owners of all such properties, as indicated by county tax records on the date of the application. 
b.	A landscaping and buffer plan, showing roads, grading, buffers, fences, plantings, screenings, and similar features. 
c.	An erosion and sedimentation control plan showing how storm water drainage will be handled during all phases of construction, operation, and remediation. 
d.	A site plan showing the proximity to all residential homes and uses, commercial structures and uses, industrial structures and uses, roads, airports, and railroads, within 1,000 feet of the subject property. 
e.	Topographic map of the site, showing elevations on a two-foot contour, and showing all wetlands and flood plains, streams, lakes and water features, and groundwater recharge areas. 
f.	A site plan indicating expected noise levels at the perimeter of the property and at 100-foot intervals around the boundaries of the property, out to a distance of 500 feet. 
g.	A description of hours and method of operation, a lighting plan, and a dust and debris mitigation plan to keep the streets and area clean. 
h.	For a landfill, the following information is required:
1.	A remediation plan, showing the plans for restoring the site after closure of each landfill cell. 
2.	A hydrological survey, showing the depth of the water table throughout the site at 100-foot intervals, showing the location of all public and private wells within one-half mile of the boundaries of the site, and showing the seasonal flow directions of the groundwater. 
3.	Elevation renderings, showing lines of site and maximum landfill cell elevation.
4.	Certification that all state and federal agencies and departments that regulate landfills through statutes, regulations or advisories have been timely notified of the application and intent to construct a landfill. 
(2)	Notice procedures. 
a.	Once a completed application is submitted to the county, the clerk of the board of commissioners shall forward the same to the board. The applicant shall be required to send a letter via first class mail to all adjoining property owners, as shown on the tax records of the county on the date of the application, and to all property owners where any portion of their property is within 1,000 feet of the boundary of the landfill. The notice shall be required to state that the applicant is seeking a special use permit for the requested use, and shall state the date of the two board of commissioners hearings on the application. Certification of this notice must be provided to the board, along with a list of all owners, prior to the first hearing. 
b.	The applicant shall also be required to pay for notice to be published at least twice in the county's legal organ prior to each hearing. Notice shall be published beginning at least seven but not more than 45 days prior to the date of each hearing. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Copies of all ads or a certification from the publisher must be submitted to the board prior to each hearing. 
c.	The applicant shall also pay for and post signs on the subject property along the road frontage, which shall be placed in conspicuous locations on the property. Signs shall be erected at least 15 days prior to the first public hearing and must remain until a written decision is issued. One sign is required for each 300 feet (or fraction thereof) of road frontage (i.e. under 300-1, 301 to 600-2, etc.). Each sign must be a minimum of ten square feet in size, and labeled "Special Use Permit Notice" with letters a minimum of four inches high. All other letters must be a minimum of two inches high, and the bottom of the sign itself must be a minimum of three feet off the ground and not obscured from view. Each sign must state that a special use permit has been sought, the dates, times and places of the two hearings, and the use requested. The applicant must provide pictures of the signs in place to the board prior to the first hearing. 
(3)	Hearing procedures. 
a.	The board shall hold two hearings on the application. At the first hearing, the applicant shall present its application, but public comments will not be received. The board will have the opportunity to ask questions of the applicant, and board members shall request any further information desired by the board from the applicant. The board may also request independent experts be retained by the applicant, or by the county, to verify the applicant's information or develop new and additional information. The first hearing shall take place within 45 days of a completed application being submitted. The second hearing shall take place at the next regularly scheduled board meeting following publication of the second required notice, unless additional time is granted by the board, in which case it shall take place within 60 days of the first hearing. 
If the board requests that an independent expert be retained on behalf of the county, the applicant shall be required to pay to the expert's estimated expenses prior to said expert being retained. The board shall hold said funds in escrow until payment is required and refund any unused funds to the applicant. The board shall issue no decision on an application request until the applicant has paid all expenses incurred under this section. 
b.	At the second public hearing on a special use permit application, the applicant shall again present its application, and any supplemental information requested by the board. The board members shall have the opportunity to ask questions of the staff, any experts, the applicant, supporters and opponents. The hearing shall be transcribed or recorded so that it may be transcribed later if necessary. The applicant and supporters shall be granted equal time as opponents. The minimum time allowed per side is 15 minutes. More time than the minimum may be allowed by the board or the chairman if the application is complex, or the number of witnesses warrants a further extension. If the chairman determines that there are a great number of opponents with the same interest (for example, members of the same neighborhood), the chairman may require that a spokesman be designated. The opponents may also be represented by an attorney. The applicant, supporters and opponents shall have the right to provide testimony, including expert testimony, in support of their position. Each party shall have a reasonable opportunity to ask questions of the other side, in an orderly manner as controlled by the chairman. 
c.	The board shall only consider evidence presented with the application or at the hearing. The board members shall not accept any ex parte evidence, and all evidence submitted shall be disclosed at or before the public hearing, to allow all sides the opportunity to review it. 
(4)	Decision process. 
a.	At the close of the evidence at the public hearing, the board shall discuss the application. No vote shall be taken at this time. At the close of discussion, the board shall recess the hearing to allow the county attorney's office time to prepare proposed written decision(s). The county attorney's office shall meet with each board member individually and ascertain his or her reasons for approval or denial, and shall prepare a written decision or decisions to be voted on by the board at a hearing within 45 days. Board members may also prepare their own proposed decisions. 
b.	Written decisions should be based on the evidence in the record and the criteria in the ordinance. 
c.	At the hearing, the chairman shall call for motions and any member may put forward a written decision to be voted on. Written decisions may be supplemented with further conditions proposed at that hearing. No vote shall be final until a written decision is adopted by the board. 
d.	Any proposal shall be specifically conditioned to the site plan, plat maps, elevation renderings, and other detailed plans to insure that the development is erected in accordance with the presented materials. The approval may also impose additional conditions, if the conditions are designed to minimize the impact of the use on the neighboring property, streets and so forth. 
(5)	Criteria for grant of special use permit. In considering whether to grant or deny a special use permit, the board shall consider the following criteria: 
a.	Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact in regard to traffic on adjacent streets and in regard to adjacent residential, commercial and industrial uses. 
b.	Whether there is sufficient and safe parking facilities, access and egress provided.
c.	Whether the proposed use is compatible with the surrounding properties, uses, and governmentally regulated facilities. 
d.	Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact on health, safety, aesthetics, property value, or other elements of the community. 
e.	Whether the proposed use is compatible with the county's comprehensive plan and solid waste management plan. 
f.	Whether there are any environmentally sensitive areas on the subject property (including wetlands, streams, flood plains, etc). If there are such areas, whether the proposed plans adequately protect those areas. 
g.	Whether the signage and outdoor lighting is consistent with the surrounding uses.
h.	Whether there is sufficient protective screening, either natural, topographic, or proposed, to screen the use from public view. 
i.	Whether the property can be viably used for other purposes.
j.	Whether the hours of operation of the proposed use are consistent with surrounding uses. 
k.	Whether noise, dust, debris or other external impacts of the use would negatively impact the surrounding uses. 
(6)	Development requirements. The development requirements that apply to landfills, waste collection centers, recycling centers and recovered material processing facilities are as follows: 
a.	Landfills. Minimum property area for landfills is 200 acres. The minimum undisturbed buffer around the entire perimeter of the property shall be 200 feet. If the undisturbed buffer does not contain sufficient density of hardwood and evergreen trees to screen the landfill from view at all times of the year, the applicant shall be required to improve the buffer with a minimum of [a] ten-foot earthen berm topped with [an] eight-foot opaque wooden fence, and to plant a 25-foot buffer of pine and hardwoods outside that berm, at a density approved by the county. Additionally buffering requirements may be imposed as circumstances warrant. Additionally, an undisturbed buffer of 50 feet must be maintained around all lakes, streams, and wetlands on the property. No portion of the non-buffer area of the site (as measured from the inner boundary of the buffer at the nearest point) shall be closer than 1,000 feet to any residentially used lot. A security fence must be erected around the landfill operations area. No more than 40 percent of the total property area may be disturbed as landfill cell area, with the remainder preserved as open space. No landfill cell is permitted within 200 feet of any lake, stream, or wetland buffer, not within 100 feet of any area within the 100-year flood plain. No landfill cell may exceed 65 feet in height above the original grade. Any scenic barrier, security fence, and/or earthen burn required by this section must be continually maintained in good repair and good condition by the permittee. 
b.	Waste collection centers. Minimum property area for waste collection center is 50 acres. The minimum undisturbed buffer around the entire perimeter of the property shall be 150 feet. If the undisturbed buffer does not contain sufficient density of hardwood and evergreen trees to screen the waste collection center at all times of the year, the applicant shall be required to improve the buffer with a minimum of [a] ten-foot landscaped earthen berm topped with a six-foot opaque wooden fence. Additional buffering requirements may be imposed as circumstances warrant. Additionally, an undisturbed buffer of fifty feet must be maintained around all lakes, streams, and wetlands of the property. No portion of the non-buffer area of the site (as measured from the inner boundary of the buffer at the nearest point) shall be closer than 1,000 feet to any residentially used lot. A security fence must be erected around the landfill operations area, inside the buffer. No waste may be kept on a waste collection center property for more than three weeks before being transferred to a landfill. 
c.	Recovered materials processing center. Minimum property area for recovered materials processing center is 20 acres. The minimum undisturbed buffer around the entire perimeter of the property shall be 100 feet. If the undisturbed buffer does not contain sufficient density of hardwood and evergreen trees to screen the landfill at all times of the year, the applicant shall be required to improve the buffer with a minimum of [a] six-foot landscaped earthen berm topped with a six-foot opaque wooden fence. Additional buffering requirements may be imposed as circumstances warrant. Additionally, an undisturbed buffer of 25 feet must be maintained around all lakes, streams, and wetlands on the property. No portion of the non-buffer area of the site (as measured from the inner boundary of the buffer at the nearest point) shall be closer than 1,000 feet to any residentially used lot. 
d.	Recycling centers. Minimum property area for recycling centers is 20 acres. The minimum undisturbed buffer around the entire perimeter of the property shall be 100 feet. If the undisturbed buffer does not contain sufficient density of hardwood and evergreen trees to screen the landfill at all times of the year, the applicant shall be required to improve the buffer with a minimum of [a] six-foot landscaped earthen berm topped with a six-foot opaque wooden fence. Additional buffering requirements may be imposed as circumstances warrant. Additionally, an undisturbed buffer of 25 feet must be maintained around all lakes, streams, and wetlands on the property. No portion of the non-buffer area of the site (as measured from the inner boundary of the buffer at the nearest point) shall be closer than 1,000 feet to any residentially used lot. No recovered materials may be kept on recycling center property for more than three weeks before being transferred to a recovered materials processing facility. Waste that is not recyclable may not be accepted by nor stored at a recycling center. 
(7)	Appeal procedures. In the event a special use permit application is denied, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the superior court of the county within 30 days. The applicant shall file a copy of the appeal with the clerk of the board of commissioners, and the clerk shall forward a copy of the entire record (including all evidence submitted by all sides) to the superior court as soon as is practicable, along with the minutes of the hearings, copies of the tapes or transcriptions of the hearings, the written decision, a copy of the ordinance, and all other relevant ordinances, maps and documents. 
(8)	General restrictions. The following restrictions apply to all landfills, waste collection centers, recycling centers and recovered material processing facilities. 
a.	No facility shall be open, accept any waste or other materials, or be in operation earlier than 7:00 a.m. nor later than 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. through 3:00 p.m. Saturday. No operations are allowed on Sunday. 
b.	Lighting for any facility shall be downward firing and shielded to minimize light pollution. Illumination from any facility shall not cast light on adjoining property or shine in such a manner as to cause traffic interference. 
c.	Vehicles leaving the site of any facility shall be sufficiently clean not to deposit dirt, debris, or waste into the road or right-of-way. 
d.	Ingress and egress shall be as designated by the county, and acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided for traffic entering and leaving any facility. 
e.	No landfills, waste collection centers, recycling centers or recovered material processing facilities shall be established in violation of any state or federal statute, regulation or advisory, or without certification of compliance with all applicable statutes, regulations and advisories. 
(9)	Fees. The fees for submission of a special use permit application and for each annual renewal in addition to paying the cost of newspaper advertising, are as follows: 
Landfill .....$1,000.00 
Waste collection center .....500.00 
Recycling center .....500.00 
Recycling materials processing center .....500.00 
Each special use permit governed by this article must be renewed on an annual basis by filing an application to renew with the county board of commissioners at least 90 days prior to the permit's expiration date and pay in the fees enumerated above in addition to the costs of advertising the renewal application in the legal organ of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-16-2004, § VI)
Sec. 54-68. - Violation and enforcement. 
(a)	The county enforcement officer or his designated representative is hereby granted and shall hereafter have the power and authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this for the collection and disposal of waste in this county. 
(b)	Any person who violates any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)	By a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each day the violation exists. 
(2)	In the sound discretion of a court in which the conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any waste the person has deposited and any and all other waste deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(3)	In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which the conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited waste, any and all waste deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(Ord. of 8-16-2004, § VII)
Chapter 58 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-4(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-4(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-166 et seq.; excise tax on wine, § 6-2.
State Law reference— County ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Use of county landfill prohibited by persons delinquent in payment of property tax. 
No person more than 60 days delinquent in the payment of ad valorem property taxes shall be allowed to use the county landfill for any purpose. The tax commissioner of the county is instructed to furnish to the board of commissioners a list of all taxpayers more than 60 days delinquent on ad valorem property taxes and the amounts thereof so that, if necessary, these property owners can be notified of the forfeiture of their right to use the county landfill until such time as all ad valorem taxes due have been paid or suitable arrangements made with the board of commissioners for the payment of such taxes. 
(Code 1992, § 46-1)
Secs. 58-2—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LEVY, SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 58-31. - Procedures for levy and sale of personal property. 
(a)	Anyone wishing to levy on personal property to collect a valid judgment must present the original fi. fa. or an appropriately certified copy. 
(b)	Prior to any seizure of property by representatives of the sheriff's department, the holder of the fi. fa. must make arrangements for personnel and transportation to meet the sheriff's deputy at the location at the property to be seized. If it is a vehicle which will require towing, the holder of the fi. fa. must make prior arrangements with an approved wrecker service. 
(c)	Before any property will be seized, evidence that the fi. fa. holder has an acceptable storage facility must be presented. The deputy will accompany them to the storage facility and insure that it is adequate and appropriately secured. 
(d)	All seized property must, by law, be advertised for sale in the legal organ for four weeks preceding the first Tuesday in the next month. Therefore, within 48 hours after seizure the judgment creditor must present a copy of the legal ad to the sheriff, or his duly appointed representative, along with proof that arrangements for publication have been made with the legal organ. Otherwise the seized property will be released to the judgment debtor. 
(e)	It is the responsibility of the fi. fa. holder to contact the sheriff's department, prior to the day of sale, and make arrangements for a representative of the department to conduct the sale. 
(f)	The statutory fee for executing a levy is $25.00 which must be paid in advance.
(g)	Anyone seeking to execute a writ of possession shall be exempt from these procedures except those concerning pick up, transportation and/or towing. 
(h)	A copy of these procedures shall be given to anyone requesting a levy upon personal property. 
Secs. 58-32—58-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq.

Sec. 58-66. - Required for business dealings with the county. 
Effective January 1, 1998, and during all succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the county, whether with a location in the county, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state but exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such business tax registration shall be shown to the county clerk or his deputies or to any police officer of the county upon his request. 
Sec. 58-67. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period including, without limitation, the following: 
(1)	Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred;
(2)	Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness;
(3)	Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services;
(4)	Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and
(5)	Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income.
Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(1)	Sales, use or excise tax;
(2)	Sales returns, allowances and discounts;
(3)	Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2); 
(4)	Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and
(5)	Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
Location of office means a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person means sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not exclude a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the entity. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-68. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)	A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)	A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)	The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations are set forth in section 58-69. 
Sec. 58-69. - Levied; restrictions. 
(a)	An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based upon the following criteria regarding the number of employees of the business or practitioner: 

 
(b)	The county shall require an occupation tax from those real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located both inside and outside the county and sell property inside the limits of the county. 
(c)	Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
Sec. 58-70. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall be charged as follows: A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this section shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
Sec. 58-71. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
Sec. 58-72. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
Sec. 58-73. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)	Each such occupation tax shall be for the current calendar year and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Such registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by February 1 of each year, and shall be subject to a ten percent penalty for delinquency for each 30-day period late. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the county in 1997 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not paid immediately upon beginning a business and a ten percent penalty imposed. 
(b)	In addition to the remedies of subsection (a) of this section, the county may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
Sec. 58-74. - Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from such registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to such purpose. 
Sec. 58-75. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)	Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b)	Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
Sec. 58-76. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
Sec. 58-77. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this section before commencing the business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained such registration, shall be subject to penalties provided therefor. 
Sec. 58-78. - County clerk charged with collecting, subpoena and arresting powers. 
The county clerk and/or his duly designated employees shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspector with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
Sec. 58-79. - Businesses not covered by article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article, but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: 
(1)	Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission.
(2)	Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.
(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)	Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105.
(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq.
(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15.
(7)	Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355.
(8)	Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state, governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356.
(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55.
Sec. 58-80. - When occupation tax due and payable; payment options. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the county, at the office of the clerk, on January 1 of each year and is delinquent if not paid on or before February 1 of each year. However, the taxpayer may have the following options as to payment of the tax if requested in writing and approved by the board of commissioners: Instead of electing to pay on January 1 the entire amount of the occupational tax, the taxpayer elects to pay the tax in deferred payments. Such tax shall be paid in equal installments as follows: March 15, July 15 and October 15. Where a taxpayer fails to make any such agreed upon payment on or before the due date for such payment, a ten percent penalty will be imposed and an additional five percent will be imposed for each additional month of delinquency thereof. 
Sec. 58-81. - Amendment or repeal of article provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the board of commissioners to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the county of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
Sec. 58-82. - Applications of article provisions to prior ordinances. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
Sec. 58-83. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
It is the duty of the county clerk to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed and to summon all violators of such provisions to appear before the court. It is further the duty of the sheriff's department and his deputies to inspect all registrations issued by the county, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted. 
Sec. 58-84. - Public hearing before tax increase required. 
Prior to January 1 of each year, the county shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
Sec. 58-85. - Option to establish exemption or reduction. 
The board of commissioners may by subsequent ordinance provide for an exemption or reduction in the occupation tax for one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development of attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the board of commissioners. 
Secs. 58-86—58-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.

Sec. 58-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Depository financial institutions means state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
Gross receipts means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(Code 1993, § 46-26)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-122. - Imposed; rate. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. 
(Code 1993, § 46-26)
Sec. 58-123. - Minimum tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 58-122 shall be $1,000.00. 
(Code 1993, § 46-27)
Sec. 58-124. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Code 1993, § 46-28)
Sec. 58-125. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 58-124 unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1993, § 46-29)
Secs. 58-126—58-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INSURERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— General assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2.

Sec. 58-161. - License fee; license fee for additional locations generally. 
There is levied an annual license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk upon every insurance company engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate limits of the county, and there is levied an additional annual license fee in such amount for each separate business location in excess of one operated and maintained by any such company within the corporate limits. 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 58-162. - License fee for businesses lending money or offering term financing of sales; taking insurance applications. 
There is levied an additional license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk on each insurance company for each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under section 58-161, which company is operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and which, in connection with the loans or sales involving term financing, offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of the insurance company for insurance. 
State Law reference— Local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 58-163. - License fee for additional locations of independent agencies and brokers. 
There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by either section 58-161 or 58-162, in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk for each such location within the county. 
Sec. 58-164. - Gross direct premiums tax. 
There is levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the county in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The expression "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by sections 58-161 and 58-162. 
Sec. 58-165. - Gross direct premiums tax on classes of insurance other than life, accident and sickness. 
There is levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1) doing business as provided in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2 in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The expression "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
Sec. 58-166. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in this article shall be due and payable April 1 of each year. 
Secs. 58-167—58-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of 12-17-2012, §§ 1—8, effective Jan. 1, 2013, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. VI, §§ 58-181—58-188, was at the editor's discretion.

Sec. 58-181. - Energy excise tax definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms: "dealer," "energy," "local sales and use tax," and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2012, § 1)
Sec. 58-182. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
(a)	In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2012, § 2)
Sec. 58-183. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)	Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of Emanuel County pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
(1)	For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 25 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)	For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 50 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)	For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 75 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)	On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 100 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2(c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (b) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016, limitation in that paragraph (4). 
(d)	(1)	Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of Emanuel County shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two percent (except in the case where the municipal option water and sewer tax is levied where that rate will be three percent). 
(2)	In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two percent to one percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)	In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one percent to two percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2012, § 3)
Sec. 58-184. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
(1)	Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)	Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as other[wise] provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(3)	A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(4)	Remitted to the governing authority of Emanuel County by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(5)	A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2012, § 4)
Sec. 58-185. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)	The governing authority of Emanuel County, or the collecting officer appointed under section 58-188 of this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)	An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. No penalty shall attach to such provider for failure to collect the excise tax under this article when it has properly collected and remitted local sales and use taxes on such energy where the purchaser would have qualified for the uniform exemption certificate but failed to apply for such certificate or where the purchaser received such certificate but failed to file it with the energy provider. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2012, § 5)
Sec. 58-186. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on January 1, 2013, and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of Emanuel County monthly on or before the 20th day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2012, § 6)
Sec. 58-187. - Allocation, distribution, and expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b), the excise tax proceeds shall be allocated and distributed by the governing authority of Emanuel County at the end of each calendar month. An amount equal to one percent of such proceeds collected by Emanuel County shall be paid into the general fund of Emanuel County to defray the costs of collection and administration. 
(b)	The remainder shall be distributed in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement as required under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b) and (c). Within 30 days following the end of each calendar month, the remainder shall be distributed to the general fund of Emanuel County and the general fund of each participating municipality in accordance with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(c)(1) or (2) as follows: 
(1)	If two local sales and use taxes are in effect in the special district, an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds shall be distributed to the general fund of Emanuel County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the first local sales and use tax, and an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Emanuel County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in such county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the second local sales and use tax; or 
(2)	If only one such local sales and use tax is in effect in the special district, then the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Emanuel County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the local sales and use tax. 
(c)	Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, proceeds of the excise tax deposited in the general fund of Emanuel County may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the governing authority of Emanuel County. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2012, § 7)
Sec. 58-188. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)	The governing authority of Emanuel County shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)	The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this article. 
(c)	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2012, § 8)
Chapter 62 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 38; roads, ch. 46.
State Law reference— Authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371.

Sec. 62-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)	Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Code 1992, § 50-1)
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 62-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the roads of the county may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the county law enforcement officers may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts; and any person, who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them, shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
Sec. 62-3. - Traffic, speed, zones; signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)	Upon approval by resolution of the board of commissioners, the public works director is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)	Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(2)	Other safety zones for pedestrians.
(3)	Traffic lanes.
(4)	Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones.
(5)	Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices.
(6)	Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the county. 
(b)	All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the county. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the county. 
(c)	The county clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate official map setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic control devices. The map and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by resolution of the board of commissioners and the map shall be known as the official traffic control map of the county. An official copy of the map shall be kept in the office of the county clerk; shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the county clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device. 
(d)	No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(e)	Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established pursuant to this chapter shall be a violation of this Code. 
Sec. 62-4. - Speed detection devices. 
The board of commissioners hereby approves the use of a speed detection device for its law enforcement officers in order to comply with state and federal speed law requirements. 
Sec. 62-5. - Covering of loads. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this county unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the county. 
Sec. 62-6. - Parking in deceleration or acceleration lanes prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park any automobile, truck, bus, truck tractor, trailer, tractor, trailer combination, motorcycle, moped or other motor vehicle within or upon the deceleration or acceleration lanes lying in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)	Deceleration and acceleration lanes shall be defined for the purpose of this section as those strips of pavement lying adjacent to and to the east of the northbound lanes of traffic and adjacent to and to the west of the southbound lanes of traffic which are not part of the regular roadway but afford access into and out of the driveways and side roads along the highway. 
(c)	Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a violation of a county ordinance and shall be prosecuted in the state court of the county under the authority of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
Chapter 64 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 64-1—64-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEPTAGE/BULK SEWAGE SLUDGE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of 10-20-2003, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 55-11—55-25. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. II, §§ 64-31—64-44. See also the Code Comparative Table.
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 26.

Sec. 64-31. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Emanuel County Septage and/or Bulk Sewage Sludge Safety Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-32. - Applicability. 
(a)	This article shall have application to:
(1)	The on-site storage of septage (as defined in 40 CFR 503.9(f)) and/or bulk sewage sludge in holding tanks; 
(2)	Treatment of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge in holding tanks; and
(3)	The land application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge that has been treated in holding tanks, or that has been transferred from the pumper truck(s) to any intermediate equipment, vehicle or apparatus for treatment prior to land application. As used herein, bulk sewage sludge shall be deemed as having the same definition as in 40 CFR 503.9(w) and 503.11(e). 
(b)	This article does not regulate the land application of septage retrieved from septic systems by a pumper truck(s) with no intermediate treatment in holding tanks or like apparatus prior to land application, as regulation of such activity is controlled by the 1994 Memorandum of Understanding between the Georgia Department of Human Resources and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, with guidelines for same established in the manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(1)	This article shall have no application to the treatment, storage, handling, distribution, sale, or land application of Class A sewage sludge, as defined in 40 CFR 503.32(a). 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-33. - License required. 
No person shall land apply septage and/or bulk sewage sludge in the county without first obtaining a license to conduct such operation. The license shall be issued by the county board of commissioners; is subject to being renewed and may be revoked or refused for cause. A separate license must be issued for each site at which a person or entity plans to land apply septage and/or bulk sewage sludge. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-34. - Same—Term. 
Unless otherwise provided by the county board of commissioners, each license granted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be nontransferable and/or nonassignable and shall be effective for a period of not more than one year unless earlier suspended or revoked. The license year shall be from January 1 to December 31. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-35. - Same—Application. 
(a)	An application for a license shall be completed and submitted to the county board of commissioners on a form provided by the board. The application shall not be considered complete until the county board of commissioners receives all applicable fees and all material required by this section. Applicants shall not commence any land application activities until the license application has been reviewed and approved by the county board of commissioners. In addition to a completed application form, the applicant must submit the following: 
(1)	A 1:12,000 scale map showing the location of each site on which septage and/or bulk sewage sludge shall be applied. This map shall include: 
a.	Topographic information showing the drainage characteristics of property including locations of streams, lakes, or other water courses and impoundments either on, or adjacent to the property; water supplies including individual and community wells within 1,000 feet of the application site; all buildings and neighboring land uses within 1,000 feet of the application site; application site boundaries, and location of roadways to and from the application site; 
b.	The parcel number, tax map information, site acreage, name and address of all owners of the application site, and information setting forth the name and address of all adjacent property owners to the application site; 
c.	Percolation test results of the entire application site; and
d.	Seasonal water table elevation and/or location of rock strata or other impervious strata. 
(2)	Soils information by a certified soil scientist to confirm soil suitability at each land application site. Soil information shall include soil borings and a soil survey map of each site. For a land application site to be suitable it must meet the following requirements: 
a.	Have medium or fine surface textures. Land application shall not be done on sand or peat surface textures. Must have a surface permeability (percolation rate) slower than four inches per hour; 
b.	Have a two-foot minimum separation to the water table or bedrock;
c.	Have six inches of available water holding capacity between the application depth and the water table or bedrock; and 
d.	Must be free from flooding hazards.
(3)	The proposed volumes of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge to be applied on each site.
(4)	The proposed application method (proposed application method shall be subsurface injection).
(5)	Certified mail receipts from property owners directly adjacent to the land application site evidencing having received notice from the applicant of the proposed land application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge. 
(6)	A licensing fee to be established annually by the county board of commissioners. The amount of this licensing fee shall be based upon the estimated costs and carrying out regulatory and monitoring functions under this article including the cost of any and all mandatory and/or optional testing. A license applicant under this article shall tender the license fee prior to receipt of an original or renewed license. 
(b)	An application to renew a license and accompanying licensing fee shall be submitted to the county board of commissioners on the same form provided in section 64-55(a). In order to ensure uninterrupted operation, a renewal form and fee shall be submitted to the board office no later than December 5 of the calendar year for which a renewed license is sought. Failure to submit a renewal license application by December 5 shall result in the applicant being subject to fine and/or citation for operation of a site without a license. 
(1)	The items accompanying an original license application set forth in sections 64-55(a)(1)—(6) shall not be required as part of a renewal license application unless the board determines a change in pertinent environmental conditions, operating practices, adjacent property land uses or other factors implicating human health and safety warrant that the site information on file with the board is in need of supplementation. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-36. - Locations of land disposal sites. 
(a)	Sandy soils overlaying an unconfined aquifer, which is used or may be used as a principal source of potable drinking water, shall not be utilized as land disposal sites for septage and/or bulk sewage sludge. An exception may be made when special studies conducted by a soil hydrologist confirm acceptable separation distances between the point of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge application and the seasonal high water table can be achieved to prevent groundwater contamination. 
(b)	Land disposal sites for application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge shall not be located in a local drainage basin of a reservoir or a stream extending from a reservoir which is upstream of an intake for a drinking water supply. 
(c)	Sites shall be well drained and are not to be used where soil studies, soil types, areas of Karst, or other geological data indicate existence of soil conditions which would preclude safe and proper application. 
(d)	Land application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge via injection shall not be performed on sites with slopes exceeding 15 percent. 
(e)	Land application sites shall be subject to the following setback requirements. The permissible application area shall be determined by measuring from the edge of the border or perimeter of the following: 

 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-37. - Site and application restrictions. 
(a)	Septage and/or bulk sewage sludge shall be land applied by subsurface injection.
(b)	In no event may bulk sewage sludge and/or septage be surface spread or land applied by any method other than injection. 
(1)	Land application permitted by this article is expressly limited to "bulk sewage sludge" as defined in 40 CFR 503.9(w) and 503.11(e) and/or "septage" as defined at 40 CFR 503.9(f). 
(c)	The land application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge under this article shall only be conducted on a non-public contact site. Septage and/or bulk sewage sludge shall not be applied to a public contact site, a lawn, or a home garden. 
(1)	A non-public contact site is a site the public uses infrequently such as agricultural land, forests, and reclamation sites, and that is adjacent to areas having a low population density. 
(2)	A public contact site is land with a high potential for contact by the public. This includes, but is not limited to, public parks, ball fields, cemeteries, plant nurseries, golf courses, and other areas where members of the public customarily have ready access. 
(3)	As used in this section, "public" means individuals or group of individuals not employed, associated or otherwise affiliated with the land application entity and/or operation. 
(d)	To avoid the public and/or animals from coming into contact with the soil/sewage sludge mixture, the application site must be fenced with, at a minimum, a five-foot uninterrupted wire-mesh fence. The wire-mesh fence must be installed subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	There shall be no greater than two inches of separation between the ground and the bottom of the wire-mesh fence; and 
(2)	The wire mesh shall not contain any single opening greater than eight square inches in area. 
(e)	Each land disposal site significant point of access shall be posted with "No Trespassing" signs, and identified as a land application disposal site for septage and/or bulk sewage sludge. Moreover, each entrance to the land application site must be gated, with said gate to be closed and locked at all times except during entrance or exit from the site. 
(1)	In addition to the notice provided above, at the main entrance of each application site, signage must be erected setting forth the following information: 
a.	The name and address or phone number of the applier;
b.	The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the regulatory and permitting authority;
c.	The material that is being applied (i.e. bulk sewage sludge);
d.	A notice that access is restricted, and if desired, the date after which access is no longer restricted; and 
e.	If applicable, a notice on limitations regarding the harvest of edible plants from the site. 
(f)	Septage and/or bulk sewage sludge shall not be applied such that ponding or runoff occurs. 
(g)	Septage and/or bulk sewage sludge shall not be applied to soils unless the soil has dried adequately from previous application or rainfall, so that ponding does not occur. 
(h)	Septage and/or bulk sewage sludge shall not be applied by spray irrigation or other methods that cause aerosols to drift from the application site. 
(i)	Septage and/or bulk sewage sludge shall not be applied on Sundays or holidays recognized by the county, during periods of precipitation, or during any 24-hour period when the percentage chance of precipitation during that 24-hour period is 70 percent or greater, as forecast by the National Weather Service. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-38. - Site restrictions during and subsequent to land application. 
(a)	Pathogen control. The following management practices must be met for compliance with pathogen control requirements: 
(1)	Food crops with harvested parts that touch the land surface shall not be harvested for 14 months after septage and/or bulk sewage sludge application; 
(2)	Food crops with harvested parts that develop above the land surface, feed crops, or fiber crops shall not be harvested for 30 days after application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge; 
(3)	Food crops with harvested parts below the land surface shall not be harvested for 20 months after application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge; 
(4)	Animals shall not be allowed to graze on the land for 60 days after application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge; 
(5)	Turf grown on land where bulk sewage sludge is applied shall not be harvested for one year after application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge; and 
(6)	Public access shall be restricted for 60 days after application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge. 
(b)	Vector reduction management. The following management practices must be met for compliance with vector reduction requirements. 
(1)	Septage and/or bulk sewage sludge shall be injected below the surface of the land and no significant amount of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge shall be present on the land surface within one hour after injection. Injection may be accomplished by any device(s) that places the septage and/or bulk sewage sludge beneath the solid surface in a narrow trench at a depth of no greater than 12 inches, and a minimum trench depth of four inches, and promptly replaces the cover soil in the same action of trenching and depositing septage and/or bulk sewage sludge. Excavation of a trench followed by placement of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge and later covering of the trench is not considered injection and is prohibited. 
(2)	Subsurface application techniques include plow furrow cover (PFC), subsurface injection (SSI), and terregator injection, which is a patented device for subsurface injection. Placement in trenches and lagoons are considered burial practices and are not approved. An approved storage facility is required. A resting period of one week is required before equipment can be driven over waste-injected land. 
(c)	Lime treatment. In order to diminish pathogens and minimize vector attraction, the pH of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge to be subsurface injected into the soil shall be raised to 12 or higher by lime addition and, without the addition of more lime, shall remain at 12 or higher for two hours prior to subsurface injection. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-39. - Application rate. 
The maximum annual application rate of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge applied to a land application site shall not exceed 40,000 gallons per acre per year. The septage and/or bulk sewage sludge must be injected as evenly as possible over the entire land disposal site. This application rate is calculated assuming a value of 100 pounds per acre per year of nitrogen required by the crop or vegetation grown on the land. This formula is found as equation 1 in 40 CFR Part 503.13(c). 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-40. - Record keeping. 
(a)	Individuals involved in land application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge shall maintain the following information for five years and that information shall be available for inspection, upon request, by either the county board of commissioners, its agent or designee, or the Environmental Protection Agency of the State of Georgia. 
(1)	The location, by either street address or latitude and longitude, of each site on which septage and/or bulk sewage sludge is applied. 
(2)	The number of acres of each site on which septage and/or bulk sewage sludge is applied.
(3)	The date, time, and quantity of septage and/or sewage sludge applied to each site.
(4)	The crop or vegetation grown on each site; and, with respect to such crops or vegetation, a record of the: 
a.	Quantity harvested;
b.	Harvest dates;
c.	Destination or use of harvested products;
d.	Name and address of the party to whom the harvested product was sold or given; and
e.	A signed statement from the party to whom the product was sold or given stating that the party understands the product was fertilized with septage and/or bulk sewage sludge. 
(5)	The rate in gallons per acre per year at which septage and/or sewage sludge is applied to each site. 
(6)	The following certification statement: "I certify, under penalty of law, that the pathogen requirements in section 64-38(a) and (c) and the vector attraction requirements in section 64-38(b) and (c) have been met. This determination has been made under my direction and supervision in accordance with the system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information used to determine that the pathogen requirements and vector attraction reduction requirements have been met. I am aware that there are significant penalties for false certification including the possibility of fine or imprisonment." 
(7)	A description of how the management requirements in section 64-38(a) and (c) for pathogens and the vector reduction requirements in section 64-38(b) and (c) are being met. 
(8)	The name of the company and signature of the person who applied the septage and/or bulk sewage sludge. 
(9)	A manifest setting forth every person, company, contractor, and/or entity from whom each load of septage or sewage sludge was received for land application on the site, and the date of each shipment. 
(10)	Documentation from each septage pumper such that the county will be enabled to identify the name and address of the residence where the septage was pumped; and a certification from each pumper that no septage to be deposited with the licensee shall originate from an industrial or commercial site. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-41. - Loading rates and disallowed substances at land application sites. 
(a)	No industrial or hazardous wastes shall be deposited on the site. Only septage and/or bulk sewage sludge, as defined in this article, is permitted. Prior to land application, all septage and/or bulk sewage sludge shall be screened for removal of municipal solid waste contained in the septage. Any municipal solid waste removed from the septage/bulk sewage sludge shall be disposed of in a lawfully permitted landfill. 
(b)	No liquid or solid materials removed from a septic tank, cesspool, or similar treatment works that receives either commercial wastewater or industrial wastewater shall be applied on the site, nor shall grease removed from a grease trap at a restaurant. 
(c)	The pH of the soil/septage mixture is to be maintained at 6.5 or greater at all times.
(d)	The pH of the soil in the land disposal area is not to go below 6.5 as measured by annual soil tests. 
(e)	The annual cadmium (Cd) loading rate is not to exceed 0.5 kg/hectare/year. The following formula shall be used to calculate the annual cadmium loading rate: 
Cd dry weight concentration (mg/kg) × whole application rate (metric tons/ha) × 0.001 (conversion factor) = Cd applied (kg/ha) 
(1)	Application of cadmium in excess of the annual loading rate shall be grounds for revocation of the land application license. 
(f)	The ceiling concentrations for the following substances shall be as follows (all values are milligrams per kilogram, dry weight basis): 

 
(g)	Sewage sludge testing. With respect to a licensee land applying sewage sludge, at least quarterly, testing of the sewage sludge in the holding tanks shall be conducted by an independent engineering or biosolids firm to ensure that the ceiling concentrations of the substances identified in section 64-42(f) are not exceeded. The results of this quarterly testing shall be provided to the county board of commissioners or its agent or designee. In no event may sewage sludge be land applied where any of the section 64-42(f) ceiling concentrations are exceeded. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of all testing. In no event shall testing be performed less frequently than required under 40 CFR 503 regulations. 
(h)	Septage testing. With respect to a licensee land applying septage, at least once every six months during the first year of operation, and thereafter annually, testing of the septage shall be conducted by an independent engineering or biosolids firm to ensure that the ceiling concentrations of the substances identified in section 64-42(f) are not exceeded. The results of this annual testing shall be provided to the county board of commissioners or its agent or designee. In no event may septage be land applied where any of the section 64-42(f) ceiling concentrations are exceeded. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of all testing. In no event shall testing be performed less frequently than required under 40 CFR 503 regulations. 
(i)	In no event shall sewage sludge and/or septage be land applied such that the cumulative pollutant loading rates and/or the pollutant concentrations limitations provided in 40 CFR 503.13, Tables 2 and 3, are exceeded. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-42. - Sewage sludge/septage holding tanks. 
(a)	It is necessary that all septage and/or bulk sewage sludge application sites governed by this article have sewage sludge holding tank facilities installed on the premises. These holding tanks are necessary to provide a mechanism for the pathogen and vector reduction process, as well as to provide a temporary holding facility for the septage and/or bulk sewage sludge during periods of adverse weather. These holding tanks shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	No overflow or leakage of septage and/or sewage sludge may be allowed from the surface onto the ground surface, into the surface waters or the groundwater table. 
(2)	A 60 lb. turn-down lid shall be installed on the holding tanks and shall be closed at all times, except when employees of the license holder, or other duly authorized individuals, are present. 
(3)	Odors from such tanks are to be controlled at all times.
(4)	During periods of pumping into or out of holding tanks, citronella or other odor controlling spray shall be released in the air sufficient to abate any odor occasioned by the transfer process. 
(5)	After periods of pumping sewage sludge or septage into or out of holding tanks, all equipment, tanks and grounds shall be hosed down such that all septage and/or sewage sludge is washed off the equipment, tanks, and grounds. 
(6)	Septage and/or sewage sludge is to be removed from the holding tanks to the land application equipment as soon as weather and soil conditions permit. 
(b)	Prior to the installation of septage and/or sewage sludge storage handling tanks, each such tank shall be inspected and approved by a representative designated by the county board of commissioners and the cost of such inspection and approval shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant/licensee. The inspector shall make findings with respect to structural integrity, rusting, holes, cracks, fissures, and any other evidence of deterioration or structural unsoundness. Any tanks determined to be structurally unsound or otherwise susceptible to leaking or failure shall not be approved for installation or use at the facility. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-43. - Inspection, monitoring and investigation. 
(a)	After receiving an administratively complete license application, the county board of commissioners or its agent or designee may, prior to issuance of a license: (a) inspect the site to determine whether the license applicant has complied with this article; (b) test the background or accumulated levels of chemicals, metals, pathogens, radioactive material, and other pollutants in the soil, groundwater, or surface water at the septage and/or sewage sludge site for purposes of establishing baseline measurements; and (c) test the septage and/or sewage sludge to be applied to ensure compliance with all pertinent federal and local pollutant, pathogen, pH, vector attraction reduction, and other applicable regulations. 
(b)	The person who inspects the site on behalf of the county board of commissioners, its agent of designee may be accompanied by representatives of the license holder, the sewage sludge handler, the state, and/or the Environmental Protection Agency. The county board of commissioners shall deny a land application license if the results of any test or inspection reveal that the land application will violate any federal, state or local laws or regulations concerning the land application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge. 
(c)	Upon issuance of a license, and after the land application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge or septage has commenced, the county board of commissioners, or its designee, shall conduct, at a minimum, quarterly inspections of the site to monitor compliance with this article including, without limitation, to determine whether the septage and/or bulk sewage sludge is being properly applied, whether all Environmental Protection Agency and local permit and/or license requirements have been achieved, whether cumulative ceiling concentrations of metals section 64-42(f) are exceeded, whether setbacks are being observed, whether all vector and pathogen abatement requirements are being followed, and whether there is compliance with food and feed crop restrictions under this article and all other pertinent authority. The cost of such quarterly inspection shall be the sole responsibility of the licensee. 
(d)	Upon issuance of a license and after the land application of septage and/or bulk sewage sludge or septage has commenced, the county board of commissioners, or its designee, shall, as often as it deems necessary to protect and ensure public health, collect samples of the septage and/or bulk sewage sludge in the holding tanks to determine compliance with the pathogen and vector abatement requirements of this article. The results of such tests shall be maintained by the county board of commissioners and shall be provided to the license holder upon request. The cost of such sampling and testing shall be the sole responsibility of the licensee. 
(e)	Upon issuance of a license and after the land application of bulk sewage sludge or septage has commenced, the county board of commissioners, or its designee, shall, as often as it deems necessary to protect and ensure the public health, collect water samples from all water impoundments, lakes, streams, ponds, reservoirs, marshes, sinkholes, or any permanent or intermittent water bodies considered a water of the state on, or within one-half mile of the site in order to test for chemicals, metals, pathogens, radioactive material, and other pollutants. The results of such tests shall be maintained by the county board of commissioners and shall be provided to the license holder upon request. 
(1)	If such testing reveals the presence of chemicals, metals, pathogens, radioactive material, and/or other pollutants in excess of concentrations permitted by pertinent local, state or federal regulations or guidelines, and if the origin of such pollutants is determined to be the land application site, then a violation of this article will have occurred and the county board of commissioners, in addition to any other remedies provided under this article, shall be authorized to immediately petition the superior court of the county for issuance of a stop work order effective against the licensee until such time as the pollutant concentration levels in the affected water bodies are reduced to permissible levels and remedial action is undertaken by the licensee to ensure no future contamination. 
(f)	The inspections and monitoring required in this section are in addition to those tests and inspections required to be performed by, or on behalf, of the holder. Cost of such inspections and monitoring shall be borne by the permittee. 
(g)	Representatives of the county board of commissioners, or its designee, may inspect the site without notice or a search warrant to monitor compliance with this article. Prior to conducting any inspection under this article, the person conducting the inspection on behalf of the board shall present his/her credentials to the owner or occupier of the site unless this requirement would wholly or partially frustrate the inspection. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
Sec. 64-44. - Enforcement and revocation. 
(a)	Whenever it is determined that there has been a violation of this article, the county board of commissioners shall give notice to the person alleged to have violated the article. Such notice shall: (1) be in writing; (2) include a statement of the alleged violation(s); (3) be served upon the person alleged to be in violation of the article via certified mail; (4) contain a compliance order that explains the remedial action that, if taken, will effect compliance with the article; and (5) provide the alleged violator with five days to take the prescribed remedial action to cure his violation(s). 
(b)	Upon failure of any person to comply with a notice of violation and compliance order, the county board of commissioners may suspend the applicable site registration and/or land application registration with a cease and desist order that terminates land application of bulk sewage sludge or septage at which the alleged violation(s) occurred. In addition to a cease and desist order, the board of commissioners of the county may institute an action for injunction or other appropriate action to cause cessation of the violation. 
(c)	Whoever shall cause or permit any activity or use of property to be carried out in violation of the terms of this article, or who shall do any acts prohibited by this article, or who shall fail to do any act commanded, directed, or required by this article, shall be subject to the maximum punishment now provided, or as may be provided, by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. The duly authorized law enforcement officers of the county shall carry out enforcement of this subpart of the article. 
(d)	In addition to or instead of utilization of the injunctive relief or criminal provisions in the previous sections, the board of commissioners of the county may institute civil action to penalize violation of any part of this article. The civil penalty shall not exceed $1,000.00 per day per violation. In addition to said penalties, reimbursement to the board of commissioners for reasonable attorney fees for the enforcement of the article and costs of litigation, including depositions and related costs, are authorized to be awarded by the appropriate judicial authority. 
(e)	Any person who violates and/or is convicted of violating this article two or more times shall be permanently prohibited from land applying sewage sludge or septage, operating a land application site, or preparing bulk sewage sludge/septage to be land applied in the county. This prohibition applies to that person's parent, sister, and successor companies, subsidiaries, and alter egos, and to any person substantially owned or controlled by the person (including its officers, directors, or owners that twice violate this article). 
(Ord. of 10-20-2003)
APPENDIX A - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of 5-21-2001 amended Appendix A, §§ 51.1—51.48, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Appendix A pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the county's subdivision regulations, as adopted by the board of commissioners effective October 21, 1996. See also the Code Comparative Table. Amendments to the zoning ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-4(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 26; manufactured homes, ch. 34; planning, ch. 42; roads, ch. 46.
State Law reference— Approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d).

ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION 

51.1 - Authority. 
The general planning authority contained in the Constitution of the State of Georgia grants authority to the governing body of each county and municipality to regulate subdivisions and land development. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.2 - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall apply to all unincorporated land located within the boundaries of the County of Emanuel. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
[51.2.1 - Purpose.] 
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to any subdivision of property as defined herein whether the same be for residential, commercial, or industrial use and notwithstanding the nature of the structures or buildings proposed to be constructed or placed within said subdivision. 
(Amd. of 3-16-1998)
[51.2.2 - Exemptions.] 
1.	A division of property previously held in joint ownership among the joint owners thereof shall not be considered a subdivision for purposes of this ordinance. 
2.	The transfer of property or any portion thereof from one contiguous owner to another contiguous owner shall not be considered a subdivision for purposes of this ordinance. 
3.	A single transfer of an interest in property by a land owner shall not be considered a subdivision for purposes of this ordinance. However, any subsequent transfers of less than the entire remaining tract of property or subsequent transfer of a portion of the previously transferred property by the owners thereof, their heirs, assigns, or devicees or successors in interest shall be deemed to create a subdivision and the second transfer and all subsequent transfers shall be governed by the terms of this ordinance. 
(Amd. of 3-16-1998)
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE AND SHORT TITLE 

51.3 - Purpose. 
The public health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within Emanuel County, Georgia. In furtherance of the general intent of this ordinance, the regulation of land subdivision county governing authorities is authorized for the following purposes, among others: 
(a)	To encourage the development of economically sound and stable municipalities and counties;
(b)	To assure the timely provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
(c)	To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in and through new land developments; 
(d)	To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; and 
(e)	To assure, in general, the wise and timely development of new areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan (if applicable) of the municipalities and the county. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.4 - Short Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "Emanuel County Subdivision Regulations." 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND DEFINITIONS 

51.5 - Rules. 
In the construction of these regulations, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the content clearly indicates otherwise: 
(a)	Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and the words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular. 
(b)	The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
(c)	The word "may" is permissive.
(d)	The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.6 - Definitions. 
51.6.1 Accessory building. A secondary residence, garage, or other building or structure subordinated to and not forming an integral part of the main or principal building on a lot or parcel but pertaining to the use of the main building. 
51.6.2 Alley. A narrow thoroughfare dedicated or used for public passageway up to 20 feet in width, which usually abuts the rear of the premises, or upon which service entrances or buildings abut, and which is not generally used as a thoroughfare by both pedestrians and vehicles, is not used for general traffic, and is not otherwise officially designated as a street. A way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
51.6.3 Reserved. 
51.6.4 Buildable area. Reserved. 
51.6.5 Building. A building is any structure erected for the purpose of providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind. 
51.6.6 Building line. A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way and nearest extreme projection of a building (including all areas covered by any vertical projections to the ground or overhang, walls, roof, or any other part of the structure). 
51.6.7 Building site. The ground area of a building or buildings together with all open spaces surrounded by said building or buildings. 
51.6.8 Building official. Person appointed by the local governing authority to inspect, determine compliance with, and render decisions concerning the compliance of structures and lots within the county, with this and other ordinances of the county. 
51.6.9 Certified survey. A survey, sketch, plat, map, or other exhibit is said to be certified when a written statement regarding its accuracy or conformity to specified standards is signed by the specified professional engineers, registered surveyor, architect, or other legally recognized person. 
51.6.10 Density. Reserved. 
51.6.11 Easement. A grant to the general public, a corporation, or certain person of a strip or parcel of land for use for a specific purpose. No construction of any kind is permitted in or upon easements except that required in connection with the designated use. 
51.6.12 Engineer. Any person being licensed by the State of Georgia as an engineer capable of determining the correct manner in which to construct roads, streets, highways, water and sewage systems, drainage system, structures or other technical related areas. 
51.6.13 Family. Reserved. 
51.6.14 Flood prone areas. Reserved. 
51.6.15 Group development. Reserved. 
51.6.16 Governing authority. The board of commissioners of the county. 
51.6.17 Lot. Parcel of land shown on a recorded plat or on the official county zoning maps (if applicable) or any piece of land described by a legally recorded deed. 
51.6.18 Lot, area. Shall mean the total area of the lot including easement. 
51.6.19 Lot, corner. Any lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersections or intercepting streets or public highways. If the angle or intersection of the direction lines of two highways is more than 135 degrees, the lot fronting on said intersection is not a corner lot. 
51.6.20 Lot, double frontage. A lot having frontage and access on two or more public streets. A corner lot shall not be considered having double frontage unless it has frontage and access on three or more streets. 
51.6.21 Lot, interior. Any lot which is not a corner lot that has frontage only on one street other than an alley. 
51.6.22 Lot, line, front. In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the front lot line is the line separating such lot from such street. In the case of a corner lot, that part of the lot having the narrowest frontage on any street shall be considered the front lot line. In the case of any other lot, one such line shall be elected to be the front lot line for the purpose of this ordinance, provided it is so designated by the building plans which meet the approval of the building official. 
51.6.23 Lot, line, rear. The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, or any odd-shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be determined by the building official. 
51.6.24 Lot, line, side. A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is an exterior side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot, or lots, is an interior side lot line. 
51.6.25 Lot, reverse frontage. A lot having frontage on two or more public streets, the access of which is restricted to one street. 
51.6.26 Metes and bounds description. A method of property description whereby properties are described by means of their direction and distances from an easily identifiable location or point. 
51.6.27 Mobile home. Reserved. 
51.6.28 Planning commission. Reserved. 
51.6.29 Plat. A map showing the features of a proposed subdivision (lot split, metes and bounds description). This plat would show the entire tract, and the lot which is to be subdivided, the adjacent properties and owners, roads, or streets, and giving all necessary bearings and distances for the proposed "split." 
51.6.30 Plat, final. The map, plan or record of a subdivision, and any accompanying materials, as described in Article V. 
51.6.31 Plat, preliminary. A map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision, including topographical data, submitted to the county commission for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
51.6.32 Principal building. The building situated or to be placed nearest the front property line and the use of which conforms to the primary use permitted by this ordinance and (if applicable) the zone classification in which it is located. 
51.6.33 Public use. Use of any land, water, buildings by a municipality, public body or board, commission or authority, county, state or federal government, or any agency thereof for a public service or purpose. 
51.6.34 Regulatory flood. Reserved. 
51.6.35 Residential. The term "residential" or "residence" is applied herein to any lot, plot, parcel, tract, area, or piece of land and/or any building used exclusively for family dwelling purposes or intended to be used, including concomitant uses specified herein. 
51.6.36 Reserve strip. A strip of land adjacent to a public street or similar right-of-way which has been reserved for the purpose of controlling access to the public way. 
51.6.37 Right-of-way line. The outside boundaries of a highway right-of-way, whether such right-of-way be established by usage, dedication or by the official right-of-way. 
51.6.38 Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building. When two or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior property line so grouped shall be used in determining offsets. 
51.6.39 Site. An area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded subdivision plat or in an legally recorded deed. 
51.6.40 Street. A public right-of-way affording primary access to abutting property. For the purposes of these regulations, the term shall also mean avenue, boulevard, road, land, and other public ways. 
51.6.41 Street, cul-de-sac. Shall mean a short local street having but one end open for vehicular traffic, the opposite end being terminated with a permanent turn-around. 
51.6.42 Street, dead end. Shall mean a street not intersecting other streets at both ends, and distinguished from a cul-de-sac by not being terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
51.6.43 Street, local. Shall mean streets which provide only access to adjacent properties and by nature of their layout do not serve vehicles passing through the area with neither origin nor destination within the area. 
51.6.44 Street, marginal access. Shall mean a minor service street which parallels and which is immediately adjacent to an arterial street (frontage road). 
51.6.45 Street, width. Shall mean the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street. 
51.6.46 Surveyor. A person who is licensed by the State of Georgia as a registered land surveyor. 
51.6.47 Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which divides for sale, rent or lease or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined. 
51.6.48 Subdivider. Any person, firm, or corporation who or which divides for sale, rent or lease or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined. 
51.6.49 Subdivision. "Subdivision" means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, or building development and includes all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes further subdividing of the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following exceptions are not considered a subdivision: 
(a)	The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the governing authority; and 
(b)	The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved or an existing street is not extended. 
51.6.50 Use. The purpose for which land or building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
51.6.51 Waterfront. Any site shall be considered as waterfront property provided any or all of its lot lines abut on or are continuous to any body of water including creek, canal, river, or any other body of water, natural or artificial, including marshlands, not including a swimming pool, whether said lot line is front, rear or side. 
51.6.52 Yard. An open space on the same lot with a building; said space lies between the building and nearest lot or street line. 
51.6.53 Yard, front. That area of open space to the front of the platted lot, the area immediately adjacent to the street side of the lot. If streets bound on two sides of the lot, the narrower portion fronting on a street shall the front. See Lot line, front. 
51.6.54 Yard, rear. That area of open space that is opposite the area delineated as the front; that area of greatest distance form the street. See Lot line, rear. 
51.6.55 Yard, side. That area of open space that is immediately adjacent to the side lot lines. See Lot line, side. 
51.6.56 Zoning ordinance. Reserved. 
(Amd. of 5-21-2001; Ord. of 5-21-2001)
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL 

51.7 - Three Step Review. 
The procedure for review and approval of a subdivision plat consists of three separate steps. They are: 
(a)	Review of sketch plans by the building official;
(b)	Review and approval of preliminary plat by county commission;
(c)	Review and approval of final plat by governing authority.
Steps (a) and (b) shall be completed prior to making any street improvement or installing any utilities. Step (c) shall be completed prior to the sale of any lots in the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.8 - Review Procedure. 
The following procedure shall be followed in the submission, review, and action upon all subdivision plats: 
51.8.1 Sketch plan review procedures. Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider may submit to the building official a simple sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. The sketch plan may be a simple free hand drawing. Included with the sketch plan should be a sketch map which shows the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area. The purpose of the sketch plan is to assist the subdivider prior to extensive site planning necessary for the preparation of the preliminary plat and enable the subdivider to become familiar with the regulations affecting the land to be subdivided. The building official shall review and approve, disapprove, or approve with modification the sketch plan within 15 days from the meeting at which it is presented. 
51.8.2 Preliminary plat procedures. Application for preliminary approval of a subdivision plat shall be submitted to the county administrator or the county commission at least 25 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting date of the county commission. The plat of the subdivision shall be submitted in six blue line prints and shall be such as to meet the minimum requirements contained herein. Any preliminary plat submitted to the county administrator shall contain the name and address of the subdivider (or subdivider's designee) to whom notice of hearing may be sent; and no preliminary plat shall be acted upon by the county commission without affording a hearing thereon, notice of time and place of which shall be sent by registered or certified mail to said address not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. 
Additional copies of the plat and supplemental information may be requested by the county commission. The above mentioned copies shall be distributed as required by this ordinance and additionally as deemed necessary by the county commission. The person or agency to which a copy of the preliminary plat is directed, shall indicate any desired changes or comments on the plat and submit to the county commission prior to the formal presentation of the preliminary plat. 
The county commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 30 days after formal submission, and, if approved, shall indicate in writing, stating the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express in writing its disapproval and its reasons therefor. Failure of the county commission to act within 30 days after formal submission of the preliminary plat shall be deemed to constitute approval and certificate to that effect shall be issued by the county commission on demand, provided, however that the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent in writing to the extension of such period. 
The action of the commission shall be recorded in the minutes of the commission meeting. 
Preliminary approval of the subdivision plat shall be noted on the plat and certified by the county administrator on authorization by the county commission. 
Also noted shall be the date on which the county commission granted preliminary approval and the date of written notification to the subdivider or subdivider's authorized agent. Failure of a subdivider to initiate any development within 18 months from the approval of the preliminary plat will require resubmittal of the preliminary plat to the county commission for approval. 
Approval of a preliminary subdivision plat shall not constitute approval of the final subdivision plat. 
Preliminary approval shall constitute approval of the proposed widths and alignments of streets and the dimensions and shapes of lots subject to the final approval of the county health department and road superintendent. Application for approval of the final record plat will be considered only after the requirements for final plat approval as specified herein have been fulfilled and after all other specified conditions have been met. Upon approval of the preliminary subdivision plat by the county commission, the subdivider may proceed to comply with the other requirements of these regulations and the preparation of the final subdivision plat. However, if the subdivider fails to act within 180 days of the preliminary approval such approval shall become void unless an extension is requested by the subdivider and approved by the county commission. 
51.8.3 Final plat procedure. The county commission shall examine the final plat to determine if it meets all requirements of these regulations, conforms to the approved preliminary plat, has approval of the health department and road superintendent, has been reviewed and approved by the local soil and water conservation district, design of the roads has been approved by the appropriate designated official, and whether streets and easements have been dedicated or qualify for dedication. If water or sewer system is to be installed, the subdivider is to indicate who will own the system, who will operate it and what assurance will be given to the governing authority for continued operation. If roads are to be built, subdivider will indicate each subdivider's proposal for a bond to the governing authority to assure their proper and timely construction. If approved, a plat can be recorded in the clerk's office of the Emanuel County Superior Court upon authentication by the county administrator. For purposes hereof, authentication shall be in the following form to wit: Approved for recording on the ____________ day of ____________/____________/____________, 19____________ by the appropriate governing authority. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.9 - Federal Housing Administration Approval. 
In the event the subdivider plans to secure approval of the subdivision design by the Federal Housing Administration, it is suggested that such approval be secured after submission to and approval of a preliminary plat by the county commission. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
ARTICLE V. - PLAT REQUIREMENTS 

51.10 - Sketch Plan. 
51.10.1 Scale. The sketch plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one to 660 feet to one inch. 
51.10.2 Vicinity map. The sketch plan shall include a vicinity map at a scale not less than one inch equals one mile showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to surrounding development. 
51.10.3 Other requirements. The sketch plan shall show: 
(1)	Proposed name of subdivision.
(2)	Name, address, and telephone number of petitioner and architect, surveyor, engineer or designer. 
(3)	All names and addresses of all property owners of the site.
(4)	All names and addresses, as listed by the county assessor, of all owners of the land adjacent to the site. 
(5)	North indicator.
(6)	Date of preparation.
(7)	Total acreage in the tract to be subdivided.
(8)	Existing and proposed uses of land through out the subdivision.
(9)	Sheet size shall be 18 inches × 24 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
51.10.4 Subdivision of part of property. The subdivider shall submit a sketch plan of such subdivider's entire tract even though each such subdivider's present plans call for the actual development of only a part of the property. 
51.10.5 Division of property without sufficient road frontage. A tract of property, without sufficient road frontage, may be divided once so long as the divided tract meets the minimum lot size requirements of this ordinance and provided that the divided tract is served by an easement from a public road no less than 30 feet in width. Neither the original tract nor the divided tract served by the easement may be sub-divided further unless the sub-divider complies with the minimum road frontage requirements of the Emanuel County Subdivision Ordinance. This amendment shall not apply to property in a residential subdivision developed for resale. A plat of the divided tract showing the location of the easement shall be prepared by a registered surveyor and filed in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Emanuel County. The following language shall be displayed prominently on the plat: 
No further division of this property will be permitted without the prior approval of the Emanuel County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001; Amd. of 9-17-2007)
51.11 - Preliminary Plat. 
The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 200 feet and meet the minimum standards of design set forth in these regulations and shall include the following information: 
51.11.1 General conditions. 
(1)	Full name of subdivision.
(2)	Name, address, and telephone number of petitioner and architect, surveyor, engineer or designer. 
(3)	All names and addresses of all property owners of the site.
(4)	All names and addresses of all deed record owners of the land adjacent to the site.
(5)	Graphic scale, north point and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true or grid north. 
(6)	Vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch equals one mile showing the relationship of the subdivision to the surrounding area. 
(7)	Acreage to be subdivided.
(8)	Proper identification of the boundaries of the tract to be subdivided with all bearings and distances indicated. The boundary survey shall be to such a degree of accuracy that the error of closure is 1:7,500 or greater. 
51.11.2 Existing conditions. 
(1)	Zoning district classification (if applicable) of land to be subdivided and adjoining land. 
(2)	In case of resubdivision, a copy of the existing plat with proposed resubdivision super-imposed thereon. 
(3)	Location of natural features such as streams, lakes, and swamps.
(4)	Location of existing adjoining property lines and existing buildings on the property to be subdivided. 
(5)	Location and right-of-way streets, roads, railroads, and utility lines either on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided. Specify whether utility lines are on easements or right-of-way and show location of poles or towers. 
(6)	Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the street or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown. 
(7)	Location of city limit lines and county lines (if applicable).
51.11.3 Proposed conditions. 
(1)	Layout of streets, roads, alleys, public crosswalks, with widths, road names, or designations.
(2)	Profile of proposed streets showing natural and finished grades with percent of grade slope. 
(3)	Detailed layout of all lots, including setback lines; scaled dimensions on lots; lot and block numbers, utility easements with width and use. 
(4)	Construction drawings of sanitary sewers (if applicable) with grade, pipe size, location of manholes, and points of discharge and percolation tests, soil borings and wells as specified by the health department. 
(5)	Construction drawings of storm sewer system (if one is to be constructed) with grade, pipe size, and location of outlet. Storm sewers shall be sized to accommodate runoff from a ten-year frequency rainfall. 
(6)	Plans of all drainage provisions, retaining walls, curbing, planting, anti-erosion devices, or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with, or as a part of the proposed work together with a map showing the drainage area of land tributary to the site and estimated runoff of the area served by any drains. 
(7)	Construction drawings of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants and valves, (if applicable). 
(8)	Designation of all land (if any) to be reserved or dedicated for public use.
(9)	Designated of proposed use of all lots to be used for other than single-family residential (if any). 
(10)	Proposed major contour changes to areas where substantial cut and/or fill is to be done. 
(11)	A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the development sequence and the time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures. 
(12)	Total number of lots, total acreage, total length and width of new streets.
51.11.4 Review and approval. The preliminary plat shall be approved by the county commission only after review and approval of the following: 
(a)	The health department shall review the water supply and sewage disposal facilities to be provided on all preliminary plats. In addition, it shall make determinations in all matters concerning the public health, as specified herein. Such determinations and recommendations shall be forwarded to the county commission in writing. 
(b)	The county administrator and road superintendent shall review the preliminary plat for conformity of its proposed streets with adopted design standards, if any, and existing and proposed public street improvements. 
(c)	The local soil and water conservation district shall review the preliminary subdivision plat and make comments and determinations regarding slopes and soil erosion, drainage and water runoff, flood plain areas and other related areas. The district shall forward in writing to the county commission comments and/or recommendations and approval or disapproval. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.12 - Final Plat. 
If the final plat is drawn in two or more sections, each section shall be accompanied by a key map showing the location of the several sections. The final plat shall contain the following specific information. 
(1)	Name of owner of record.
(2)	Name of subdivision, date, north arrow, and graphic scale.
(3)	Name, registration number, and seal of registered land surveyor.
(4)	Names of counties in which subdivision is located and location map.
(5)	Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce accurately on the ground the location, bearing, length and width of every street and alley line, lot line, easement, boundary line, and building line, whether curved or straight. This shall include the radius, point of tangency, and other data for curved property lines and curved streets, to an appropriate accuracy and in conformance with good surveying practice. 
(6)	Names of owners of record of all adjoining land and all adjoining land and all property boundaries, water courses, streets, easements, utilities and other such improvements, which cross or form any boundary line of the tract being subdivided. 
(7)	Exact boundaries and original property lines within the tract of land being subdivided shown with bearings and distances. 
(8)	Streets and alleys, right-of-way, and street names.
(9)	Right-of-way of easements; location, widths, and purposes.
(10)	Lot lines, minimum building setback lines, street names and lot and block numbers.
(11)	Parks, school sites, or other public open spaces, if any.
(12)	All dimensions shall be to the nearest 1/100 of a foot and angles to the nearest minute.
(13)	Accurate description of the location of all monuments and markers.
(14)	Utility easements by widths and locations to include:
(a)	Water;
(b)	Gas;
(c)	Sanitary sewer;
(d)	Storm drainage;
(e)	Electrical lines;
(f)	Telephone lines.
(15)	The following signed certificate shall appear on the final plat which is submitted to the county commission by the subdivider: 
(a)	Certificate of approval for recording, county commission (to be placed on an original of the approved final plat by the county commission representative and returned to the subdivider for recording). 
"The subdivision plat known as ____________, has been found to comply with the Emanuel County Subdivision Regulations and was approved at a regular (special) meeting of the Emanuel County Commission on the ____________ day of ____________/____________/____________, 19____________, for recording in the office of Clerk of Court of Emanuel County, Georgia. 

 
(b)	Certificate of accuracy. 
I hereby certify that this Plat is a true, correct and accurate survey as required by the Emanuel County Subdivision Regulations; and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision, and that monuments shown have been located and place to the specification set forth in said regulations. 

 
Registered Land Surveyor No.____________ 
No.____________/____________/____________ 
Date____________/____________/____________ 
(c)	Certificate of ownership and dedication (individuals). 
"It is hereby certified that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites to public or private use as noted. It is further certified that the streets, drainage system, sewer system and water system in ____________ Subdivision as shown on the Plat dated ____________/____________/____________, prepared by ____________ have (has) been installed in accordance with the Preliminary Plat (Construction Drawings) approved (Date) ____________/____________/____________. It is understood that is not an assumption of maintenance by the governing authority. This dedication is for the public's right of ingress and egress only. 

 
(d)	Certificate of ownership and dedication (corporation). 
"It is hereby certified that ____________, a corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the State of Georgia is the owner of the property shown and described thereon, and that all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and sites shown thereon, are dedicated to public or private use as noted. It is understood that this is not as assumption of maintenance by the governing authority. This dedication is for the public's rights of ingress and egress only. 
(Corporate seal required) 

 
51.12.1 Final plat approval. The final plat shall be approved by the governing authority after review and approval by the following: 
(a)	County administrator and road superintendent.
(b)	County board of health.
(c)	County Soil Conservation District when required.
(d)	Georgia Department of Natural Resources when required.
51.12.2 Permanent reference points. Prior to the approval of the final plat, all of the subdivision's permanent reference points shall have been placed in accordance with the following requirements: 
51.12.2.1 Subdivision corner tie. At least one corner of the subdivision shall be designated by course and distance (tie) from a readily discernible reference marker. If a corner is within 2,000 feet of a U.S. Coast and Geodetic Station, U.S. Geological Survey, or Georgia Grid System coordinated monument, then this corner shall be marked with a monument so designated by computed X and Y coordinates which shall appear on the map with a statement identifying this station or monument to an accuracy of 1:10,000. When such a monument or station is not available, the tie shall be made to some permanent and readily recognizable landmark or identifiable point, physical object or structure. 
51.12.2.2 Monuments. 
(1)	Monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the boundaries of the subdivision; at the intersection of the lines of streets with boundaries of the plat and at the intersection of alleys with the boundaries of the subdivision; at all points of curvature, points in the side lines of street and alleys; and at all angles of an intermediate traverse line. 
(2)	It is not intended or required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a street to mark angles in the boundary of the subdivision if the angle points can be readily re-established by reference to monuments along the sidelines of the streets. 
(3)	All required monuments shall be placed flush with the ground where practicable.
(4)	If the required location of a monument is in an inaccessible place, or where the location of a monument would be clearly impracticable, it is sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location thereof be clearly indicated on the plat and referenced to the true point. 
(5)	All monuments used shall be made of a minimum of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half-inch in diameter and 24 inches long. 
(6)	If a point required to be monumented is on a bedrock outcropping, a steel rod, at least one-half-inch in diameter shall be drilled and groated into solid rock to a depth of at least eight inches. 
51.12.2.3 Control corners. Within each block of a subdivision at least two monuments designed and designated as control corners shall be installed. 
51.12.2.4 Property markers. A steel or wrought iron pipe or the equivalent not less than one-half-inch in diameter and at least 24 inches in length shall set all corners, except those located by monuments. 
51.12.2.5 Accuracy. Land surveys, both within the limits of incorporated areas and beyond shall be at an accuracy of at least 1:7,500. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

51.13 - Required Improvements. 
A well designed subdivision means little to a prospective lot buyer until such buyer can see actual physical transformation of raw land into lots with all necessary improvements provided. Likewise, a well designed subdivision is not an asset to the community until the necessary improvements have been installed. In order that prospective lot purchasers may get useable products and new subdivisions may be an asset rather than a liability to the community, the subdivider shall install and/or pay for the improvements required by these regulations necessary to serve the subdivision prior to the approval of the final plat. 
51.13.1 Natural gas. When gas lines are located in a street right-of-way, where possible, such lines shall be located outside the portion of the street to be surfaced to prevent having to cut into the paved surface to serve abutting properties. 
51.13.2 Water supply. When a water system is installed in a subdivision with more than 20 lots, water mains shall provide a minimum flow of water of 500 gallons per minute for four minutes or 250 gallons per minute for two hours at the furthermost point from the tank. Fire hydrants shall be provided at distances not greater than 1,000 feet apart. When the water main is located in the street to serve the abutting lots a water service line three-fourths-inch in size shall be stubbed-out to the property line to serve each lot before the street is surfaced. When connection to a municipal or county water system is not available, the county commission may make an exception to this rule. 
51.13.3 Sanitary sewage. If a sanitary sewer is installed in a subdivision, sanitary sewers shall be installed to the plans and specifications approved by and in accordance with the rules and administrative regulations of the county health department. When the sewer line is located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed-out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. 
51.13.4 Sewage disposal systems. Prior to the construction of any community sewage disposal system such as private septic tanks, an oxidation pond or other facility, the location, size, plans, and specifications of such a facility shall be approved by and be in accordance with the rules and administrative regulations of the county commission, and the county health department. 
51.13.5 Curb and gutters. If concrete curbs or paved valley type gutters are installed, they shall be installed in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by an engineer, registered surveyor or architect and approved by the county commission, or the local governing authority or its designee. 
51.13.6 Street grading and surfacing. It shall be the subdivider/developers responsibility to pave all streets in subdivisions governed by this ordinance. Street grading, base preparation and surfacing shall be carried out by the subdivider according to plans and specifications approved by the county administrator and road superintendent. 
51.13.7 Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, storm sewers, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, and other necessary appurtenances shall be installed by the subdivider according to plans and specifications approved by the county administrator. 
51.13.8 Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections within a subdivision. The location, design and name shall be approved by the board of commissioners. 
51.13.9 Topsoil. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover on the lots and at least four inches of cover between sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. The excavation and treatment of overburden during construction shall be inspected by the soil conservation service. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.14 - Final Plat Revisions. 
If it should become necessary to revise a final plat due to a dimensional error, a revised plat shall be submitted to the county clerk of court for the final recording after the county commission has approved and signed the revised plat. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.15 - Performance Bonds. 
In lieu of the completion of required improvements and the installations previous to the final approval of a plat, the board of commissioners may accept a bond, in an amount and with survey and conditions satisfactory to it, providing for and securing to the county a period specified by the county commission and expressed in the bond; and the county is hereby granted the power to enforce such bonds by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.16 - Dedications. 
After the adoption of a major street plan as provided by law, the county or other public authority shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street or authorize the laying of water mains, sewers, connections, or other facilities or utilities in any street within the territorial jurisdiction of the county commission unless such street has been accepted or opened as, or shall otherwise have received the legal status of, a public street prior to the attachment of the county commission's subdivision jurisdiction, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the local governing authority. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
ARTICLE VII. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

51.17 - Scope. 
The following design standards shall be considered minimum requirements in the platting of all subdivisions. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.18 - Streets. 
51.18.1 Conformity to existing maps or plans. The location and width of all proposed streets shall be in conformity with official county policies and standards. 
51.18.2 Continuation of adjoining street system. The proposed street laying shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area. Where possible, existing major streets shall be extended. 
51.18.3 Access to adjacent properties. Where it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property and a temporary turn-around shall be provided. Houses fronting on minor streets shall have access from minor streets only. 
51.18.4 Street names. Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with other existing and named streets, shall bear the assigned name of the existing streets. In no case shall the name of the proposed streets duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street name, irrespective of the use of suffix, street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person in laying out any new street or road to name such street or road on any plat, by marking or in any deed or instrument, without first getting approval of the county commission. 
51.18.5 Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be prohibited. 
51.18.6 Right angle intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable. 
51.18.7 Cul-de-sac. A minor street provided with a turn-around having a roadway diameter of at least 50 feet and a right-of-way diameter of at least 80 feet. Temporary dead-end streets shall be provided with a turn-around having a 40-foot radius. 
51.18.8 Street right-of-way widths. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
A.	Curb and gutter type construction. 

 
B.	Shoulder-type lane. 

 
NOTES: 
(1)	Except for local street, roadway widths shown do not provide for on-street parking; service lanes are intended only for loading and unloading of passengers and goods and for disabled vehicles and not for the storage of vehicles. 
(2)	Right-of-way (henceforth referred to as R/W) width listed is for only that portion of the typical section between the limits indicated in diagram. Sloping rights of additional R/W will be required for cut and fill slopes outside these limits; these future slope areas beyond indicated R/W limits should also be kept clear of development until slopes have been constructed. 
(3)	R/W widths greater than "minimum" are encouraged because they make for a safer, more aesthetic and more "comfortable" facility and permit future roadway widening without disrupting abutting property. 
51.18.9 Sight distance for vertical curves. Where vertical curves are used, the minimum sight distance shall be as follows: 

 
51.18.10 Horizontal curves. Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees occurs in the alignment of a marginal access or minor street or road, a curve of reasonable radius shall be introduced. A curve shall be introduced at any change in direction of a collector, industrial or commercial service street or major thoroughfare. On major thoroughfares the centerline radius of curvature shall be determined by the state department of transportation or county road superintendent. On collector, industrial or commercial service street, the centerline radius of curvature shall not be less than 350 feet. On minor streets, the center-line radius of curvature shall not be less than 150 feet unless the topography of the land to be subdivided makes this impractical. 
51.18.11 Street grades. Grades on thoroughfares shall be established by the state department of transportation or county road superintendent. Grades on collector streets shall not exceed eight percent unless topographic conditions make this impractical. Grades on minor residential streets shall not exceed 15 percent, unless topographic conditions make this impractical. All streets should have a minimum grade of not less than one-half of one percent. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.19 - Easements. 
Easements having a minimum width of 15 feet and located along the side or rear lot lines shall be provided as required for utility lines and underground mains and cables. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.20 - Blocks. 
Block widths shall be as follows: 
51.20.1 Widths. Blocks shall have sufficient widths to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth. Blocks may be one lot in depth where single-tier lots are required to separate residential development from through vehicular traffic or non-residential uses. 
51.20.2 Pedestrianways. Crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, may be required by the county commission where it is deemed essential in order to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.21 - Lots. 
Residential lots shall meet the minimum lot width, depth, and area requirements of this and other applicable ordinances. 
51.21.1 Orientation of lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
51.21.2 Lots abutting public streets. Each lot shall abut upon a dedicated public street on which it has access. 
51.21.3 With public water and public sewer. 
(a)	Minimum area: 15,000 square feet for a single housing unit. 
(b)	Minimum width: 100 feet between side lot lines measured at the front setback lines. Corner lots shall have additional width to accommodate the side street building setback required as herein specified. 
(c)	Minimum depth: 150 feet. 
51.21.4 Without public water and sewer. 
(a)	Minimum area: 40,000 square feet for a single housing unit, subject to the approval of the county health department. The county health department shall notify the commission and developer of its approval. Such notification shall include, as a minimum, identification of individual lots by number. 
(b)	Minimum width: 200 feet between side lot lines measured at the front setback line. Corner lots shall have additional width to accommodate the side street building setback required as specified herein. 
(c)	All lots five acres or more to front on a public road by 60 feet or more.
51.21.5 With public water but not public sewer. 
(a)	Minimum area: 30,000 square feet for a single housing unit, subject to the approval of the county health department. The county health department shall notify the commission and developer of its approval. Such notification shall include, as a minimum, identification of individual lots by number. 
(b)	Minimum width: 150 feet between side lot lines measured at the front setback line. Corner lots shall have additional width to accommodate the side street building setback required as specified herein. 
(c)	Minimum depth: 200 feet 
51.21.6 Setback lines. 
(1)	Front setback—50 feet 
(2)	Side setback—30 feet (interior) 
(3)	Side setback—40 feet (corner lots only) 
(4)	Rear setback—30 feet 
51.21.7 Building setback lines. A building line meeting the front yard setback requirements of this ordinance shall be established on all lots. 
(Amd. of 6-15-1998; Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.22 - General Suitability. 
51.22.1 Soils. The county commission shall not approve a subdivision where the soil conditions have been determined not suitable for development purposes of the kind proposed. 
51.22.2 Flooding. Flood prone areas shall be consistent with all flood insurance regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
ARTICLE VIII. - VARIANCES 

51.23 - Variances. 
When, due to a particular hardship experienced by an owner of a tract of land, such as inadequate size, shape, drainage, etc., it is impractical for a developer to comply with the interpretations of the design requirements of these regulations, the county commission shall be authorized to vary such requirements provided the intent and purpose of these regulations are not violated. Such variations, and the reasons for granting them, shall be entered into the minutes of the county commission. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.24 - Effective Date. 
From and after the date of the adoption of this ordinance and notification of the county clerk of the court. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.25 - Filing and Recording. 
No plat of a subdivision within Emanuel County shall be filed or recorded by the county clerk of court until the final plat shall have been submitted to and approved by the county commission and such approval entered in writing on the final plat by the secretary of the county commission. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.26 - Improvements, Streets. 
The governing authority or other public authority shall not hereafter accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street or lay or authorize the laying of any water mains, sewers, connections, or other public facilities or utilities in any street unless it has been accepted as, opened as, or has otherwise received the legal status of, a public street or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on the final plat approved by the county commission. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.27 - Street Names. 
No street or road shall hereafter be named on a plat or in a deed or other instrument without approval by the county commission. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
ARTICLE IX. - CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE 

51.28 - Prior Approval. 
No construction or land-disturbing activity of any kind, including grading, installation of improvements, or building shall begin on any land subject to these regulations without prior approval and implementation of the preliminary plat and a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan where required by state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.29 - Grading and Land-Disturbing Activity. 
Grading and land-disturbing operations may commence once approval of the preliminary plat and soil erosion and sedimentation control plan (if applicable) and are granted. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures prescribed in the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan must be installed prior to any land-disturbing or grading activity where applicable. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.30 - Utilities. 
Utility installation shall not occur until the road superintendent has approved the rough grade of the street and shoulder separation. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.31 - Inspections. 
Periodic inspection during the installation of the required improvements in a subdivision shall be made by the designated official to insure conformity with the approved plans and specifications. The subdivider shall notify the county administrator when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.32 - Sale and Transfer. 
No lot or parcel of land shall be sold or transferred until the final plat, of which said lot or parcel is a part, shall have been approved and recorded as provided for in these regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.33 - Construction Standards. 
A building or structure shall be considered substandard if and when it does not meet the requirements of the Standard Building Code, the National Electrical Code, or the Standard Plumbing Code, or any other code or ordinance adopted by the county or its governing authority. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.34 - Building Permits. 
Reserved. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.35 - Occupancy. 
Within each phase of development a building may not be occupied for a dwelling until all roads and required utility installations, including water supply and sanitary sewer systems, have been completed to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
ARTICLE X. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

51.36 - Filing or Recording. 
The filing or recording of a final plat of a subdivision without the approval of the governing authority as required by these regulations, or the filing and recording of any sketch plan or preliminary plat as a "record" plat is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable as provided by law in the Magistrate Court of Emanuel County. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.37 - Recording Official. 
The county clerk of court shall not accept, file, or record any sketch plan or any preliminary plat as a "record" plat or nay final record plat involving any area subject to these regulations which has not been approved by the governing authority. Should any public official violate the provisions of this section he shall in each instance be subject to the penalty provided in this article and the governing authority shall have such rights and remedies as to enforcement or collection as provided and may enjoin any violations thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.38 - Transfer of Lots in Unapproved Subdivisions. 
The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within the county who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before such final plat has been approved by the governing authority and recorded in the office of the clerk of court in and for the county, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in the discretion of the court, and the description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from these penalties. The county may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.39 - Erection of Buildings. 
Any building erected in violation of these regulations shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the county administrator or county attorney or other official designated by the board of commissioners may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.40 - Street Names. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in laying out any new street or road to name such street or road on any plat, by any marking or in any deed or instrument without first getting the approval of the governing authority. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.41 - Penalties. 
The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within the county who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before such plat has been approved by the governing authority, and recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Court in Emanuel County, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by law; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
ARTICLE XI. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

51.42 - Interpretation. 
The regulations expressed in this document shall be considered as the minimum provisions for the protection of the health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, and welfare of the general public. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.43 - Conflict With Other Laws, Ordinances, or Regulations. 
Whenever the requirements made under authority of these regulations impose higher standards than are required in any other statute or local ordinance of regulation, provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.44 - Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such a declaration shall not affect the ordinance as a whole, or any other part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.45 - Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.46 - Amendments. 
The county commission shall hold a public hearing on any amendment to these regulations prior to its adoption, notice of which shall be given not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing date. The notice of hearing shall be made in a newspaper having general distribution in the area of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.47 - Savings Provisions. 
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the county under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the county or its governing authority except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
51.48 - Effective Date. 
These regulations shall take effect on and after October 14, 1996. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2001)
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1992 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1992 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1992 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1992 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1992 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since the 1992 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 