CODE OF ORDINANCES HOUSTON COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted July 20, 1993 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
OF 
HOUSTON COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Sherrill Stafford 
Chairman 
____________ 
Larry G. Snellgrove, Vice-Chairman 
Archie R. Thompson 
H. Jay Walker, III 
Calvin S. Maye 
Board of Commissioners of the County 
____________ 
Michael J. Long 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Stephen S. Engle 
Director of Administration 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Houston County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code, as supplemented through March 1991, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Michael J. Long, County Attorney, and Mr. Steve S. Engle, Director of Administration, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 

 
Adopting Ordinance 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for Houston County, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Board of Commissioners of the County: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Houston County, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 72, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 17, 1992, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the county to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 17, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall be effective ____________ . 
Passed and adopted by the Board of Commissioners this 20th day of July, 1993. 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the board of commissions of Houston County held on the 20th day of July, 1993. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part I contains local constitutional amendments and state laws of local application. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The sections of the various acts have been consecutively renumbered for inclusion herein. Except as otherwise noted, section catchlines have been supplied by the editor. 

ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the 1922 act of the general assembly, as amended, which created the board of commissioners of the county. The initial history note for each section identifies the origin of each section of the original act or a section added to the original act by subsequent amendment. Section number references for all other amendatory acts have been omitted. 
Code reference— Board of commissioners, § 2-36 et seq. 

Sec. 1.1. - Board established. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, That from and after the passage of this Act, there shall be established a Board of County Commissioners for the County of Houston, State of Georgia. 
(1922 Ga. Laws, page 372, § 1) 
Sec. 1.2. - Membership; qualifications of members; election of members; term of office. 
The Board of Commissioners of Houston County shall consist of five members who shall be elected thereto by the electors of the entire county. In order to be eligible for election to the board, candidates shall be qualified voters of Houston County who have resided therein at least two years prior to the date of the beginning of their term of office. For the purposes of electing members to the board, positions on the board shall be numbered as Posts 1 through 5, respectively. That position presently occupied on the board by Commissioner H. C. Talton, Jr. shall be Post No. 1. That position presently occupied by Commissioner Stewart I. Bloodworth shall be Post No. 2. That position presently occupied by Commissioner James Edward Bryant shall be Post No. 3. That position presently occupied by Commissioner Frank Rozar shall be Post No. 4. That position presently occupied by Commissioner Alton Tucker shall be Post No. 5. 
Those members of the board serving at the time of the effective date of this Section shall continue to serve until the expiration of the terms of office to which they were elected. Successors to the present commissioners shall be elected in the general election which is conducted in that year in which the respective term of office shall expire, shall take office on the first day of January following their election and shall serve for a term of office of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(1922 Ga. Laws, page 372, § 2; 1958 Ga. Laws, page 2574; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3266; 1970 Ga. Laws, page 2962) 
Sec. 1.3. - Compensation of members. 
(a)  Members of the Board of Commissioners of Houston County shall receive a base salary of $450.00 per month from the funds of the County. On and after January 1, 2007, members of the board of commissioners shall receive a base salary of $1,000.00 per month, plus any applicable training supplement and cost of living raise as approved by the state. On and after January 1, 1991, the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Houston County shall receive an annual salary of not less than $48,000.00, the exact amount to be determined and approved by the board of commissioners, from the funds of Houston County. In addition, each time the board of commissioners grants an increase in the salary paid from county funds to the county officers of Houston County whose offices are listed in Article IX, Section I, Paragraph III of the Constitution, upon approval by the board of commissioners, the chairman's salary shall be increased by the same amount. 
(b)  The Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Houston County shall have an expense account from which funds may be withdrawn to be used in carrying out the duties of such office which shall be in addition to any other compensation provided for said chairman. The expense account shall be approved by the board of commissioners annually and shall be a part of the county budget. 
(c)  A monthly contingent expense allowance for the members of the Board of Commissioners of Houston County, other than the chairman, shall be and the same is fixed in the sum of $200.00, which shall be in addition to any other compensation provided for said members other than the chairman. 
(1922 Ga. Laws, page 372, § 3; 1953 Ga. Laws, page 2575; 1955 Ga. Laws, page 3217; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2169; 1970 Ga. Laws, page 3236; 1975 Ga. Laws, page 2091; 1981 Ga. Laws, page 3112; 1990 Ga. Laws, page 3510; 1991 Ga. Laws, page 3742; Amd. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 1.4. - Filling of vacancies. 
All vacancies in the membership of the board of commissioners, including the chairman post, occurring in less than one year of the expiration of such term of office shall be filled by appointment of a duly qualified person by the remaining members of the board, and such appointee shall be commissioned and hold office until his successor is elected and qualified; provided, however, that if such remaining members cannot agree on an appointment within 45 days after a vacancy has been declared, the Judge of the Probate Court of Houston County shall appoint a qualified person to fill such vacancy. All vacancies in the membership of the board, including the chairman post, occurring more than one year prior to the expiration of the term of office shall be filled by a special election called by the Election Superintendent of Houston County in the same manner as in the case to fill vacancies in other county offices, and the person so elected shall be commissioned and hold office until the expiration of said unexpired term and until his successor is elected and qualified. The expense of any such special election shall be paid out of the general funds of the county. 
(1922 Ga. Laws, page 372, § 4; 1958 Ga. Laws, page 2574; 1976 Ga. Laws, page 3982; 1991 Ga. Laws, page 3742) 
Sec. 1.5. - Meetings; election of chairman. 
(a)  The commissioners elected as provided in this Act shall meet at some public place in the City of Perry on the first Tuesday in each month and shall meet at the county building in Warner Robins on the third Tuesday in each month. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, on the first Tuesday in January of each year, said commissioners shall organize and choose one from their number as chairman, whose term of office shall be one year; and a chairman of said board shall be elected by said board on the first Tuesday in January of each year through December 31, 1990. The board of commissioners shall have full and complete right and power to fix the time or times for its regular meetings and may also call and set the times and places for any special meetings as said board of commissioners may within its discretion require. 
(b)  Beginning with the general election in 1990 and continuing thereafter, Post 1 shall be designated the Chairman Post and the candidate elected to Post 1 from the county at large shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners. Any person appointed or elected to fill a vacancy in Post 1 after January 1, 1991, pursuant to the provisions of Section 4 of this Act shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. Any duly qualified person may be appointed by the board to fill a vacancy in Post 1 pursuant to the provisions of Section 4 [1.4]. 
(1922 Ga. Laws, page 372, § 5; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2169; 1990 Ga. Laws, page 3510; 1991 Ga. Laws, page 3742; 1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 68)) 
Sec. 1.6. - Clerical staff. 
The board of commissioners shall elect a clerk or secretary whose duty it shall be to keep in well-bound books complete records of all the proceedings of the board of commissioners and to do and perform all of the duties and services usual and incident to the position of clerk or secretary of such a board. Said clerk or secretary shall be elected to serve at the pleasure of the board, and he shall be paid a salary commensurate with the duties and requirements of his office, in an amount to be in the discretion of the board of commissioners and payable monthly. The board of commissioners shall elect any other clerical or secretarial help as it shall deem necessary. Such clerical or secretarial help shall be elected to serve at the pleasure of the board and shall be paid a salary commensurate with the duties and requirements of their employment, in an amount to be in the discretion of the board of commissioners and payable monthly. 
(1922 Ga. Laws, page 372, § 6; 1958 Ga. Laws, page 2574; 1960 Ga. Laws, page 2584; 1990 Ga. Laws, page 3510) 
Sec. 1.7. - Powers and duties generally. 
The board of commissioners of Houston County is authorized to enact ordinances, rules, resolutions, and regulations implementing the powers granted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia to the governing authorities of the various counties in the State of Georgia. In addition, the board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To cause the Code of Ordinances of Houston County to be updated at least annually; 
(2)  To maintain, or cause to be maintained, an accurate accounting of all financial affairs of the county and to publish a report annually in a newspaper of general circulation located in the City of Perry and a newspaper of general circulation located in the City of Warner Robins; 
(3)  To inspect roads, bridges, buildings, or other public works of the county; 
(4)  To prepare annually and cause to be filed in the permanent records of the county an inventory of all county property, both real and personal, which inventory shall show the amount of insurance coverage provided for each building, vehicle, or other item of county property; and 
(5)  To undertake and transact such other business as is necessary for the orderly conduct of county affairs. 
(1922 Ga. Laws, page 372, § 7; 1958 Ga. Laws, page 2574; 1990 Ga. Laws, page 3510) 
Sec. 1.8. - Powers and duties of chairman. 
(a)  The office of chairman shall be a full-time position and a person serving as chairman shall not perform any other job or occupation during such tenure as chairman. The chairman of the board shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the board but shall not vote unless the board is equally divided, in which event the chairman shall vote and that vote shall be counted the same as the vote of any other member of the board; 
(2)  Appoint members and chairmen of all committees of the board; 
(3)  Be recognized as the official head of Houston County by state, federal, and other authorities for military and ceremonial functions; 
(4)  Veto, approve, or fail to approve resolutions of the board as provided in subsection (b) of this section; 
(5)  Be the chief executive officer of Houston County with authority and responsibility to implement the actions of the board and generally to supervise, direct, control, and provide for the administration of the affairs of Houston County; 
(6)  Appoint and remove all officers and employees of the county, subject to confirmation by the board and consistent with any personnel policies adopted by the board, except the county attorney, clerk or secretary, or other clerical help appointed pursuant to Section 6[1.6], and the outside auditor who shall be appointed and removed by the board of commissioners; 
(7)  See that all laws and ordinances of the county are enforced; 
(8)  Exercise control over all departments or divisions of the county which the board has heretofore exercised or that may hereafter be created; 
(9)  Prepare and submit to the board of commissioners an annual budget; 
(10)  Keep the board of commissioners fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of said county; 
(11)  Supervise and direct the official conduct of all county officers and department heads appointed by the chairman; 
(12)  Provide for the salaries or compensation of all county officers and employees, subject to confirmation by the board and consistent with any personnel policies adopted by the board; 
(13)  Maintain offices in the City of Perry and the City of Warner Robins and spend sufficient time in each office to carry out the duties of such office of chairmanship in both areas of the county; and 
(14)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the board. 
(b)  Every official act of the board having the force and effect of law shall be by resolution of the board. Any such resolution adopted or approved by the board shall be submitted to the chairman thereof within two calendar days following its adoption or approval. The chairman shall approve or veto the resolution within eight calendar days after adoption or approval, and no resolution shall become effective without the chairman's approval except as provided in this subsection. If the chairman vetoes a resolution, the chairman shall within two business days of such veto return it to the board accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for that veto. If the board shall pass the resolution by a vote of three of its members at the meeting next held after the resolution has been returned with the chairman's veto, it shall become law without the chairman's approval. In the event the chairman does not approve or veto the resolution within the time required, it shall become law without the chairman's approval. The chairman may veto any item or items of any resolution making appropriations; the part or parts of any resolution making an appropriation not vetoed shall become law, and the part or parts vetoed shall not become law unless passed by the board over the chairman's veto as provided in this subsection with respect to the passage of a vetoed resolution. 
(c)  [Purchasing; signing of payroll checks; supervision of work on roads and bridges.] 
(1)  The chairman of the board shall be the chief purchasing agent for the county, by whom all purchases or supplies and all contracts therefor shall be made. He shall sign checks and all vouchers for the payment of the same under such rules and regulations as the board may adopt, not inconsistent with this subsection. The board shall adopt rules for regulating purchases made by the county and the chairman shall be governed thereby. In no event shall the chairman be authorized to spend in excess of $2,500.00 for the purchase of any item for use by the county without the prior consent of a majority of the duly qualified members of the board. 
(2)  The chairman of the board is further vested with the authority to sign all payroll checks for the employees of Houston County. 
(3)  The chairman shall be directly responsible for the construction and maintenance of all roads and bridges under the jurisdiction of Houston County. He shall appoint a superintendent of roads and bridges whose primary duty shall be to supervise the construction and maintenance of all county roads and bridges. A complete written record shall be kept of the requisitions made by the chairman or superintendent of roads and bridges for all supplies and equipment for the maintenance of the public works forces and the carrying out of the work under the supervision of said superintendent. 
(1990 Ga. Laws, page 3510, § 7A) 
Sec. 1.9. - Jurisdiction. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said Board of County Commissioners shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the business of the county covering within the scope and purview of their authority, having exclusive jurisdiction and control over the following matters, to-wit: In directing and controlling all of the property of said county, as they may deem expedient, according to law; in levying taxes, according to law; in establishing and abolishing roads and bridges, according to law; in abolishing, changing, or establishing election precincts and militia districts according to law; in supervising the books of the tax receiver and tax collector; in settling the claims and accounts of officers having the care, management, or disbursement of funds belonging to, or appropriated for the use and benefit of said county, and bringing them to a settlement; in providing for the poor of the county, and in preserving and safe-guarding the health of the county; in regulating license fees as provided by law; in establishing and maintaining the county chain-gang; in appointing and discharging all minor officers and employees of said county whose election is not otherwise provided for by law; in providing for a uniform system of collecting the commutation road tax, the amount to be paid, or the number of days work on the roads of said county in lieu thereof; in levying and collecting the tax for roads as provided by law; in fixing the time when the commutation tax shall be paid or the work in lieu thereof performed; in trying all road defaulters according to law; and generally to have and exercise all of the powers ordinarily vested in the ordinary when sitting for county purposes, and to exercise all other powers and discharge all other duties fixed and granted by law; and all others as may be incident or indispensable to the jurisdiction of said Board of County Commissioners over county matters. 
(1922 Ga. Laws, page 372, § 8) 
Sec. 1.10. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for Houston County shall commence on the 1st day of July each year and extend through the 30th day of June in the following year. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2970, § 8A) 
Sec. 1.11. - Appointment of members of hospital authority. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Code section 88-1803 [O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72], relating to the creation of hospital authorities, as amended, after the effective date of this Act, the Board of Commissioners of Houston County by resolution shall fill all vacancies occurring in the membership of the Hospital Authority of Houston County. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2601, § 8B) 
Sec. 1.12. - Redevelopment powers. 
The county shall have and be authorized to exercise all redevelopment and other powers authorized or granted counties pursuant to the "Redevelopment Powers Law," as now or hereafter amended, provided for by Chapter 44 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1 et seq.]. These powers shall include, without being limited to, all redevelopment powers, the power to issue tax allocation bonds and incur other obligations without such bonds or obligations constituting debt within the meaning of Article IX, Section V of the Constitution, and the power to enter into contracts with private persons, firms, corporations, and business entities for the period specified in the "Redevelopment Powers Law." 
(1986 Ga. Laws, page 3901, § 8C) 
Sec. 1.13. - Exemption of members and certain employees from jury duty. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the members of the said Board of County Commissioners, the clerk or the secretary thereof, and the superintendent of roads and bridges provided for in this Act shall be exempt from jury duty during their term of office. 
(1922 Ga. Laws, page 372, § 9) 
ARTICLE II. - COURTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Code reference— Courts, ch. 22. 

DIVISION 1. - HOUSTON JUDICIAL CIRCUIT 

Sec. 2.1. - Created; election of judge and district attorney. 
Effective June 1, 1971, there is hereby created a new judicial circuit of the superior courts of this state, to be known as the Houston Judicial Circuit, which circuit shall be composed of the County of Houston. The offices of judge of the Superior Court of Houston County and district attorney of the Houston Judicial Circuit are hereby created for said circuit. The initial judge and district attorney shall be appointed by the Governor and they shall take office on the 1st day of June, 1971, and serve until December 31, 1972. In the general election of 1972, and each four (4) years thereafter, successors to the initial judge and district attorney shall be elected and they shall take office on the 1st day of January following their election and serve for a term of office of four (4) years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 427, § 1; 1971 Ga. Laws, page 647) 
Sec. 2.2. - Compensation of judge. 
The compensation and allowances of the judge of said circuit shall be as now or hereafter provided by law. In addition to all other compensation and allowances received by the judge from the state, the board of commissioners of Houston County shall supplement his salary so that his total salary shall not be less than $22,500 per annum. The board of commissioners of Houston County may supplement the judge's salary so that he may receive an annual salary in excess of that figure if they so desire. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 427, § 2) 
Sec. 2.3. - Court reporter; secretary. 
(a)  The judge of said court shall be authorized to employ and engage a full-time court reporter and shall be authorized to enter into negotiations to provide such services for the court and to fix the compensation of such court reporter in a sum not to exceed $600 per month. The compensation provided herein shall be in lieu of per diem provided by law and for services of reporting cases in said court. The compensation provided herein shall be paid by the governing authority of Houston County and shall be deemed an expense of the operation of the superior court. 
(b)  The official court reporter of the superior court shall, upon the order of the court, be paid, in addition to the above-stated compensation, compensation for the preparation of criminal trial transcripts in the Superior Court and the State Court of Houston County at the rate provided by law, and said compensation shall be paid by the governing authority having charge of the fiscal affairs of Houston County. [A] copy thereof may be obtained by any party or parties at their expense; provided, however, when the copies are requested by any state or county officer, the copy shall be furnished at actual cost of the duplication, and when duplicated by the officer, a copy shall be furnished without expense. 
(c)  The judge of said court is authorized to employ a full-time secretary and fix the compensation of such secretary in an amount not to exceed $600 per month. The compensation of such secretary shall be an expense of the court and shall be paid by the governing authority of Houston County. 
(d)  The governing authority of Houston County shall have the authority to increase the compensation of said court reporter and secretary provided for above in such amount as they shall deem proper and necessary. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 647, § 2) 
Sec. 2.4. - Compensation of district attorney; secretary to district attorney. 
(a)  The district attorney of said circuit shall be compensated on a salary basis, rather than a fee basis. He shall receive a [as] compensation, expenses and allowances provided by law for district attorneys. The governing authority of Houston County shall have the authority to supplement the compensation of said district attorney out of county funds in such amount as they shall deem proper and necessary. 
(b)  The district attorney of said court is authorized to employ a full-time secretary and fix the compensation of such secretary in an amount not to exceed $600 per month. The compensation of such secretary shall be an expense of the court and shall be paid by the governing authority of Houston County. The governing authority of Houston County shall have authority to increase the compensation of said secretary [in] such amount as they shall deem proper and necessary. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 427, § 3; 1971 Ga. Laws, page 647) 
Sec. 2.5. - Terms of court. 
The terms of the Superior Court of Houston County shall be as follows: the first Mondays in January, March, May, July, September and November. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 427, § 4) 
Sec. 2.6. - Grand jury. 
The judge of the Superior Court of Houston County, Georgia, shall draw a grand jury for the January and July terms of said court, and, in his discretion, he may draw or require the attendance of a grand jury upon any or all other terms of said court, or may call back the grand jury which was last drawn and impaneled, provided, that the grand jury, which is now in attendance upon the present term of said Court and which is now serving, shall continue to serve as the grand jury until the July, 1972, term of said court unless earlier discharged by the judge. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 427, § 5; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 967) 
Sec. 2.7. - Transfer of proceedings from Macon Judicial Circuit. 
All proceedings and litigations, civil, equitable and criminal, pending in the superior court of Houston County at such time as it was a part of the Macon Judicial Circuit, including all complaints, pleadings, petitions, indictments, special presentments, summonses, processes, motions, writs, mesne and final proceedings, together with all books and records of any kind or character belonging to, issued, returnable, filed, pending or commenced in such county, shall relate to, become a part of, and be transferred to the superior court of Houston County of the Houston Judicial Circuit and its jurisdiction, when said circuit comes into existence. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 427, § 6) 
Sec. 2.8. - Personnel of clerk's office; recommendation of budget. 
The clerk shall have the authority to appoint such deputies, clerks, assistants and other personnel as he shall deem necessary to discharge efficiently and effectively the official duties of his office. The clerk shall at least 90 days before the first day of July of each year, beginning with July, 1965, recommend to the governing authority of Houston County the number of such personnel needed by his office, together with the suggested compensation to be paid each employee, and a proposed budget covering the costs of operating said office for the next ensuing year. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the clerk, during his respective term of office, to designate and name the person or persons who shall be employed as deputies, clerks, assistants or other employees, and to prescribe their duties and assignments, and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within his sole discretion. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2811, § 3; 1971 Ga. Laws, page 2445) 
Sec. 2.9. - Collection and remittance of funds; financial records. 
All fees, fines, forfeitures, costs, commissions, emoluments, and perquisites of whatever nature provided by laws for services rendered by the clerk shall be charged and collected by said officer and shall be held to him as county funds. On or before the 15th day of each month, the clerk shall pay over to the fiscal authority of Houston County, all such funds as shall have been collected by him for the county during the immediately preceding calendar month. The clerk shall keep such books and records as shall be prescribed by the governing authority of Houston County and all such records shall be open to the inspection of the public, the governing authority of Houston County and their auditors at all times during the hours for which said office is open for business. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2811, § 5) 
Sec. 2.10. - Collection of funds due as of effective date of act. 
All fees, costs, fines, forfeitures, commissions, allowances, penalties, funds, monies, payments into retirement system and all other emoluments which have accrued to the clerk at the time this act becomes effective and to which said officer is entitled and which remain uncollected at the time this act becomes effective, shall when collected be paid to said officer. He shall, however, report the collection of any such fees to the governing authority of the county. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2811, § 6) 
Sec. 2.11. - Microfilm photographic equipment—Use authorized. 
In all counties of this state having a population of not less than 50,000 and not more than 75,000 by the 1960 United States census or any future census, the clerk of the superior court, or other officer now or hereafter authorized by law to perform the duties now performed by the clerk of the superior court, [is authorized] to install and use microfilm, photographic equipment and use said installed equipment in recording all records relating to any court cases, civil or criminal, filed with said clerk. Such equipment may be provided for by the proper county authorities out of county funds. 
(1961 Ga. Laws, page 3136, § 1) 
Sec. 2.12. - Same—Intent. 
The provisions of this Act for the installation and use of such equipment shall be construed to be permissive only, and are cumulative of existing provisions of laws. 
(1961 Ga. Laws, page 3136, § 2) 
Sec. 2.13. - Same—Viewing equipment. 
If such records are microfilmed adequate equipment for viewing such records shall be maintained. 
(1961 Ga. Laws, page 3136, § 3) 
Sec. 2.14. - Same—Use for records on appeal. 
No provision of this Act shall be construed to change or repeal any rule of court or of any provision of law relating to records on appeal for review in the courts of this state. 
(1961 Ga. Laws, page 3136, § 4) 
Secs. 2.15—2.30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STATE COURT OF HOUSTON COUNTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the act of the general assembly, as amended, which created and established a special court to be located in Warner Robins and to be known as the State Court of Houston County. It may be cited as 1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584. 

Sec. 2.31. - Special court authorized. 
Article VI, section IX, paragraph I of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
The General Assembly is authorized to create within Houston County a special court and to invest such court with jurisdiction and powers as the General Assembly may provide. The General Assembly shall provide by law for the jurisdiction, personnel, juries, practice and procedure within said court and for the manner and method of the correction of errors through direct appeals to the Court of Appeals and Supreme Court and the granting of new trials. Said court may be established without regard to the provisions of this paragraph requiring uniformity of judicial tribunals. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 1805, § 1) 
Editor's note— The special court created by constitutional amendment in article 6, section 9, paragraph 1, was continued in full force and effect pursuant to 1985 Ga. Laws, page 4871. 
Sec. 2.32. - Creation. 
Under the authority conferred upon the General Assembly by Article VI, Section IX, Paragraph I of the Constitution pursuant to a constitutional amendment approved April 10, 1968 (1968 Ga. Laws, page 1805), and ratified November 5, 1968, there is hereby created and established a special court which shall be located in the City of Warner Robins, Houston County, Georgia. Said court shall be known as the State Court of Houston County and said court shall have territorial jurisdiction over the entire County of Houston. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 1) 
Sec. 2.33. - Jurisdiction. 
The State Court of Houston County shall have jurisdiction within the limits of Houston County concurrent with the superior court of said county to try and dispose of all civil cases or proceedings of whatever nature, whether arising ex contractu or delicto under the common law or by statute and over which jurisdiction is not vested by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia exclusively in any other court, without regard to the amount in controversy. Said state court shall have criminal jurisdiction in the County of Houston over all misdemeanor cases, but shall not have any jurisdiction over felony cases. The accused in criminal proceedings in said court shall not have the right to indictment by the Grand Jury of Houston County. The State Court of Houston County shall have jurisdiction of special statutory remedies such as, but not limited to: mortgage foreclosures, garnishments and attachments. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 2) 
Sec. 2.34. - Judge—Election, commissioning and oath. 
There shall be a judge of said state court who shall be elected by the voters of Houston County as hereinafter provided. Mr. Paul C. Armitage, the presently elected Judge of the State Court of Houston County, shall serve until the expiration of his term of office on December 31, 1978. At the general election in 1978, a successor to Mr. Armitage shall be elected, and he shall take office January 1, 1979, for a term of four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. Future successors shall be elected at the general election each four (4) years and shall likewise serve a term of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. The judge of the state court shall be commissioned by the Governor and, before entering the duties of his office, shall take the same oath which judges of superior courts must take. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 3) 
Sec. 2.35. - Same—Eligibility; compensation. 
In order to be eligible to be appointed or elected judge of said state court, a person at the time of said appointment or election must have been a resident of Houston County continuously for the three (3) years immediately preceding said appointment or election, must be a licensed attorney at law and must have been a practicing attorney for at least five (5) years immediately preceding such appointment or election. Such person must also be at least twenty-five (25) years of age and must be a qualified registered voter of Houston County. The Judge of the State Court of Houston County shall not be permitted to engage in the practice of law. He shall be compensated by an annual salary to be fixed by the governing authority of Houston County and to be not less than $12,000.00. In that year in which the term of office of the judge shall expire, it shall be the duty of the governing authority of Houston County on or before the first day of July to fix the salary of the judge of the state court for the next ensuing term of office of such judge. The salary so fixed by the governing authority shall not be diminished during the term of office of that judge who takes office on the first day of January following. The salary of the judge of the state court shall be paid out of county funds. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 4) 
Sec. 2.36. - Same—Vacancies in office. 
In the event of a vacancy in the office of judge of said state court by reason of death, resignation or any other cause except expiration of term of office, the Governor shall appoint a person to serve the unexpired term. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 5) 
Sec. 2.37. - Same—Powers. 
The judge of said court is hereby granted the same power and authority as is held [by] judges of the superior courts of this state within the limitations of this Act and laws of general application of the State of Georgia. All laws relating to and governing judges of the superior courts shall apply to the Judge of the State Court of Houston County insofar as the same may be applicable, unless inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 6) 
Sec. 2.38. - Same—Absence. 
Upon taking office, the judge of said court shall appoint some competent and disinterested attorney at law who shall meet the qualifications of section 4[2.35] hereof to preside in said court in the place of said judge when the judge of said court is unable to discharge the duties of his office due to providential cause or if he is for any cause disqualified or prevented from presiding in any cause in said court. Such attorney, when so appointed and when the appointment is entered upon the minutes of the court, and in any of such events, shall exercise all the functions and powers of the judge of said court. The compensation of such attorney for actual services as presiding judge shall be $50.00 per day to be paid from the same funds from which other officers of the court are paid. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 7) 
Sec. 2.39. - Solicitor—Election, commissioning and oath. 
There shall be a solicitor of said state court who shall be elected by the voters of Houston County as hereinafter provided. Mr. Austin J. Kemp II, the presently elected Solicitor of the State Court of Houston County, shall serve until the expiration of his term of office on December 31, 1978. At the general election in 1978, a successor to the first solicitor shall be elected, and he shall take office January 1, 1979, for a term of four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. Future successors shall be elected at the general election each four (4) years and shall likewise serve a term of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. The solicitor of the state court shall be commissioned by the Governor and, before entering the duties of his office, shall take the same oath which solicitors general of superior courts must take. The solicitor is to represent the State in all criminal procedures in the State Court of Houston County and all appeals therefrom. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 8) 
Sec. 2.40. - Same—Qualifications; compensation. 
(a)  The qualifications for eligibility to the office of solicitor of said state court shall be as provided by general state law, as now contained in Code Section 15-7-24 [O.C.G.A. § 15-7-24] or as hereafter provided by general state law. 
(b)  The solicitor shall be a full-time solicitor and shall not engage in the private practice of law. 
(c)  The solicitor shall be compensated by an annual salary to be fixed by the governing authority of Houston County and to be not less than $36,000.00. In that year in which the term of office of the solicitor shall expire, it shall be the duty of the governing authority of Houston County on or before the first day of July to fix the salary of the solicitor of the State Court of Houston County for the next ensuing term of office of such solicitor. The salary so fixed by the governing authority shall not be diminished during the term of office of that solicitor who takes office on the first day of January following. The salary of the solicitor of the state court shall be paid out of county funds. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 9; 1989 Ga. Laws, page 4348) 
Sec. 2.41. - Same—Vacancies in office. 
In the event of a vacancy in the office of solicitor of said state court by reason of death, resignation or any other cause except expiration of term of office, the Governor shall appoint a person to serve the unexpired term. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 10) 
Sec. 2.42. - Same—Absence. 
In the event the solicitor, due to providential cause, is unable to discharge the duties of his office, the judge is hereby authorized to appoint an attorney of Houston County who is qualified under Section 9[2.40] hereof to perform the duties of the solicitor until such time as the solicitor is able to perform such duties. The compensation of said attorney while serving as solicitor shall be $15.00 per day, to be paid from the same funds from which other officers of the court are paid. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 11) 
Sec. 2.43. - Sheriff and deputy sheriffs. 
The Sheriff of Houston County and his deputies shall also act as Sheriff and Deputy Sheriffs of the State Court of Houston County. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 12) 
Sec. 2.44. - Clerk—Election; compensation. 
There shall be a Clerk of said State Court of Houston County. Mr. Ray Bliss, the present clerk of said state court, shall continue to serve until the expiration of his term of office on December 31, 1978. At the general election in 1978 and every four (4) years thereafter, the clerk shall be elected in the same manner and shall serve for the same term of office as the judge of said court. The clerk shall be compensated at an annual salary to be fixed by the governing authority of Houston County and to be not less than $4,800.00. In that year in which the term of office of the clerk shall expire, it shall be the duty of the governing authority of Houston County on or before the first day of July to fix the salary of the Clerk of the State Court of Houston County for the next ensuing term of office of such clerk. The salary so fixed by the governing authority shall not be diminished during the term of office of that clerk who takes office on the first day of January following. The salary of the clerk of the state court shall be paid from county funds. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 13) 
Sec. 2.45. - Same—Qualifications; deputy clerks. 
Any person who shall be appointed Clerk or Deputy Clerk of said State Court of Houston County must at the time of appointment be a qualified voter of Houston County. 
The clerk of said state court shall have the power to appoint a sufficient number of deputy clerks as from time to time may be needed to efficiently handle and transact the business of the court, the number thereof appointed to be first authorized by the Board of County Commissioners of Houston County, Georgia, and each and all of whom thus appointed shall hold office during the pleasure of the clerk of said court. The deputy clerks, if and when appointed, shall exercise all the functions and be subject to all the responsibilities and requirements of the said clerk. The clerk shall fix the compensation of deputy clerks subject to the approval of the governing authority of Houston County, Georgia. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 14) 
Sec. 2.46. - Same—Powers and duties; bond. 
All the requirements and duties, powers and authority imposed by law upon and conferred upon the clerks of superior courts of this State shall be obligatory upon and shall be vested in the Clerk of said State Court of Houston County, respectively, except where inconsistent with or limited by the provisions of this Act defining the jurisdiction of said court; provided, however, that the amount of the bond of the clerk of said state court shall be no less than $5,000.00 or such other amount as shall be established by the governing authority of Houston County. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 15) 
Sec. 2.47. - Ministerial functions of judge and clerk. 
The Clerk of said State Court of Houston County and each and every deputy clerk of said court shall have complete power and authority, coincident and coordinate with the power of the judge of said court, under the provisions of this Act to issue any and all warrants, civil and criminal, summary processes and writs which are issuable as a matter of right; to accept and approve bonds; to accept bond forfeitures; and to discharge any and all other functions ministerial in character which under the laws of this State are performable by a justice of the peace or by a clerk of the superior court. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 16) 
Sec. 2.48. - Records. 
Said State Court of Houston County shall be a court of record and shall have a seal. The minutes, records and other books and files that are required by law to be kept for the superior court shall, the same manner, so far as the jurisdiction of said State Court of Houston County may render necessary, be kept in and for said state court; provided, that the clerk of said state court shall not be required to keep a book of final records but shall see that the records are preserved in suitable files with all original papers in each case which shall not be removed from said clerk's office except upon order of the Judge of said State Court of Houston County upon good cause shown and then only upon receipt of counsel, and such removal from the clerk's office shall not continue for a longer period than five days. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 17) 
Sec. 2.49. - Rules for return of writs, processes and warrants. 
All warrants, summary processes and writs issuing out of said State Court of Houston County shall be returnable to said State Court of Houston County (unless required by law to be returnable to superior court) in the same manner and under the same rules as such writs are required to be returned to the superior courts or the justice courts of this State as the case may be. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 18) 
Sec. 2.50. - Rules of practice. 
The rules of practice, pleading, procedure and evidence as are applicable to superior courts of this State shall be the rules of and be applicable to the State Court of Houston County. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 19) 
Sec. 2.51. - Rules for disposition of traffic offenses. 
The Judge of the State Court of Houston County is hereby empowered to promulgate rules and regulations allowing a defendant charged with a traffic offense to appear and dispose of said case under such rules and regulations so promulgated. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 20) 
Sec. 2.52. - Terms of court. 
The terms of court of the State Court of Houston County shall be the third Monday of January, March, May, July, September, and November. Dates for guilty pleas, noncontested civil matters and nonjury matters shall be set by the judge. The judge may, in his discretion, hold adjourned terms, when business requires it, to close the dockets and may in the exercise of a sound discretion cause new juries to be drawn for the same or order the juries drawn for the regular term to give attendance upon such adjourned terms; and said judge is authorized to hold special terms of said court for the trial of criminals or for the disposition of civil business, either or both, at discretion, and either to compel the attendance of jurors of [the] previous term or to draw new jurors for the same according to the laws now in force. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 21; 1981 Ga. Laws, page 3551) 
Sec. 2.53. - Drawing of jurors. 
All laws of this State with reference to the drawing, selecting and summoning of traverse jurors in the courts of this State shall apply to the State Court of Houston County. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 22) 
Sec. 2.54. - Qualifications, empaneling and compensation of jurors. 
All laws with reference to the qualifications, empaneling, challenging and compensation of jurors now of force or such as may hereinafter be enacted in this State shall apply to and be observed in said State Court of Houston County. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 23) 
Sec. 2.55. - Selection of jurors. 
All jury trials in said court shall be by a jury of twelve (12); and said jury of twelve (12) shall be stricken from a panel of twenty-four (24) qualified jurors drawn and summoned under the provisions of this Act with each side being entitled to six (6) preemptory challenges, except in criminal cases, in which said cases the defense will be entitled to seven (7) preemptory challenges and the State entitled to five (5) preemptory challenges. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 24) 
Sec. 2.56. - Demand for jury. 
Every case in said State Court of Houston County shall be tried by the judge thereof without a jury unless a written demand for trial by jury is filed in said court by the plaintiff or his attorney or by any other party seeking affirmative relief at the time such action or proceeding is instituted, or by the defendant or his attorney on or before the day upon which he is required to appear in court in response to the proceedings against him; upon the failure of a party to demand a trial by jury, he shall be held to have waived any such right. The judge, however, in his discretion, upon request of either party or counsel for either party may allow a jury in any case at any time before the commencement of any trial before him without a jury, if, in his opinion, the request therefor is not made for delay only and if, in his opinion, the case is of such character that the end of justice will be best served by a trial by jury. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 25) 
Sec. 2.57. - Reporting of cases. 
The Judge of the State Court of Houston County shall have the same authority as the Judge of the Superior Court of Houston County to order a case reported and he may direct the case reported when either party or counsel requests it, or when, in the discretion of the judge, the ends of justice require that the case be reported. Whenever a case is reported in said court either by agreement of parties or counsel, or by direction of the court under the rule, the cost of such reporting shall be taxed equally against the parties to the case except as herein provided and shall be assessed as costs in the case under the same rules as prevail in the superior court, save that the charge for such reporting shall be at the rate of twelve cents per hundred words for taking down the testimony and twelve cents per hundred words for writing it out. It [If] either party or his counsel objects to the reporting of the case, the party so objecting shall not be charged with any expense of reporting the case, unless the judge on preliminary investigation shall determine that the case is one that should be reported, and shall direct it reported under the rule. Whenever it becomes necessary in the opinion of the Judge of the State Court of Houston County that a case shall be reported in said court, the judge of said court may designate a competent and disinterested stenographer to report said case and the compensation of such reporter shall be twelve cents per hundred words for taking down and twelve cents per hundred words for writing out the record of said case and if not paid by the parties liable therefor, it shall be taxed as costs in said case and fi. fa. issued therefor for the use and benefit of the reporter so reporting said case and paid to said reporter when collected as compensation for reporting said case. It shall be permissible for the judge of said court to appoint as court reporter aforesaid any deputy clerk or officer of said court who is a capable and efficient stenographer. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 26) 
Sec. 2.58. - New trials; appeals. 
(a)  The court may grant new trials in the same manner and upon the same grounds as new trials are granted by the Superior Court of Houston County, as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  A direct appeal shall lie to the Court of Appeals of Georgia or to the Supreme Court of Georgia from the judgment, order or ruling of the State Court of Houston County, in the same manner that a judgment, order or ruling of the Superior Court of Houston County is now or may hereafter be reviewed, as provided for by law. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 27) 
Sec. 2.59. - Furnishing of reference books. 
The State Librarian is hereby authorized and directed to furnish to said state court as they are published, a set of reports of the Supreme Court of Georgia and a set of the reports of the Court of Appeals of Georgia and a set of the Georgia Laws with no cost to said court except shipping charges. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 28) 
Sec. 2.60. - Sales of personal property. 
All sales of personal property levied upon in Houston County under process from the State Court of Houston County shall be conducted in the same manner as are such sales in the Superior Court of Houston County, except that sales may be held at the door of the place where said state court meets. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 29) 
Sec. 2.61. - Court costs. 
The scale of costs in all civil cases to be collected by officers of said state court shall be the same as the scale of costs in the Superior Court of Houston County. The costs in criminal cases shall be the same as the costs in the Superior Court of Houston County. All fees, fines, costs and other monies shall be collected by the proper officers of said court and once a month shall be turned over to the Board of County Commissioners of Houston County, Georgia, and shall become and be the property of Houston County. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 30; 1987 Ga. Laws, page 5414) 
Sec. 2.62. - Disposition of unclaimed funds or credits. 
Whenever the Clerk of the State Court of Houston County shall have in his hands any money, funds or credits which shall remain in his hands unclaimed by any person, firm or corporation for a period of six (6) months after all litigation in connection with such money, funds or credits has been fully and finally disposed of by the state court and by an appellate court, which said money, funds or credits shall have come into the hands of said clerk in connection with any case or matter pending at the time, or which has been pending in said state court, it shall be the duty of the said clerk of the state court to notify the person, firm or corporation whose property the records of said State Court of Houston County indicates said money, funds or credits to be by registered letter addressed to the said person, firm or corporation at the best obtainable address of the fact that such money, funds or credits are in his hands, and that unless the same are claimed within ten (10) days, he will dispose of the same as hereinafter provided; and if after the expiration of the period of ten (10) days from the mailing of said registered letter the same money, funds or credits still remain in the hands of said clerk unclaimed, it shall be his duty to pay the same into the treasury of Houston County, the same to be disposed of by the treasurer, or other county authority having control of county funds, in the same manner as is hereinafter provided as to funds placed in the treasury of Houston County and arising from the sale of unclaimed property remaining in the hands of the Sheriff of said State Court of Houston County; provided, however, that the clerk of the said state court, at the time of paying over to the Treasurer of Houston County any of such money, funds or credits, shall give to the Treasurer of Houston County, or other county authorities having control of the funds of said county, full information in writing as to the case or matter in connection with which such money came into his hands, and as to the name of the person, firm or corporation indicated by the records of the State Court of Houston County to be the owner of said money, funds or credits; and provided also that the expense incurred by the clerk in complying with this Section shall be deducted from the money, funds or credits in his hands. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 31) 
Sec. 2.63. - Disposition of unclaimed property in custody of sheriff. 
Whenever the sheriff of Houston County shall have in his custody any property or effects, which has come into his possession by law or seizure by virtue of any process or papers properly placed in his hands for execution, whether the levy be made by him or his deputy, which has been in his hands for a period of six (6) months after all litigation concerning the same has been disposed of in the State Court of Houston County and on appeal from that court, and it is unclaimed by any person, firm or corporation, it shall be the duty of said sheriff to give notice by registered mail to the owner of said property, if the name of such owner can be ascertained by reasonable inquiry, at the best obtainable address of such owner, specifying in said notice the property so remaining in his hands, and warning the said owner that the same will be sold in terms of the law unless the said property is claimed within ten (10) days from the mailing of such notice. If after the lapse of ten (10) days from the mailing of such notice, no claim to said property is made, said sheriff shall advertise the same for sale as unclaimed property, specifying in said advertisement the process under which the same was seized, said advertisement to be published as other advertisements of property levied upon under process of said state court. The proceeds of said sale shall be paid by the said sheriff into the treasury of Houston County; provided, however, said sheriff at the time of paying over the said proceeds shall give to the Treasurer of Houston County, or other county authorities having charge of the funds of said county, full information in writing as to the process under which the said property was seized, and as to the nature of the property which was sold. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 32) 
Sec. 2.64. - Claims for funds paid over to county treasurer. 
The Treasurer of Houston County, or other county authorities having charge of the funds of said county, shall keep any funds paid over to him, either by the Clerk of the State Court of Houston County under section 31[2.62] of this Act or by the Sheriff of said State Court of Houston County under section 32[2.63] of this Act, in a separate account for a period of twelve (12) months after the same is received. Should any person, firm or corporation claim the said fund within said period of twelve (12) months, such claimant may file an affidavit of ownership with the Treasurer of Houston County, or other county authorities having charge of the funds of said county, and may give bond in double the amount of the money claimed, with good security to be approved by the said treasurer, or other county authorities having control of the said fund, which said bond shall be conditional to answer any demand thereon that may be proved and established in any court of this State within a period of two (2) years from the date of said bonds and shall be payable to the county authority having charge of said fund. Upon the making and filing of said affidavit and bond, said fund shall be delivered to the claimant. If no claim be filed to said money within a period of twelve (12) months from the time, the same shall be taken out of the special account and be put in the general funds of Houston County and become the property of Houston County. In case conflicting claims are made to any of said money, it shall be the duty of the Treasurer of Houston County, or other county authorities having charge of the said fund, to require the claimants to litigate their claim in the State Court of Houston County, and to hold the said fund and pay out the same according to the final results of such litigation; provided, however, all such litigation must be instituted within a period of twelve (12) months from the time said money is paid into the treasury of Houston County; provided, also, that the jurisdiction to hear and determine said claim is hereby expressly conferred upon the State Court of Houston County regardless of the amount involved, and regardless of the residence of the parties, and the final order of said state court shall specify which of said claimants is entitled to the funds, or whether either or any one of them has established his right thereto. In case the result of said litigation should be that neither of said claimants is entitled to the fund, the Treasurer of Houston County or other county authorities having control of said fund shall continue to hold the same as unclaimed money and dispose of the same as hereinbefore provided. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 33) 
Sec. 2.65. - Location. 
The State Court of Houston County shall be located in the City of Warner Robins and it shall be the duty of the governing authority of Houston County, Georgia, to provide temporary quarters for the court, until such time as permanent quarters are available. The Commissioners of Houston County, Georgia, are hereby authorized to expend such funds as they deem necessary to construct and maintain permanent quarters for said court. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 34) 
Sec. 2.66. - Transfer of proceedings from city court. 
All proceedings and litigations, civil or criminal, pending in the City Court of Warner Robins, created by an Act, approved March 26, 1965 (1965 Ga. Laws, page 2650), as amended by an Act approved March 4, 1966 (1966 Ga. Laws, page 3203), by an Act approved April 4, 1967 (1967 Ga. Laws, page 2564) changing the name of said court, by an Act approved March 21, 1968 (1968 Ga. Laws, page 2656), by an Act approved April 10, 1969 (1969 Ga. Laws, page 2620), and by an Act approved April 17, 1973 (1973 Ga. Laws, page 3072), including all complaints, pleadings, petitions, accusations, summonses, processes, motions, writs, mesne, and final proceedings, together with all books and records of any kind or character belonging to, issued, returnable, filed, pending or commenced in such court, shall relate to, become a part of, and be transferred to the State Court of Houston County and its jurisdiction upon approval of this Act creating said special court. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2584, § 35) 
Secs. 2.67—2.80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROBATE COURT 

Sec. 2.81. - Deputies and other personnel; recommendation of budget. 
The judge of the probate court shall have the authority to appoint such deputies, clerks, assistants and other personnel as he shall deem necessary to discharge efficiently and effectively the official duties of his office. The judge of the probate court shall at least 90 days before the first day of July of each year, beginning with July, 1965, recommend to the governing authority of Houston County the number of such personnel needed by his office, together with the suggested compensation to be paid each employee, and a proposed budget covering the costs of operating said office for the next ensuing year. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the judge of the probate court, during his respective term of office, to designate and name the person or persons who shall be employed as deputies, clerks, assistants or other employees, and to prescribe their duties and assignments, and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within his sole discretion. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2816, § 3; 1971 Ga. Laws, page 2441) 
Sec. 2.82. - Collection and remittance of funds; financial records. 
All fees, fines, forfeitures, costs, commissions, emoluments, and perquisites of whatever nature provided by law for services rendered by the judge of the probate court shall be charged and collected by said officer and shall be held by him as county funds. On or before the 15th day of each month, the judge of the probate court shall pay over to the fiscal authority of Houston County all such funds as shall have been collected by him for the county during the immediately preceding calendar month. The judge of the probate court shall keep such books and records as shall be prescribed by the governing authority of Houston County and all such records shall be open to the inspection of the public, the governing authority of Houston County and their auditors at all times during the hours for which said office is open for business. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2816, § 5) 
Sec. 2.83. - Collection of funds due as of effective date of Act. 
All fees, costs, fines, forfeitures, commissions, allowances, penalties, funds, monies, payments into retirement system and all other emoluments which have accrued to the judge of the probate court at the time this act becomes effective and to which said officer is entitled and which remain uncollected at the time this act becomes effective, shall when collected be paid to said officer. He shall however, report the collection of any such fees to the governing authority of the county. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2816, § 6) 
Secs. 2.84—2.95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MAGISTRATE COURT 

Sec. 2.96. - Chief Magistrate. 
The Chief Magistrate of Houston County shall be elected in the same manner as the judges of the State Court of Houston County. The first such election shall take place at the time of the general election in 2008, and the chief magistrate and magistrates elected at such time shall take office on January 1, 2009, for terms of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. The chief magistrate and magistrates serving on the effective date of this Act shall serve through December 31, 2008. The chief magistrate elected as provided in this section shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia, shall be a full-time magistrate, and shall devote his or her full time to the duties of the office. The chief magistrate shall be authorized to employ one or more assistant magistrates. 
A vacancy in the office of chief magistrate shall be filled by an appointment by majority vote of the judges of Superior Court for the remainder of the unexpired term. A vacancy in the office of any other magistrate shall be filled by an appointment by the chief magistrate with the consent of the judges of Superior Court for the remainder of the unexpired term. A newly created position of magistrate shall be filled in the same manner as for filling a vacancy if such position is created more than 90 days from the next general election. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3652, § 1) 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, AUTHORITIES AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - HOUSTON COUNTY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The constitutional amendment establishing the Houston County Development Authority was continued in full force and effect pursuant to 1985 Ga. Laws, page 4873. 
Code references— Planning commission, § 2-101 et seq.; Development Authority of Houston County, § 2.126; Middle Georgia Regional Development Commission, § 2-151 et seq.; zoning, ch. 72. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

Sec. 3.1. - Creation; powers; procedures. 
Article V, section IX of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
(1) Created. There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in Houston County to be known as the Houston County Development Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of Houston County and a public corporation and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the "authority"; 
(2) Members. The authority shall consist of the mayor of the City of Warner Robins, the mayor of the City of Perry, the mayor of the City of Centerville, the chairman of the governing authority of Houston County, and three (3) additional members who shall be appointed by the above named member of the authority. The persons so appointed shall be appointed in such a manner that their initial terms of office shall be for one (1) to three (3) years, respectively. Thereafter, all such members shall serve for terms of office for three (3) years each; 
(3) Tax exemption. The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations and interest on the obligations of Houston County; 
(4) Powers. The powers of the authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power: 
a.  To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts; 
b.  To borrow money, to issue notes, bonds and revenue certificates, to execute trust agreements or indentures, and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor; 
c.  To contract with political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name; 
d.  To have and exercise usual powers of [a] private corporation except such as are inconsistent with this amendment, including the power to appoint and hire officers, agents and employees and to provide their compensation and duties, which officers and agents may or may not be members of the authority, and the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and by-laws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority; 
e.  To encourage and promote the expansion and development of industrial and commercial facilities in Houston County, and to that end to acquire by purchase or gift any building or structure within aforesaid territorial limits suitable for and intended for use as a factory, mill, shop, processing plant, assembly plant, or fabricating plant, including all necessary and appurtenant lands and appurtenances thereto, and all necessary or useful furnishings, machinery and equipment. Such acquisition may be through the acquisition of land and the construction thereon of a building, including the demolition of existing structures, or through the acquisition of an existing building and the remodeling, renovating, reconstructing, furnishing and equipping of such building; 
f.  No building acquired hereunder shall be operated by the authority but shall be leased or sold to one (1) or more persons, firms or corporations. If sold, the purchase price may be paid at one (1) time or in installments falling due in not more than 30 years from the date of transfer of possession. The lessee or purchaser shall be required to pay all costs of operating and maintaining the building or buildings and to pay rentals or installments sufficient, together with other revenues, which may be pledged for the purpose, to retire all bonds, both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which the authority may have incurred in connection with the undertaking. 
g.  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
h.  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter; 
i.  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated; 
(5) Debt. The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the State of Georgia or Houston County; 
(6) Members' compensation. The members of the authority shall receive no compensation for their services to the authority; 
(7) Bonds. In order to finance any undertaking with [within] the scope of its power or to refund any bonds then outstanding, the authority is hereby authorized to issue bonds bearing rate or rates of interest and maturing at the years and amounts determined by the authority and the procedure of validation, issuance and delivery shall be in all respects in accordance with the revenue bond law (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761) as amended, Ga. Code Ann. Supp. chapter 87-8, as if said obligations had been originally authorized to be issued thereunder; provided, however, that any property, real or personal, of the authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered as security for any lawful debt of the authority. The authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture not in conflict with the provisions of this amendment to provide security for any bonds issued as provided herein, and such trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or under any term or condition under which such bonds are issued. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to create a right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of Houston County to pay any of the said obligations of said authority; 
(8) Bonds placed in escrow. The authority may authorize additional bonds, for extensions and permanent improvements to any industrial building acquired hereunder, to be placed in escrow and to be negotiated from time to time as proceeds for that purpose may become necessary. Bonds so placed in escrow shall, when sold and delivered, have such standing with the bonds of the same issue as may be provided in the authorizing proceedings; 
(9) Issuance of bonds. No bonds except refunding bonds shall be issued hereunder unless the authority shall have found and declared that: 
a.  The undertaking for which the bonds are to be issued will increase employment within the territorial limits herein designated; 
b.  The lessee or purchaser of the building or buildings involved will not by virtue of establishing operations in said territorial limits, reduce the number of employees employed by said lessee or purchaser elsewhere in the State of Georgia; 
(10) Gifts. No moneys derived by the authority from any source other than gifts and contributions from private individuals, firms or corporations shall at any time be used for entertainment, or other promotional expenses; 
(11) Property. Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Houston County subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time; 
(12) Purpose; construction. This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare industry and trade in Houston County and its vicinity and reducing unemployment to the greatest extent possible, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes; 
(13) Power of General Assembly. The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the authority. The authority shall be an instrumentality of the Houston County and the scope of its operations shall be limited to the territory embraced within said county. The General Assembly shall not extend the jurisdiction of the authority nor the scope of its operations beyond such limits. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 1055, § 1) 
Related laws reference— Please see Development Authority of Houston County, Code of General Ordinances, Article III, Division 9, Section 2-253 which supersedes portions of the above section. 
Secs. 3.2—3.15. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERRY-HOUSTON COUNTY AIRPORT AUTHORITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— An act adopted Feb. 15, 1994, changed the title of this division from "Perry-Fort Valley Airport Authority" to "Perry-Houston County Airport Authority." 
State Law reference— Acquisition, construction and maintenance of airports by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq.; powers of counties and municipalities as to airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-25; authorization to enforce police regulations in airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-27. 

Sec. 3.16. - Short title. 
This Act may be sighted [cited] as the "Perry-Houston County Airport Authority Act." 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 1; Act of 2-15-94, § 1) 
Sec. 3.17. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Perry-Houston County Airport Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style and title and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the Authority of the trustee acting under the trust indenture herein provided for shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents and employees of the Authority. The Authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 2; Act of 2-15-94, § 2) 
Sec. 3.18. - Membership. 
The Perry-Houston County Airport Authority shall be composed of seven members. Two of the members shall consist of the Mayor of the City of Perry or a member of the Perry City County designated by the Mayor and the Chairman of the Houston County Commissioners or a member of the Houston County Commissioners designated by the Chairman and their term on the Authority shall coincide with the terms of the respective elective positions of the Mayor and the Chairman. The remaining five members shall be appointed by the Perry City Council and the Houston County Commissioners as hereinafter set out. Within 30 days after the approval of this Act, it shall be the duty of said governing authorities to appoint five members. The City of Perry will appoint three members, two appointed for a term ending December 31, 1995 and one for a term ending December 31, 1996. The Houston County Commissioners shall appoint two members, one appointed for a term ending December 31, 1996. The Houston County Commissioners shall appoint two members, one appointed for a term ending December 31, 1995 and one appointed for a term ending December 31, 1996. At the first meeting of the governing authorities in 1996, the City of Perry shall appoint one member for a term ending December 31, 1997 and the Houston County Commissioners shall appoint two members whose terms shall expire December 31, 1997. All subsequent terms will be for two years and both governing authorities shall appoint one member every odd numbered year beginning in 1997. The governing authority of the City of Perry will appoint two members every other even numbered year beginning in 1998 and one member every other even numbered year beginning in 2000. The Houston County Commissioners shall appoint one member every other even numbered year beginning in 1988 and two members every other even numbered year beginning in 2000. All members appointed by each governing authority shall be residents of Houston County with the same residential qualifications as are required for a person to vote in Houston County. 
In addition to the regular members of the Authority, the members of the Authority may elect Ex-Officio members to serve in an advisory capacity if in the opinion of the Authority such would be beneficial to the Authority and provided said Ex-Officio members are approved by the governing authorities of the City of Perry and Houston County. Ex-Officio members shall have all rights, privileges and amenities of regular members, but shall not have voting power or authority to execute official documents of the Authority by virtue of serving in this capacity. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 3; Act of 2-15-94, § 3) 
Sec. 3.19. - Meetings and organization. 
(a)  [Meetings.] The Authority shall hold their first regular meeting after the approval of this Act, and their first regular meeting of each year thereafter shall be in January. The Authority shall meet at such time as may be necessary to transact the business coming before it, but not less than quarterly. At its first meeting in January each year thereafter, the Authority shall elect its officers from the members of said Authority. 
(b)  Officers. The officers shall be a chairman, a vice chairman and a secretary-treasurer. Only one (1) person shall hold the office of secretary-treasurer. These officers shall be elected for a term ending on December 31 of the year in which they were elected or until their successors are elected and qualified and must be members of said Authority. 
(c)  Quorum. Four members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum, provided however, there must be two members present representing each of the governing authorities. 
(d)  Compensation. The members of the Authority shall be compensated as determined from time to time by the governing authority of said cities and counties. However, it is expressly provided that they shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duty. 
(e)  Executive committee. There shall be an executive committee composed of the chairman of the Authority and three (3) other members appointed by him with such powers and duties as may be given it by the Authority from time to time. Provided however, that the executive committee shall be composed of one (1) member representing each of the municipal authorities and each of the counties. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 4; Act of 2-15-94, § 4) 
Sec. 3.20. - Vacancies. 
In the event of a vacancy on the Authority by reason of death, resignation or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority and the person so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 5) 
Sec. 3.21. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms have the following meanings: 
(1)  The word "Authority" shall mean the Perry-Houston County Airport Authority" as created by the provisions of this Act. 
(2)  The word "Project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, improving the operation of public airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, and relating buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property, both real and personal, and the lease and sale of any part or all such facilities, including real and personal property so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance and operation of such airports, and landing fields for the use of aircraft deemed by the Authority to be necessary, convenient or desirable for the operation of such airports and landing fields within the perimeter of the lands now held or hereafter required. 
(3)  The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired, including the payment or reimbursement of reasonable actual costs incurred as a result of utility relocations when such relocations are made necessary by the project, the cost of all machinery, equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and improving the same, the placing of the same in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of any funds of the Authority including the proceeds from any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for any such project or projects. 
(4)  The terms "revenue bonds," "bonds" and "obligations" as used in this Act, shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in the revenue bond law (1957 Ga. Laws, page 36) amending the law formerly known as the revenue certificate law of 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761, as amended), and such type of obligations may be issued by the Authority as authorized under said revenue bond law and any amendments thereto, and in addition shall also mean obligations of the Authority the issuance of which is hereinafter authorized in this Act. 
(5)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if in the judgment of the Authority the revenues and earnings to be derived by the Authority therefrom and all properties used, leased and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such projects. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 6; Act of 2-15-94, §§ 5, 6) 
Sec. 3.22. - Powers. 
The authority shall have powers: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease, dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, gift or otherwise, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchise necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contract with respect to the use of or disposition of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the Authority; 
(4)  To appoint, select and employ officers, agents and employees including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their representative compensations; 
(5)  To make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient including contracts for construction of projects or leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired and any and all persons, firms and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the Authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they may deem advisable; the said Authority is further granted the authority to make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient with the United States government or any agency or department thereof concerning the projects of the Authority, subject to the rights and interests of the holder of any of the bonds or obligations authorized to be issued hereunder, and by the resolution or trust indenture of the Authority authorizing the issuance of any of its bonds or obligations as provided in section 21[3.36] of this Act; 
(6)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the Authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(7)  To accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality or other source may impose; 
(8)  To accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision or any other source, may impose; 
(9)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(10)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of this state, including the right of eminent domain; 
(11)  The Authority and the trustees acting under the trust indenture, are specifically authorized subject [to the provisions of this act] from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real or personal, or interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the Authority was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in section 2 [3.17] and section 21[3.36] of this Act; 
(12)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers especially given in this Act. 
(13)  To give a name to any project provided said name is approved by the governing authorities of the City of Perry and Houston County. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 7; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 3570; Act of 2-15-94, § 7) 
Sec. 3.23. - Revenue bonds generally. 
The Authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the Authority created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized at one (1) time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one (1) or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special funds herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates as may be authorized by the Authority from time to time, shall be payable semi-annually, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding thirty (30) years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the Authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity at the option of the Authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to and in conformity with the revenue bond law (1957 Ga. Laws, page 36) amending the law formerly known as the revenue certificate law of 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, page 261), and all procedures pertaining to such issuance and the conditions thereof shall be the same as those contained in said revenue bond law and any amendments thereof. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 8) 
Sec. 3.24. - Form, denominations, registration and place of payment of bonds. 
The Authority shall determine the form of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the Authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 9) 
Sec. 3.25. - Signatures and seal on bonds. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the Authority and attested by the secretary-treasurer of the Authority and the official seal of the Authority shall be affixed thereto and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman, and secretary-treasurer of the Authority. Any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the Authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of delivery and payment of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 10) 
Sec. 3.26. - Negotiability of bonds; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instrument law of the state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds, their transfer, and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 11) 
Sec. 3.27. - Sale and price of bonds. 
The Authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such prices as it may determine to be for the best interest of the Authority, but no such sale shall be made at a price less than par as provided in the revenue bond law unless said revenue bond law be hereafter amended to permit the sale of such bonds at less than par. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 12) 
Sec. 3.28. - Use of proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit for the cost of the project or projects, which unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purposes. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into a sinking fund or used for additional construction as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 13) 
Sec. 3.29. - Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 14) 
Sec. 3.30. - Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The Authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 15) 
Sec. 3.31. - Conditions precedent to issuance of bonds. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happenings of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the Authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the Authority by a majority of the quorum as in this Act provided. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 16) 
Sec. 3.32. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of either Houston County or the City of Perry, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the funds hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate Houston County or the City of Perry, to levy or the pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this Section. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 17; Act of 2-15-94, § 8) 
Sec. 3.33. - Trust indenture as security for bonds. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or without the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the Authority, including the proceeds derived from the sale from time to time of any surplus property of the Authority, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the property, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the Authority, both real and personal, and may provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the Authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other monies be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the Authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the Authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 18) 
Sec. 3.34. - Payment of proceeds of bonds. 
The Authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolutions or trust indentures may provide. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 19) 
Sec. 3.35. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued and any monies derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal of the Authority, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the Authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one (1) or more of all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agent or agents for paying interest and principal and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 20) 
Sec. 3.36. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the Authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 21) 
Sec. 3.37. - Refunding bonds. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds of the Authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the Authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 22) 
Sec. 3.38. - Validation of bonds. 
Bonds of the Authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedures of said revenue bond law. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States Government or any department or agency of the United States Government, if subject to be sued, which has contracted with the Authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality, shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the Authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, against the Authority issuing the same, and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the United States government if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said Perry-Houston County Airport Authority. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 23; Act of 2-15-94, § 9) 
Sec. 3.39. - Venue and jurisdiction for actions pertaining to bonds. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such Authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Houston County, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be bought [brought] in the Superior Court of Houston County, which shall have original jurisdiction of such action. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 24; Act of 2-15-94, § 10) 
Sec. 3.40. - Protection of interests of bondholders. 
While any of the bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said Authority or its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or authority will be created which will compete with the Authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, [such bonds] shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 25) 
Sec. 3.41. - Monies received considered trust funds. 
All monies received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 26) 
Sec. 3.42. - Purpose of Authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of the Act, the general purpose of the Authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, improving and operating airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, including any related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and to lease or sell any or all of such facilities including real property and to do any and all things deemed by the Authority necessary, convenient or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 27) 
Sec. 3.43. - Imposition of fees and charges. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls and charges, and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or sub-leases or its lands or facilities, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 28) 
Sec. 3.44. - Budget of the authority. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to prepare a budget for the carrying out of its powers and the governing authorities of the City of Perry and Houston county agree to each be responsible for one-half of any unfunded portion of said budget after said budget has been ratified by said governing authorities. 
(Act of 2-15-94, § 11) 
Editor's note— An Act adopted Feb. 15, 1994, amended the Related Laws by adding § 3.44, and renumbered former §§ 3.44—3.48 as §§ 3.45—3.49. 
Sec. 3.45. - Establishment of rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the Authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act, including the basis on which airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft shall be furnished. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 29; Act of 2-15-94, § 11) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 3.44. 
Sec. 3.46. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 30; Act of 2-15-94, § 11) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 3.44. 
Sec. 3.47. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act being for the purpose of promoting the health, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the United States, of the State of Georgia, of Houston County, and the City of Perry, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 31; Act of 2-15-94, §§ 11, 12) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 3.44. 
Sec. 3.48. - Power of eminent domain. 
Through the use and power of eminent domain, the Authority shall have the right, power, privilege and authority to condemn real property, rights-of-way of [or] easement[s] for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, [and] any such condemnation shall be conducted in accordance with the laws of this state. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 32; Act of 2-15-94, § 11) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 3.44. 
Sec. 3.49. - Jurisdiction over property owned by authority. 
All property, the title to which shall vest in said Authority shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the county wherein such property shall lie. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 33; Act of 2-15-94, § 11) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 3.44. 
ARTICLE IV. - COUNTY OFFICIALS 
DIVISION 1. - TAX COMMISSIONER[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Consolidation of office of tax receiver and tax collector into office of tax commissioner, compensation of tax commissioner, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 1, par. 3; salaries of tax collectors and tax commissioners, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183. 

Sec. 4.1. - Office created. 
The offices of tax receiver and tax collector of Houston County are hereby abolished and consolidated into the office of tax commissioner of Houston County. 
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 2587, § 1) 
Sec. 4.2. - Powers and duties. 
The rights, duties, and liabilities of said office of tax commissioner shall be the same as those imposed upon tax receivers and collectors by the laws of this state. 
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 2587, § 2) 
Sec. 4.3. - Election; term of office; vacancy in office. 
The first election for the office of tax commissioner created herein shall be held at the same time as the election for other county officers in Houston County is held in 1960, and the person so elected shall take office on January 1, 1961, for a term of four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. Likewise, all future elections for tax commissioner shall be held at the same time as the election for other county officers; and all future tax commissioners shall likewise have a term of office for four (4) years and until his successors are elected and qualified. Through December 31, 1960, the tax receiver and collector of Houston County shall continue in office. In the event any vacancy should occur in the office of tax commissioner, the vacancy shall be filled by a special election called by the judge of the probate court of Houston County. Said election shall be held within 30 days after the vacancy occurs in said office. 
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 2587, § 3) 
Sec. 4.4. - Payment of taxes due at time of taking office. 
All taxes due and payable at the time the tax commissioner takes office shall continue to be due and payable until paid. All tax fi. fa. theretofore issued shall have full force and effect and be collectible as issued. 
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 2587, § 4) 
Sec. 4.5. - Office space. 
The tax commissioner shall be furnished an office in Houston County Courthouse and shall keep said office open for the transaction of business as do other county officers. 
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 2587, § 6) 
Sec. 4.6. - Oath; bond. 
The tax commissioner, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath prescribed by law for tax collector and shall give bond as provided by law for the tax collector. The premium costs for said bond shall be paid by the county. 
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 2587, § 7) 
Sec. 4.7. - Personnel; recommendation of budget. 
The tax commissioner shall have the authority to appoint such deputies, clerks, assistants and other personnel as he shall deem necessary to discharge efficiently and effectively the official duties of his office. The tax commissioner shall at least 90 days before the first day of July of each year, beginning with July, 1965, recommend to the governing authority of Houston County the number of such personnel needed by his office, together with the suggested compensation to be paid each employee, and a proposed budget covering the costs of operating said office for the next ensuing year. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the tax commissioner, during his respective term of office, to designate and name the person or persons who shall be employed as deputies, clerks, assistants or other employees, and to prescribe their duties and assignments, and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within his sole discretion. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2813, § 3; 1971 Ga. Laws, page 2448, § 1) 
Sec. 4.8. - Collection and remittance of funds; financial records. 
All fees, fines, forfeitures, costs, commissions, emoluments, and perquisites of whatever nature provided by law for services rendered by the tax commissioner, except as hereinafter provided, shall be charged and collected by said officer and shall be held by him as county funds. On or before the 15th day of each month, the tax commissioner shall pay over to the fiscal authority of Houston County, all such funds as shall have been collected by him for the county during the immediately preceding calendar month. The tax commissioner shall keep such books and records as shall be prescribed by the governing authority of Houston County and all such records shall be open to the inspection of the public, the governing authority of Houston County and their auditors at all times during the hours for which said office is open for business. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2813, § 5) 
Sec. 4.9. - Collection of funds due as of effective date of act. 
All fees, costs, fines, forfeitures, commissions, allowances, penalties, funds, monies, payments into retirement system and all other emoluments which have accrued to the tax commissioner at the time this act becomes effective and to which said officer is entitled and which remain uncollected at the time this act becomes effective, shall when collected be paid to said officer. He shall, however, report the collection of any such fees to the governing authority of the county. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2813, § 7) 
Secs. 4.10—4.30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SHERIFF 

Sec. 4.31. - Personnel; recommendation of budget. 
The sheriff shall have the authority to appoint such deputies, clerks, assistants and other personnel as he shall deem necessary to discharge efficiently and effectively the official duties of his office. The sheriff shall at least 90 days before the first day of July of each year, beginning with July, 1965, recommend to the governing authority of Houston County the number of such personnel needed by his office, together with the suggested compensation to be paid each employee, and a proposed budget covering the costs of operating said office for the next ensuing year. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the sheriff, during his respective term of office, to designate and name the person or persons who shall be employed as deputies, clerks, assistants or other employees, and to prescribe their duties and assignments, and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within his sole discretion. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2819, § 3; 1971 Ga. Laws, page 2443) 
Sec. 4.32. - Collection and remittance of funds; financial records. 
All fees, fines, forfeitures, costs, commissions, emoluments, and perquisites of whatever nature provided by law for services rendered by the sheriff shall be charged and collected by said officer and shall be held by him as county funds. On or before the 15th day of each month, the sheriff shall pay over to the fiscal authority of Houston County, all such funds as shall have been collected by him for the county during the immediately preceding calendar month. The sheriff shall keep such books and records as shall be prescribed by the governing authority of Houston County and all such records shall be open to the inspection of the public, the governing authority of Houston County and their auditors at all times during the hours for which said office is open for business. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2819, § 5) 
Sec. 4.33. - Collection of funds due as of effective date of act. 
All fees, costs, fines, forfeitures, commissions, allowances, penalties, funds, monies, payments into retirement system and all other emoluments which have accrued to the sheriff at the time this act becomes effective and to which said officer is entitled and which remain uncollected at the time this act becomes effective, shall when collected be paid to such officer. He shall, however, report the collection of any such fees to the governing authority of the county. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2819, § 6) 
Secs. 4.34—4.50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CORONER 

Sec. 4.51. - Basis of compensation. 
The present mode of compensating the coroner of Houston County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, an annual salary for such office is prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2638, § 1) 
Sec. 4.52. - Collection and remittance of funds. 
Said officer shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed him as a compensation for services in any capacity, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the 15th day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, the coroner shall furnish the governing authority of the county a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2638, § 3) 
Sec. 4.53. - Payment of operating expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of the coroner's office shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture, utilities and equipment, and the repair, replacement and maintenance thereof, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority of Houston County. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2638, § 4) 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE—GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Related Laws. 

 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE—ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS 
This table shows the location within the Related Laws of ordinances or resolutions. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances, resolutions and other enactments embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, Houston County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the county, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Board of commissioners, board, commissioners, commission, county commission, governing authority and governing body. The terms "board of commissioners," "board," "commissioners," "commission," "county commission," "governing authority" and "governing body" mean the board of commissioners of Houston County, Georgia. 
Chairman; other officers and officials. The term "chairman" means the chairman of the board of commissioners of Houston County. Whenever titles of various officers or officials are used, they shall refer to the persons holding such positions with Houston County. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to certain laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted, and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The terms "the county" and "this county" mean Houston County, Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males or any other legal entity when applicable under federal or state law. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or; and. The word "or" may be read "and," and the word "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding; following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. The term "premises" means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any are available or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the clerk of the commissioners' office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the county seal. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" means the sheriff of Houston County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The terms "state" and "the state" mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the county. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means a calendar week of seven days. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Board of Commissioners of Houston County, as follows:". 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Houston County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Houston County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances, acts, etc., not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
(16)  Sections 4-4003 through 4-4022 of the 1976 Code regulating use of the county's recreation facilities. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since such provisions would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement, and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ ," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code. 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners, which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided thereof, the violation of such provision shall be punishable for the first two offenses by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, and for the third offense by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Amend. of 10-6-09) 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; punishment for misdemeanors, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; personnel, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 68; zoning, ch. 72. 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; general provisions applicable to counties only, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - County boundaries. 
The boundaries of the county at all times shall be shown on a map or a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the county clerk and to be designated, as the case may be, "official map (or description) of the county boundaries of Houston County, Georgia." Photographic, typed or other copies of such map or description certified by the county clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(Code 1976, §§ 1.101, 1.102) 
State Law reference— Extent of jurisdiction of counties divided by water, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-2; county boundaries, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-2—2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Related laws reference— Board of commissioners, art. I. 
State Law reference— Counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 1, par. 1; county officers, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 1, par. 3; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 1; supplementary powers, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; matters over which county commission has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1; authority to adopt ordinances, rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a). 

Sec. 2-36. - Regular meetings. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall meet at some public place in Perry on the first Tuesday of each month at 9:00 a.m. 
(b)  The board shall meet at the county annex building in Warner Robins on the third Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1001; Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 2; Mo. of 1-21-97; Amd. of 12-4-17) 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of board of commissioners, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); 1993 GA Law (Act #68). 
Sec. 2-37. - Special meetings. 
The chairman or a majority of the members of the board of commissioners may call a special meeting upon reasonable notice to the other members. No special meeting shall be called unless the notice given shall specify the subject matter to be considered or unless, after the meeting is assembled and all are present, all members agree to transact business not specified in the call, subject to the provisions of law. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1002) 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-38. - Agenda. 
There shall be a written agenda prepared prior to each meeting of the board of commissioners. Persons who desire to address the members of the board at a meeting shall be required to notify the clerk of the board 24 hours prior to commencement of each meeting. Each person who desires to address the board shall be limited in his remarks to five minutes in duration. The chairman of the board of commissioners retains the discretion to recognize any person attending a meeting of the board. 
Sec. 2-39. - Rules of procedure. 
Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall generally be adhered to in all meetings of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-40. - Distribution of minutes. 
A copy of all minutes shall be delivered or mailed to all members of the board of commissioners within five days of each meeting, and a copy furnished to any other person as designated by the board. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1003) 
Secs. 2-41—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES AND OTHER AGENCIES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Related laws reference— Boards, authorities and commissions, art. III. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-61. - Appointment of members. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, members of boards, commissions and authorities of the county shall be appointed by a majority vote of the total membership of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1006) 
Secs. 2-62—2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Creation of hospital authority in each county and municipality, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72. 

Sec. 2-81. - Establishment. 
There is need for a hospital authority, as defined in an act approved March 27, 1941 (1941 Ga. Laws, page 241), to function, exist and be operated in and for the county, and there is hereby activated, created and organized such an authority, to be known as the hospital authority of the county, as provided in and by the act approved March 27, 1941. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8001) 
Sec. 2-82. - Membership; appointment of members; term of office. 
(a)  The hospital authority shall consist of a board of nine members representing all areas of the county at the discretion of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided, the successors of the original members shall be appointed for terms of four years from the dates of expiration of their respective terms of office, except that any person appointed to fill a vacancy created during a term shall be appointed only for the unexpired term of the member that he succeeds. Any member shall be eligible for reappointment. All appointments shall be made by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Position number 1 shall be appointed on February 27, 2000 to a four-year term expiring on February 26, 2004. Position numbers two and three, currently held by Arthur Head and Randy Sherrill will expire on February 26, 2001. Positions four and five, currently held by Burnie Adams and Chris Murman, will expire on February 26, 2002. Positions six and seven, currently held by Jimmy Faircloth and Zell Blackmon, will expire on February 26, 2003. Position eight shall be filled by the chief of staff or acting chief of staff of the Houston Medical Center. This person shall be appointed upon assuming the title of chief of staff and will serve until their successor has been appointed. Position nine shall be filled by the chief of staff or acting chief of staff of the Perry Hospital. This person shall be appointed upon assuming the title of chief of staff and will serve until their successor has been appointed. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8002; Mo. of 6-2-92; Res. of 10-5-99(1)) 
Sec. 2-83. - Investigation of indigent care patients. 
The hospital authority shall investigate indigent care patients for the county hospital. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8003) 
Secs. 2-84—2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Related laws reference— Houston County Development Authority, § 3.1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 4; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

Sec. 2-101. - Establishment. 
The county planning commission, which may be referred to in this division as "the commission," is hereby established. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8011) 
Sec. 2-102. - Membership; term of office. 
The commission shall consist of seven members, who shall be residents of the county and appointed on a rotating basis. The terms of the members shall be for four years. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8012; Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 3) 
Secs. 2-103—2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MIDDLE GEORGIA REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Related laws reference— Houston County Development Authority, § 3.1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq. 

Sec. 2-151. - Establishment. 
There is hereby established the Middle Georgia Regional Development Commission, which may be referred to in this division as "the commission." 
(Code 1976, § 2-8041) 
Sec. 2-152. - Compensation of representatives. 
Representatives of the commission established in this division shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8042) 
Sec. 2-153. - Election of officers. 
The commission established in this division may elect its officers in accordance with its bylaws. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8042) 
Sec. 2-154. - Approval of bylaws. 
The initial bylaws of the commission established in this division are hereby approved and consented to. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8045) 
Sec. 2-155. - Powers and duties. 
The commission established in this division shall be a joint planning commission as defined in and with all the powers, duties and obligations of a joint planning commission set forth in an act approved March 13, 1957 (1957 Ga. Laws, page 420), as amended, and an area planning and development commission as defined in and with all the powers, duties and obligations of an area planning and development commission set forth in an act approved March 18, 1970 (1970 Ga. Laws, page 321), as amended. The commission shall also have all the powers, duties and obligations of a joint planning commission and area planning and development commission set forth in any other law of general application pertaining to joint planning commissions and area planning and development commissions. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8044) 
Sec. 2-156. - Commission to act in advisory capacity only. 
The commission established in this division shall act in an advisory capacity, and any plan or part thereof, or amendment, extension or addition thereto, adopted by the commission shall constitute a recommendation and shall have no binding effect on the member governments in implementing any plans or zoning laws. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8046) 
Sec. 2-157. - Effect of division on local commissions. 
The passage of this division shall not affect the present or future powers and duties granted to any existing local planning and zoning commission or in any way affect the future creation of any local planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8047) 
Secs. 2-158—2-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HOUSTON DRUG ACTION COUNCIL[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Drug Abuse Treatment and Education Act, O.C.G.A. § 26-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-186. - Organization and operation generally. 
The corporation known as the Houston Drug Action Council, Inc. is organized and operated as a nonprofit corporation, and no part of the property of the corporation or any of its earnings or donations shall inure to the benefit of any member of the board of directors, employee or other private individual. No person shall own any stock in this corporation, and the affairs of this corporation shall be handled by its board of directors or any executive committee appointed by the board of directors. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, § 1.1) 
Sec. 2-187. - Membership and organization of board of directors. 
(a)  The board of directors of the corporation described in this division shall consist of 15 members. The members of the board of directors shall be appointed by the board of commissioners and, so far as practicable or possible, shall be representative of a geographical cross section of the county. 
(b)  The board of directors itself shall elect from its members a chairman, secretary and treasurer. These officers of the board of directors shall serve for a one-year term of service or until they submit a letter of resignation. 
(c)  Seven directors shall serve four-year terms, and six directors shall serve two-year terms. When the original two-year terms expire, the terms will be expanded to four years. 
(d)  A quorum for doing business shall consist of four members of the board of directors, and only the members of the board shall have the authority to conduct the business of the corporation. 
(e)  The board of directors may hire an executive director to run the day-to-day activities of the corporation, but the executive director shall serve at the pleasure of the board of directors, and all of his duties and responsibilities shall come directly from the board of directors. 
(f)  All nominations to the board of directors shall come from the board of commissioners, the presently sitting board of directors or the public at large. 
(g)  All resolutions adopted or business transacted by the board of directors shall require a majority vote of the quorum present to transact such business. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, § 2.1; Min. of 9-7-93(1); Min. of 8-15-95) 
Sec. 2-188. - Removal of members of board of directors. 
No member of the board of directors of the corporation described in this division shall be removed from office except by a majority of the members of the total board of directors with the acquiescence of and approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, § 2.4) 
Sec. 2-189. - Meetings of board of directors. 
(a)  The board of directors of the corporation described in this division shall meet on a regular basis, at least once a month. In addition, special meetings of the board of directors may be called at any time by the chairman. The executive director has no authority to call meetings, but must go through the chairman in dealing with the board of directors. At least five days' written notice of called meetings must be given to the members of the board of directors unless such notice is waived in writing. The executive director shall attend all meetings of the board of directors. 
(b)  Any and all actions taken by the board of directors shall be at a regularly called or special called meeting. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, §§ 2.2, 2.3) 
Sec. 2-190. - Powers and duties of board of directors. 
The responsibilities and authority of the board of directors of the corporation described in this division are as follows: 
(1)  To set, determine and define the general policies, goals and objectives of Houston Drug Action Council, Inc. and the Community Crisis Center. 
(2)  To hire or appoint an executive director and to establish the responsibilities and qualifications for such position. 
(3)  To oversee, assess and critique the performance of the organization and the duties, responsibilities and performance of the executive director and any and all employees of the corporation, and to establish and implement the policies, goals and objectives of the corporation. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, § 5.3) 
Sec. 2-191. - Prerequisite for service on board of directors. 
All members appointed to the board of directors of the corporation described in this division must, prior to taking the position, read the article that appeared in the May 13, 1990, Macon Telegraph and News relating to prior activities of the corporation so as to more fully understand their objectives and responsibilities. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, § 5.9) 
Sec. 2-192. - Election and duties of officers. 
(a)  Election. Nominees for the positions of officers of the corporation described in this division shall be selected by a nominating committee consisting of at least three members of the board of directors, which are to be appointed by the chairman. The officers shall be a chairman, secretary and treasurer. The officers of the corporation shall be elected by a quorum of the board of directors. The board of directors will elect an officer to replace any officer who resigns or is dismissed. 
(b)  Duties of chairman. The chairman shall preside at meetings, appoint standing and special committees, act as ex officio member of all committees, sign warrants, drafts and contracts, appear on behalf of the agency in actions brought by it and against it, exercise other temporary assignments and powers given by the board of directors, work with the executive director to develop meeting agendas, and act for the board of directors in emergencies if action must be taken before the full board can meet. Such emergency actions are subject to ratification at the next meeting of the board of directors. 
(c)  Duties of secretary. The secretary shall keep minutes of all meetings of the board of directors and shall have charge of the minute book, the seal of the corporation, and bylaws and other corporate documents. The secretary shall perform other such duties and have other such powers as may from time to time be delegated to him by the chairman or by the board of directors. 
(d)  Duties of treasurer. The treasurer shall be charged with the management of financial affairs of the corporation and shall have the power to recommend action concerning the corporation's affairs to the chairman and to the board of directors. The treasurer shall be further charged with keeping the board of directors informed about the financial condition of the corporation and auditing the financial affairs of the corporation on a regular basis. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, §§ 3.1—3.4) 
Sec. 2-193. - Powers and duties of executive director. 
The executive director who is appointed or hired by the board of directors of the corporation described in this division shall have the responsibility for the general day-to-day management of the business of the corporation. The executive director shall be responsible for the administration of the corporation's business and the carrying out of the policies and responsibilities set by the board of directors. The executive director shall not have the authority to borrow money, pledge assets of the corporation, dispose of assets of the corporation, encumber assets of the corporation, enter into contractual obligations for or on behalf of the corporation, or set policies or objectives for the corporation without the prior approval of and written consent of the board of directors. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, § 5.4) 
Sec. 2-194. - Seal. 
The seal of the corporation described in this division shall be in such form as the board of directors may from time to time determine. If it is inconvenient to use such seal at any time, the signature of the chairman, attested to by the secretary, followed by the word "Seal" enclosed in parentheses or scroll, shall be deemed the seal of the corporation. The seal shall be in the custody of the secretary of the corporation and affixed by him or by the chairman on all official documents of the corporation. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, § 4.1) 
Sec. 2-195. - Personnel. 
(a)  Generally. The Houston Drug Action Council, Inc. (Community Crisis Center) is a nonprofit agency and shall develop its own personnel policy and procedures. All employees, including any fulltime director, shall serve at the pleasure of the board of directors, and the board of directors shall have the sole authority to hire and dismiss such employees. 
(b)  Administration of payroll and fringe benefits; funding. The corporation shall be responsible for and handle the payroll and fringe benefits for the Community Crisis Center staff. The funding of any executive director's salary and other personnel shall be provided by funds and grants received by the corporation and administered by the board of directors. 
(c)  Hiring of relatives of employees or members of board of directors. It is hereby stated that it is the policy of the corporation not to hire as employees or as the executive director anyone who is closely related by blood or marriage to any member of the board of directors or other employees of the corporation. For purposes of this section, the term "closely related" is defined as meaning the spouse, child, parent, daughter-in-law or son-in-law, mother-in-law or father-in-law, aunt, uncle, grandchild or grandparent of members of the board of directors or other employees. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, §§ 5.1, 5.2, 5.8) 
Sec. 2-196. - Ownership of work-related products. 
Any and all work-related products, including grants, programs developed or other related work products, whether or not developed during the employment of any person, shall remain the sole and exclusive property of the corporation described in this division, and any employee, consultant, member of the board of directors or officer of the corporation shall have no ownership or pecuniary interest in such work product. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, § 5.5) 
Sec. 2-197. - Conflict of interest. 
It is incumbent upon the board of directors of the corporation described in this division, the executive director as appointed by the board of directors, and the employees and staff of the corporation not to engage in any activities that would constitute a conflict of interest, whether such conflict of interest be a monetary one or a philosophical one with the goals, objectives and policies of the corporation. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, § 5.6) 
Sec. 2-198. - Use of property. 
All property, real, intangible and personal, of the corporation described in this division, or the facilities of the corporation, shall be used solely for the purpose of carrying out the corporation's goals and objectives and shall not be used for any private gain or by a private individual. 
(Res. of 7-12-90, § 5.7) 
Secs. 2-199—2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - LIBRARY BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Local and regional public libraries, O.C.G.A. § 20-5-20 et seq. 

Sec. 2-216. - Establishment; membership. 
The county library board, consisting of 12 members, is hereby established. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8071; Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 4) 
Sec. 2-217. - Appointment of members; term of office. 
Appointment of the members of the library board shall be as follows: Three members shall be appointed by the Houston County Board of Commissioners, from any area of the county; the Perry City Council shall appoint three members who are residents of Perry; the Warner Robins City Council shall appoint three members who are residents of Warner Robins; and the Centerville City Council shall appoint three members who are residents of Centerville. The term of office shall be three years. No one member may serve on the board for more than three successive three-year terms. Board members shall receive no compensation, but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of library business. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8071; Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 4) 
Secs. 2-218—2-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CLEAN COMMUNITY AND STREETS COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Solid waste management education program; establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3. 

Sec. 2-246. - Establishment. 
There is hereby created, established and constituted in the county a body to be known as the county clean community and streets commission, which may be referred to in this division as "the commission." 
(Code 1976, § 2-8101) 
Sec. 2-247. - Membership; appointment of members. 
The clean community and streets commission shall consist of 12 members. Appointment of the members shall be as follows: Three members shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Warner Robins, three members shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Perry, three members shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Centerville, and three members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8102(a)) 
Sec. 2-248. - Coordinator. 
In addition to the clean community and streets commission, there is also created and established the position of commission coordinator to assist the commission in the furtherance and execution of its goals, purposes, functions and duties. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8102(b)) 
Sec. 2-249. - Bylaws. 
The clean community and streets commission may initiate, adopt and publish bylaws to establish its meetings, officers, activities and functions, consistent with normally accepted practices of such boards and commissions and this division. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8103) 
Sec. 2-250. - Functions and duties. 
The functions and duties of the clean community and streets commission shall include but not be limited to the furtherance, promotion and maintenance of a clean, wholesome and aesthetically pleasing environment for all the citizens of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8104) 
DIVISION 8. - HOUSING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-251. - Creation of authority. 
There is hereby declared to be a need for a housing authority to function in the county; and there exists unsanitary and unsafe inhabited dwelling accommodations in the county; and there exists a shortage of safe and sanitary dwellings accommodations in the county available to persons of low income at rentals they can afford. Therefore, pursuant to the housing authorities laws of the state there is hereby created the Housing Authority of Houston County. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 5) 
Sec. 2-252. - Appointment of members; terms of office. 
The housing authority of Houston County shall have four members who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. The terms of the members shall be for five years. Effective April 27, 1993, the current and successive members of the Warner Robins Housing Authority shall serve as members of the Houston County Housing Authority. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 5) 
DIVISION 9. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-253. - Need for authority. 
There is hereby determined and declared to be a pressing, existing and future need for a development authority (as more fully described and defined in the development authorities law, Ga. Laws 1969, p. 137) to function in the county for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare, trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in the county thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry and, in the furtherance of that purpose, to finance projects for air and water pollution control facilities by industries. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 6) 
State Law reference— Development authorities, O.C.G.A. ch. 69-15. 
Sec. 2-254. - Creation of authority. 
There is hereby activated in the county the public body corporate and politic known as the Development Authority of Houston County which was created upon the adoption and approval of the development authorities law and particularly section 2 thereof. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 6) 
Sec. 2-255. - Membership. 
There are hereby elected as members of the first board of directors of the development authority the following: Two persons for terms of two years; two persons for the terms of four years, and three persons for terms of six years. Thereafter, each member shall serve a six-year term of office. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 6) 
Sec. 2-256. - Organization; duties. 
The board of directors hereinbefore elected shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the development authorities law as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 6) 
Sec. 2-257. - Development authority not affected. 
This division is not intended in any way to affect the Houston County Development Authority, including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organization, powers or function. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 6) 
Related laws reference— Houston County Development Authority, § 3.1. 
DIVISION 10. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS 

Sec. 2-258. - Establishment; membership; term of office. 
The board of elections, consisting of five members, is hereby established. Appointment of the members of the board of elections shall be as follows: One member shall be appointed by the Houston County Democratic Committee; one member shall be appointed by the Houston County Republican Committee; and three members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. All members shall serve a four-year term of office. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 7) 
DIVISION 11. - FAMILY AND CHILDREN SERVICES BOARD 

Sec. 2-259. - Establishment; membership; term of office. 
The Houston County Board of Family and Children Services, consisting of five members, is hereby established. Appointment of the members of the board of family and children services shall be made by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with state code. All members shall serve a five-year term of office. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 8; Ord. of 4-3-01) 
DIVISION 12. - TAX ASSESSORS BOARD 

Sec. 2-260. - Establishment; membership; term of office. 
(a)  The tax assessors board consisting of five members, is hereby created. All members shall be appointed for overlapping three-year terms. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided, the successors of the original members shall be appointed for terms of three years from the dates of expiration of their respective terms of office. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy created during a term shall be appointed only for the unexpired term of the member that he succeeds. Any member shall be eligible for reappointment. The board of commissioners shall make all appointments. 
(c)  Position number one and position number two shall be changed beginning January 1, 2000 to three-year terms, expiring December 31, 2002. Position three and position four shall be changed beginning January 1, 2000 to four-year terms, expiring December 31, 2003. At such expiration date, successors of these positions shall be appointed for terms of three-years. Position five is expiring December 31, 2001. At such expiration date, position five will be changed to a three-year term. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 9; Res. of 10-5-99(2)) 
DIVISION 13. - TAX EQUALIZATION BOARD 

Sec. 2-261. - Establishment; membership; term of office. 
Up to three tax equalization boards, consisting of three members and three alternates, are hereby established. All members shall be appointed for overlapping two-year terms in accordance with state code. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 10; Ord. of 4-3-01) 
DIVISION 14. - BOARD OF HEALTH[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Promulgation of rules, regulations and standard by department of human resources and county board of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; powers and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4; rules and regulation of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6. 

Sec. 2-262. - Board of health. 
The Houston County Board of Health, consisting of seven members is hereby established. Appointment of the members of the board of health will be made by the board of commissioners in accordance with state code. All members will serve a six-year term. 
(Amd. of 3-7-06) 
Sec. 2-263. - Houston County Health Code. 
The Houston County Health Code, consisting of Chapters 1 through 11, prepared by the health department and recommended by the Houston County Board of Health, is hereby approved and adopted in its entirety with the like effect as if recited in this section. 
(Amd. of 3-7-06) 
Secs. 2-264—2-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Personnel, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 2; discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1; disposition of municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; local political subdivision purchases, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq. 

Sec. 2-271. - Financial policies. 
The following financial policies are hereby established for all county funds under the direction of the board of commissioners. 
(Min. of 6-27-00) 
Sec. 2-272. - Operating budget policies. 
(a)  Houston County will finance all current expenditures with current revenues. The county will avoid budgetary procedures that balance current expenditures through the obligation of future resources. Houston County will not use short-term borrowing to meet operating budget requirements. 
(b)  The operating budget will provide for adequate maintenance of capital equipment and facilities and for their orderly replacement. 
(c)  All governmental funds are subject to the annual budget process. Budgets will be prepared for proprietary funds (enterprise and internal service) to establish fees and charges and control expenses. 
(d)  The budget must be balanced for all budgeted funds. Total anticipated revenues and other resources available must equal total estimated expenditures for each fund. 
(e)  All budgets will be adopted on a basis of accounting consistent with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Revenues are budgeted when they become measurable and available and expenditures are charged against the budget when they become measurable, a liability has been incurred, and the liability will be liquidated with current resources. 
(f)  All operating budget appropriations will lapse at year-end. 
(g)  The budget shall be adopted at the legal level of budgetary control which is the fund/department level (i.e., expenditures may not exceed the total for any department within a fund). Transfers of appropriations within a department shall require only the approval of the management services director. Transfers between departments or funds, an increase of a personal services appropriation, or an increase in the level of authorized positions shall require the approval of the board of commissioners. Department heads and elected officials are directed to operate within budget limitations to prevent "emergency" situations. 
(h)  The county will pay bills on the first and third Tuesday of each month. Department heads and elected officials are directed to submit payment requests within these timeframes. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall, however, have the authority to issue special checks up to a maximum of $2,500.00. The director of administration shall have the authority to issue special checks up to a maximum of $1,000.00. The comptroller is authorized to issue special checks for the following: 
(1)  Utility bills that do not lend themselves to timely payment within the regular billing cycle; 
(2)  Board travel as reserved by the executive secretary; and 
(3)  Automobiles and heavy equipment that have been delivered in accordance with bid awards. 
(i)  The county will strive to include a contingency amount in the general fund budget for unforeseen or emergency operating expenditures. The amount of the contingency will be no more than five percent of the operating budget. 
(j)  Houston County will strive to integrate performance measurement and objectives and productivity indicators within the budget. 
(k)  Houston County will maintain a budgetary control system to ensure adherence to the budget and will prepare timely financial reports comparing actual revenues and expenditures with budgeted amounts. 
(l)  The operating budget shall be developed to control both the direct and indirect costs of programs and services whenever practical. 
(m)  Houston County shall comply with all state laws applicable to budget hearings, public notices, public inspection, and budget adoption. 
(n)  Enterprise and internal service fund budgets shall be self supporting whenever possible. Excess revenues of enterprise funds shall not be transferred to other funds, unless authorized in the annual budget. 
(Min. of 6-27-00) 
Sec. 2-273. - Capital budget policies. 
(a)  Capital projects will be undertaken to preserve infrastructure and public facilities; promote economic development and enhance the quality of life; improve the delivery of services; preserve community assets; and improve economically depressed areas and those with low and moderate income households. 
(b)  Houston County will seek to develop a five year Capital Improvement Program (CIP) annually to direct the financing of and appropriations for all capital projects. Houston County defines a capital project for inclusion in the CIP as any asset or project in excess of $5,000.00 with an estimated useful life of three years. 
(c)  Houston County will coordinate the development of the Capital Improvement Program with the development of the operating budget to insure that future operating costs are projected and included in the operating budget where appropriate. 
(d)  Houston County will develop a program to replace authorized vehicles and equipment without significant impact to the capital budget. 
(e)  Houston County will seek public and private grants, contracts, and other outside sources of revenue to fund projects included in the Capital Improvement Program. 
(f)  The balances of appropriations for capital projects will be designated by the management at year-end and re-appropriated in the following years until the project is completed. 
(Min. of 6-27-00) 
Sec. 2-274. - Reserve fund policies. 
(a)  The purpose of the reserve fund policy is to provide funds that are 1) a stable funding source for expenditures that fluctuate significantly each year, for example, equipment acquisitions and replacements; 2) working capital to maintain a sufficient cash flow; 3) provide funding of services during periods of budget shortfalls or other revenue reductions during a budget year; and 4) a stable or improved credit rating. 
(b)  This policy covers all fund types for the county. Fund balances will be classified into one of the following classifications: nonspendable, restricted, committed, assigned, or unassigned. A fund may use more than one classification of fund balance. 
(c)  By their nature, any debt service funds will only classify fund balances as nonspendable or restricted. When debt expenses are paid, the county will use restricted fund balance first. All debt services funds will maintain a fund balance at a level to retire the debt. Once all debt is retired, or the fund balance is sufficient to retire all remaining debt, any remaining fund balance will be transferred to other county funds or projects as directed by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  The lowest level of fund balance restrictions for special revenue funds will be committed fund balance. When expenses are paid, committed fund balance will be used first, unless the expense is for purchases which were listed in the restricted fund balance classification. Special revenue fund types will maintain their fund balance at a level consistent with restrictions imposed which created the fund. 
(e)  Capital projects funds lowest level of fund balance will be assigned for the funding of specific projects. An assigned fund balance will be spent first, unless the expenditures are tied to a restricted fund balance amount. Once the project is completed, any fund balance remaining will be transferred back to the fund(s) which were the original funding source. 
(f)  The general fund may maintain all five classifications of fund balance. Houston County will strive to accumulate an unassigned general fund reserve at least equal to three months of the total general fund budget. 
(g)  Net assets will be maintained for enterprise funds and will be classified as restricted, unrestricted or invested in capital assets. Net assets should be sufficient to cover operating cost and infrastructure replacement. The board of commissioners may transfer funds from the enterprise funds to other funds if the board deems net assets are sufficient to cover operating costs and asset replacement. Unrestricted net assets will be spent first, unless the expense was for a restricted asset. 
(h)  In accordance with GASB 54, Houston County will classify any fund balance using the following designations: 
(1)  For fund balance to be classified as nonspendable, the fund balance by its nature must be either: a) not in spendable form or b) legally or contractually required to be maintained intact. 
(2)  To be classified as restricted, the fund balance must have external constraints placed on the use of the resources or the constraint must be imposed by law through constitutional provisions or enabling legislation. 
(3)  For fund balance to be committed, the resources must be used for a specific purpose pursuant to constraints imposed by formal action by the Houston County Board of Commissioners. 
(4)  Assigned fund balances are amounts that are constrained by the county's intent to be used for specific purposes, but are neither restricted nor committed. The board of commissioners, director of administration or comptroller may designate fund balances as assigned fund balance. 
(5)  All other fund balances, will be classified as unassigned fund balance. 
(Min. of 6-27-00; Amd. of 2-274, 10-18-11) 
Sec. 2-275. - Revenue administration. 
(a)  Houston County will try to maintain diversified and stable revenue stream to shelter it from short-run fluctuations in any single revenue source. 
(b)  Houston County will estimate its revenues by an objective analytical process in a prudent manner. 
(c)  Houston County will follow a policy of paying for services with user charges when possible to reduce the reliance on taxes and other general revenue sources. 
(d)  Houston County will seek public and private grants, contracts, and other outside sources of revenues for funding projects when appropriate. 
(e)  Houston County will establish the levels of all user charges based on an analysis of the cost of providing the services. User charges will be evaluated periodically. 
(f)  Houston County will set fees charges for each enterprise and internal service fund, at a level that fully supports the total direct and indirect cost of the fund. Indirect costs include the cost of annual depreciation of capital assets and requirements for future capital costs. 
(Min. of 6-27-00) 
Sec. 2-276. - Accounting, auditing and financial reporting. 
(a)  An independent audit in compliance with Generally Accepted Audit Standards will be performed annually by a qualified external auditor in accordance with GA Code § 36-81-7. 
(b)  Houston County will prepare a comprehensive annual financial report in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Houston County will strive to prepare the comprehensive annual financial report to meet the standards of the GFOA certificate of achievement in financial reporting program. 
(c)  Houston County will maintain accounting practices, and an accounting system that conforms to generally accepted accounting principles. 
(d)  Houston County will maintain accurate records of all assets to insure a high degree of stewardship for public property. 
(e)  Houston County will maintain an ongoing system of financial reporting to meet the needs of the board of commissioners, the chairman, department heads, and the general public. Reporting systems will monitor the cost of providing services where possible. The reporting systems will promote budgetary control and comparative analysis. 
(f)  Houston County will enter into multiyear agreements when obtaining the services of an independent auditor. Such multiyear agreements will be for periods of at least four years and consistent with applicable legal requirements. 
(g)  The county will periodically reevaluate its auditing services and undertake a full-scale competitive process for the selection of independent auditors, if necessary. This process will actively seek the participation of all qualified firms. The audit procurement process should be structured so that the principal factor in the selection of an independent auditor is the auditor's ability to perform a quality audit. In no case shall price be the sole criterion for the selection of an auditor. 
(Min. of 6-27-00) 
Sec. 2-277. - Debt policies. 
(a)  Houston County will confine long-term borrowing to capital improvements. 
(b)  Houston County will not use short-term debt for operating purposes. 
(c)  Houston County will follow a policy of full disclosure on every financial report and bond prospectus. 
(d)  General obligation debt will not be used for enterprise activities. 
(e)  Houston County will use voted general obligation debt to fund general purpose public improvements which cannot be financed from current revenues, available fund balances, or other current sources of capital financing. 
(f)  Enterprise fund debt will be used only when revenues are sufficient to satisfy operating expenses and debt service requirements. 
(g)  Houston County will limit the use of lease purchase and other short-term debt when possible. 
(Min. of 6-27-00) 
Sec. 2-278. - Investment policies and cash management. 
(a)  Houston County will maintain an aggressive program of investing all government funds under the direction of the director of administration and the comptroller. 
(b)  The investment program shall be operated based on the following principles, in the order listed: 
(1)  Legality. All investments comply with state and local laws. 
(2)  Safety. Principal is protected from loss with secure investment practices and collaterialization. 
(3)  Liquidity. Investments are readily convertible to cash when needed without losses. 
(4)  Yield or return on investment. Earnings are maximized without diminishing the other principles. 
(c)  The investment program shall comply with all Georgia laws and federal/state regulations for investing public funds and safekeeping/security requirements. 
(d)  The investment program shall use a competitive selection process for investments in excess of 30 days. Investments should be placed with only qualified financial institutions. 
(e)  The investment program shall provide for a system of internal control over investments and timely financial reporting over investing activities. 
(f)  The investment program shall include investing a portion of county funds in readily available fund accounts, such as the Georgia Local Government Investment Pool, to ensure that appropriate liquidity is maintained to meet ongoing obligations. 
(g)  Houston County shall ensure that all public funds are collateralized in accordance with state and federal law, thereby guaranteeing the safety of public deposits. Houston County will establish administrative systems to maintain such pledged collateral and will utilize pooled collateral systems provided by the state and local depositories when possible. 
(h)  Houston County will continue to evaluate opportunities to make and receive electronic payments to achieve improved cash flow and interest earnings. 
(i)  Houston County will periodically reevaluate its local banking services and initiate competitive bidding and negotiation processes for those services, if necessary. This process will include the development of an RFP and will specify the services, fees, and earnings rates available. Selection of a local bank will be based on receiving the most effective banking service at the most reasonable cost. 
(Min. of 6-27-00) 
Sec. 2-279. - Purchasing policies. 
(a)  It is the intent of the governing authority of Houston County to maintain uniform regulations and procedures to provide for an efficient and fiscally responsible system for the purchase of materials and services necessary for the effective operations of Houston County. The administration of this system will comply with the highest ethical and fiscal standards and applicable laws. 
(b)  The chairman, or his designee, shall be responsible for the operation of Houston County's purchasing system. 
(c)  All departments of Houston County must utilize competitive bidding procedures, as specified in the ordinance adopted by the board of commissioners. Bids will be awarded on a nondiscriminatory basis with appropriate efforts to include local businesses. 
(d)  Houston County will strive to obtain the highest quality of goods and services for the most economical costs. Bulk purchases, quantity discounts, standardization of common items, and other approaches will be used to economically acquire goods and services. 
(Min. of 6-27-00) 
Sec. 2-280. - Cash handling policies. 
(a)  The goal of Houston County's cash handling function is the accurate and secure receiving, receipting and processing of payments received at various locations throughout the County. This includes payments that are processed by the Accounting Office or any other County department, under a manual system or through an automated system. 
(b)  The general purposes for cash management are: 
(1)  To maximize the revenue accruing to the County through the investment of county funds and trust monies to the extent allowed by law, ordinance, and contract. 
(2)  Minimize the clerical efforts required to handle, process, and account for all monies received. 
(3)  Maximize the accountability for monies received. 
(c)  Department supervisors are responsible for the safekeeping of money that is received by their department and the prompt transfer of these funds to the Accounting Office. 
(d)  All monies received by the offices of the County shall be deposited promptly into the County's banking system. 
(e)  Departments are expected to provide secure surroundings for employees who handle cash and keep them informed of all County receipt policies and procedures. All employees involved in the handling of monies are expected to be accurate and efficient when processing customer payments, making change, or accepting checks. They are also expected to safeguard County funds against loss, and to establish and maintain good customer relations. 
(f)  It is the responsibility of each department to perform random, spot checks of their authorized petty cash funds. Such inspections are best done before, or after, normal working hours and the results should be retained for a period of one year or until the County's annual audit is completed. 
(g)  All monies received in a day must be deposited in the form in which they were received. Monies received must not be used to pay bills, cash personal checks, or be used in any other type of transaction. 
(h)  Houston County will utilize the following major cash receipt policies: 
(1)  Persons making payments shall be advised to make checks payable to the applicable office, not to the person holding the office. 
(2)  Cash should not be given back as change to a customer for a personal check, company check or cashier's check. 
(3)  All cash, coin and checks received shall be immediately placed into a lockable cash drawer for safekeeping. 
(4)  If funds are held overnight, all cash drawers and or vaults shall be locked. 
(5)  Check endorsement information, including the name of the department and bank account number, must be placed on the back of the check at the top one and one-half inches. The rest of the check must be left clear for the bank's stamps. 
(6)  Always double-check your balance tape and revenue summary before depositing money in the bank or with the accounting office. 
(7)  All deposits will be made using lockable or permanently sealed deposit bags. 
(Amd. of 6-1-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-281. - Grant management. 
(a)  Houston County recognizes that grant funding provides significant resources to enhance the county's ability to provide service and activities not otherwise available. The county will seek grant funding for activities, which are in the best interests of our citizens and consistent with the county's strategic priorities. The county will examine the benefits of grant funding prior to application and decline funding determined not to meet the above criteria. 
(b)  The purpose of this policy is to provide procedures relating to the requirements for application and contracts for grants; and 
(c)  To ensure that county departments are accountable for proper grant documentation, administration, and activities. 
(d)  This policy applies to all Houston County offices/departments and to all county officials and their employees. 
(e)  Grant applications may be completed and submitted by department heads or the community planner after direction from the board of commissioners or the director of administration. If the grant application is approved by the director of administration, he or she will notify the board of commissioners at their next regularly scheduled meeting. If any matching funds are required for the grant application, the director of administration or his/her designee will disclose the amount of matching funds required to the board of commissioners in a public meeting before the application is made. If matching funds are required, the board of commissioners shall have the sole authority to approve the application. Applications requiring signature of the county's executive authority may be signed by the board chairman after the grant application is approved by the board of commissioners. 
(f)  Prior to acceptance of any funding or expenditure of funds on any grant activity, a written contract is required. Approval of grant contracts will be in accordance with Houston Purchasing/Contracting Policy and Procedure. If the contract requires modification of the county budget, a completed budget adjustment form must be submitted to the board with the contract. 
(g)  The director of administration or his/her designee is responsible for compliance with all aspects of grant requirements including monitoring to ensure that grant activities are properly accomplished, grant accounting and tracking, and ensuring that requests for reimbursement are accurate and submitted on schedule or as soon as possible after completion of grant activities. 
(h)  The original grant application, contract and any approved amendments are retained by the director of administration or by his/her designee with a copy of each being provided to the comptroller. The official grant file including a copy of the signed contract and all documents associated with the grant, including, but not limited to, the contract and amendments, applications, activity reports, requests for reimbursement, fiscal reports, and other correspondence will be maintained by the director of administration or his/her designee. Any destruction of these records will be in accordance with the approved retention schedule in the appropriate department. Public disclosure requests regarding grants will be referred to the director of administration for coordination of public records gathering and release. 
(i)  Revenue accounts will be established by the comptroller or his or her designee. All revenues are to be received by the finance department for proper deposit. 
(j)  All grant revenues will be deposited to accounts specific to the grant. The comptroller's accounting staff will create and maintain revenue numbers that ensure identification of grants and provide for tracking of accruals. 
(k)  The comptroller will ensure that for reimbursement-based, multi-year grants, both revenues and expenditures are budgeted in the year during which the grant activity will be performed. Reimbursements for grant activities performed in one calendar year and not actually received until the next calendar year are considered accruals and deposited as such. Revenues for grant activities in future years will be recorded as "restricted fund balance" and budgeted in each succeeding year according to the grant contract. 
(l)  The comptroller and his/her designee, in coordination with the director of administration, will be responsible to ensure that grant revenues are properly budgeted and that they are deposited into the proper revenue accounts immediately upon receipt. 
(m)  The director of administration and his/her designee, will evaluate the impacts of the grant-funded program or asset prior to deciding whether to continue the grant at the end of the initial period to ensure the grant is producing desired benefits. 
(n)  The director of administration or his/her designee will develop a project plan that includes how new programs or activities funded by the grant would be implemented and who would be responsible for implementation. 
(o)  The director of administration or his/her designee will provide the necessary training for those responsible for the grant, so they can effectively carry out their roles. 
(p)  The director of administration will follow existing Houston County Personnel Regulations for the terms and conditions of grant-funded personnel who are terminated upon expiration of the grant. 
(q)  The director of administration will identify the individual responsible for carrying out the grant and making sure that proper resources are available to support that grant. 
(r)  For obtaining signatures of the board of commissioners' office personnel, signature authorization forms should be delivered to the director of administration. Signature of the chairman of the board of commissioners on authorization forms may be obtained without a public meeting. Signature authority is limited to the chairman of the board of commissioners or the vice-chair in his/her absence. 
(Amd. of 10-21-14(1)) 
Sec. 2-282. - Dishonored instrument (check) charge. 
The charge for dishonored instruments (checks) for all Houston County departments shall be as set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-20G, which is $30.00 or five percent of the face amount of the instrument, whichever is greater, plus any fee charged to Houston County by its bank. 
(Amd. of 4-21-15(2)) 
Secs. 2-283—2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASE OF MATERIALS AND SERVICES 

Sec. 2-301. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the governing authority of the county to establish regulations and procedures to provide for an efficient and fiscally responsible system for the purchase of materials and services necessary for the effective operations of the county government and to ensure the administration of such system is in accordance with the highest ethical and fiscal standards and applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1)) 
Sec. 2-302. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all departments, divisions or other units of the county government receiving appropriations from the board of county commissioners and to other using agencies as the board may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1)) 
Sec. 2-303. - Designation of purchasing agent. 
The chairman of the board of county commissioners or his designee shall serve as the purchasing agent of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1)) 
Sec. 2-304. - Powers and duties. 
The purchasing agent shall have the following authority, responsibility and duties: 
(1)  To purchase or contract for all materials, supplies and services required by the using departments and divisions of the county government pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  To purchase or procure for the county materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services from the "lowest and best bidder" meeting specifications. 
(3)  To maintain up-to-date files of all vendors known to the county who are reputable and responsible vendors of materials, supplies, and services regularly used by the county, including descriptions of their goods or services, prices, and discounts as may be available. 
(4)  To sell or dispose of all obsolete or unusable personal property in accordance with the ordinance rules, regulations, or resolutions which may be adopted by the county. 
(5)  To coordinate cooperative purchasing practices with other cities and counties. 
(6)  To establish, and amend when necessary, as authorized, all rules and regulations as may be necessary for the implementation of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1)) 
Sec. 2-305. - Uniform purchasing manual. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners, or his designee, shall provide for a uniform purchasing manual which shall include all rules and regulations pertaining to the purchasing of goods and services for the county and a step-by-step description of the proper procedures for purchasing those goods and services. The purchasing manual, as approval by the board of commissioners, shall be considered a part of this article by reference and shall have the same force and effect as this article. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1)) 
Sec. 2-306. - Purchase orders. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all purchases for materials, supplies, and services for the county shall be on an official county purchase order as prescribed by the chairman of the board of commissioners and in accordance with the procedures in the purchasing manual. The chairman has the authority not to honor purchase made outside these procedures. These obligations may be incurred instead by the individual responsible for the purchase. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1)) 
Sec. 2-307. - Competitive bidding required. 
All purchases for materials, supplies, equipment or services estimated to cost over $100,000.00 shall be based on competitive bidding procedures specifically set forth in the purchasing manual. These procedures include formal advertising, contracts, specifications, sealed bids, public opening, bid deposits and performance bonds. 
Any purchases for materials, supplies, equipment or services with an estimated cost between $5,000.00 and $100,000.00 shall be based upon written competitive quotations from at least three reputable vendors, without regard for formal advertising. 
Any purchases for materials, supplies, equipment or services estimated to cost between $1,001.00 and $5,000.00 shall be based upon verbal quotations from at least three reputable vendors. 
Any item, materials or service which has a value of $1,000.00 or less may be purchased from any approved vendor recommended by the using agency or in the absence of such recommendation, from any approved vendor selected by the purchasing agent. Each such purchase shall be authorized by the head of the using department or division in accordance with the procedures prescribed in the purchasing manual. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1); Ord. of 4-3-01) 
Sec. 2-308. - Award of contracts. 
Purchases of materials, supplies, equipment or services shall be awarded to the lowest, best bidder. In addition to the price, the purchasing agent shall consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts of services; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required; 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; and 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1)) 
Sec. 2-309. - Local preference. 
Bids awarded to local vendors contribute to the local tax base and will, therefore, be given special consideration when bidding against outside vendors. Bids received from vendors within the confines of the county will be given preference if their bid is within three percent of the low bid submitted by an out-of-county bidder. This policy does not apply to any purchases of materials, equipment or services in excess of $150,000.00. On those cases, the board of commissioners will make their decision based on the lowest and best bid as submitted. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1)) 
Sec. 2-310. - Exceptions to competitive bidding. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners shall be authorized to waive any and all bidding requirements for the purchase of necessary materials, supplies, equipment or services under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Emergency purchases. Whenever an emergency condition exists which presents a threat to the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the county and whenever such requirements would cause an undue delay in the delivery of essential county services under such conditions; 
(2)  Cooperative purchasing agreements. Whenever, in the judgment of the chairman of the board of commissioners, it would be in the best interest of the county to enter into cooperative purchasing agreements with other units of government; 
(3)  State contract purchases. Whenever any item or service is available through a contract with the state and is made available to local governments, and when such items or services meet the requirements of a using agency; 
(4)  Professional/contractual services. Any necessary function that does not produce a tangible commodity, including, but not limited to, insurance services, leases and rentals, temporary employment, engineering/architectural services, audit and legal services or other services which are by nature not subject to competition; and 
(5)  Sole source purchase. Any item or service which due to special technology or extraordinary specifications and circumstances, is available from only one vendor. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1)) 
Sec. 2-311. - Rejection of bids. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners shall be authorized to reject any or all bids, in sole [whole] or in part, when in his judgment the terms, conditions or specifications received are not in compliance with those in the county specifications. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1)) 
Sec. 2-312. - Vendors in default to county. 
The purchasing agent shall not accept any bid or quotation from, nor issue any purchase order to, any vendor or contractor that is in the default on the payment of any county taxes, license fee, or other monies due the county. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1)) 
Sec. 2-313. - Records to be maintained. 
A record and description of all requisitions, competitive bids and quotations, purchase orders, receiving reports, and other pertinent documentation of purchasing shall be maintained by the purchasing agent in accordance with regulations and procedures prescribed in the purchasing manual and shall be public record. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94(1)) 
Sec. 2-314. - [Purchasing card and credit card for county-elected officials and employees.] 
(a)  Intent and scope. This section is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of county-issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the board of commissioners to receive a county-issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
Card administrator means the purchasing card and credit card administrator designated by the Houston County Board of Commissioners. 
County means Houston County and/or the board of commissioners. 
County purchase card, county p-card or county credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a county official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of the county. 
Employee means a certified full time employee of Houston County. 
Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
User agreement means the required agreement between the board of commissioners and the authorized elected officials and employees which restricts the use of a county purchasing card or credit card. 
(c)  Designated elected officials and employees. The Houston County Board of Commissioners ("county"), in its discretion, may authorize specific county-elected officials and employees to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
No authorized elected official or employee may use a county purchasing card or credit card until and unless he or she has executed the county's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official or an employee to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this section or for any purchases that are not authorized by this section. 
(d)  Card administrator. The board of commissioners shall designate a county purchasing card and credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator include: 
(1)  Manage county-issued purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(2)  Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and credit card issues. 
(3)  Serve as liaison to the elected officials and employees authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
(4)  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials and employees authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
(5)  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
(6)  Assist authorized elected officials and employees to dispute transactions when necessary. 
(7)  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this section, county procurement ordinances and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(8)  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(9)  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
(10)  Maintain records for at least seven years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. 
(e)  Use of cards. 
(1)  Authorized purchases. County purchase cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official and employee only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this section, the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, county procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
Only authorized elected officials and employees may use a county purchase card or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferrable to other elected officials or other employees. The authorized elected official and employee shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
The transaction limits are established in the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
(2)  Unauthorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official and employee. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the county's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
(3)  Receipts and documentation. Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained and maintained by the authorized county elected official or employee for five years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official or employee may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. 
(4)  Public records. All receipt and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(f)  Review of purchases and audit. Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection to misuse or abuse of county-issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials, employees and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the county. 
(1)  Review of purchases. All purchases shall be reviewed according to the following procedure: All receipts for purchases shall be given to the card administrator within ten days of purchase. 
(2)  Audits. The card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials, employees and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(g)  Violations. 
(1)  An elected official or employee shall reimburse the county for any purchases made with a county-issued purchase card or credit card in violation of this section or the user agreement. 
(2)  In the discretion of the county governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this section may result in: 
a.  A warning; 
b.  Suspension of the elected official's or employee's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card; or 
c.  Revocation of the elected official's or employee's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the county governing authority from referring misuse of a purchase card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
(Ord. of 12-1-15, §§ I—VII) 
Editor's note— Sections I—VII of an ordinance adopted Dec. 1, 2015, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-314 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-315—2-335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY 

Sec. 2-336. - Purpose. 
(a)  This policy provides guidelines for the detection and deterrence of alcohol and drug abuse. It also outlines the responsibilities of management and employees. It is the policy of the county to maintain a safe, healthful and productive work environment for all employees. To that end the county will act to eliminate any substance abuse (alcohol, illegal drugs or any other substance which could impair an employee's ability to safely and effectively perform the functions of the particular job) which increases the potential for accidents, absenteeism, substandard performance, poor employee morale or tends to undermine public confidence in the county's workforce. All persons covered by this policy should be aware that violations of the policy may result in discipline, up to and including termination, or in not being hired. 
(b)  In recognition of the serious duty entrusted to the employees of the county, with knowledge that drugs and alcohol do hinder a person's ability to perform duties safely and effectively, the following policy against substance abuse is hereby adopted by the county. 
(Mo. of 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-337. - Policy. 
(a)  No employee of the county may illegally engage in the manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of illegal drugs during working or nonworking hours. Such activity, even during nonworking hours, clearly affects an employee's ability to perform his public duties and will be considered grounds for disciplinary action, including dismissal from employment. 
(b)  The use of alcohol or other intoxicating substances while on duty, or coming to work under the influence of such substances is forbidden. Violation of this rule is cause for disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(c)  Employees using medicine while on the job must do so in strict accordance with medical directions. They may remain on duty only so long as safety, job performance, mood, and behavior are not adversely affected. If the medicine causes problems as mentioned above, then the employee will have to take appropriate leave until the problem clears up. The abuse and/or inappropriate use of medicine is prohibited. 
(d)  It is the policy of the county to provide assistance to those regular employees who voluntarily seek help for a drug or alcohol problem or who are referred for help by their supervisors. This help is confidential and will not affect future opportunities for advancement with the county, provided rehabilitation efforts are successful, nor will it affect the employee's present job. Insurance benefits will cover most of the cost of rehabilitation. Drug rehabilitation will not be offered to those employees who fail a drug test upon the request of management. Those who seek help should contact the personnel office for confidential assistance. 
(e)  The county reserves the right to search, without employee consent, all areas and property in which the county maintains joint control with the employee or full control. All county vehicles are subject to search by appropriate management personnel. Warrants will be obtained should it become necessary to search areas beyond the county's immediate control. 
(f)  Violations of this policy shall be grounds for disciplinary action, up to and including discharge for serious or repeated infractions. Any confirmed indication of drug use shall be grounds for removing an employee from a sensitive position. Refusal to submit immediately to an alcohol and/or drug analysis when requested by management will constitute insubordination which alone will form a basis for discipline. 
(Mo. of 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-338. - Employee responsibilities. 
An employee must: 
(1)  Not report to work or be subject to duty while his/her ability to perform job duties is impaired due to alcohol or drug use, on or off duty. 
(2)  Not possess or use, or have the odor of alcohol on his/her breath during working hours, on breaks, during meal periods, while on county property in an official capacity or while operating any county vehicle. 
(3)  Not directly or through a third party sell or provide drugs or alcohol to any person or to any other employee while either employee or both employees are on duty, or "on-call"; 
(4)  Submit immediately to reasonable requests for alcohol and/or drug analysis when requested by a responsible county representative. 
(5)  Notify the personnel director in writing of any conviction (including a plea of no contest) of any criminal drug statute within five days after such conviction. 
(6)  Provide within 24 hours of request a current valid prescription for any drug or medication identified when a drug screen/analysis is positive. The prescription must be in the employee's name. 
(Mo. of 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-339. - Management responsibilities and guidelines. 
(a)  Department heads and supervisors are responsible for consistent enforcement of this policy. Any supervisor who knowingly permits a violation of this policy by employees under his/her direct supervision shall be subject to disciplinary action. 
(b)  Department heads may request that an employee submit to a drug and/or alcohol analysis when a department head has a reasonable suspicion that an employee is intoxicated or under the influence of drugs or alcohol. "Reasonable suspicion" is a belief based on objective and articulate facts sufficient to lead a reasonable prudent supervisor to suspect that an employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol so that the employee's ability to perform his/her job safely is reduced. For example, any of the following, alone or in combination may constitute reasonable suspicion: 
(1)  Slurred abnormal speech; 
(2)  Alcohol on breath; 
(3)  Inability to walk a straight line; 
(4)  Physical altercation; 
(5)  An uncharacteristic verbal altercation; 
(6)  Behavior which is so unusual that it warrants summoning a supervisor or anyone else with authority; 
(7)  Possession of alcohol or drugs; 
(8)  Information obtained from a reliable person with personal knowledge. 
(c)  Any department head requesting an employee to submit to a drug and/or alcohol analysis should immediately notify a second supervisor to observe the employee's behavior. Should the second supervisor concur that the employee appears to be in violation of the policy, the following procedure shall immediately be applied: 
(1)  The department head should document in writing the facts constituting reasonable suspicion that the employee in question is intoxicated or under the influence of drugs. 
(2)  Any department head requesting an employee to submit to a drug and/or alcohol analysis shall be responsible for the employee's transport to the county's designated facility where a drug and/or alcohol test will be requested. Drug testing will be performed at the Houston Drug Action Council (HODAC), from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. After hours testing will be performed in the laboratory facilities at the Houston Medical Center at 1601 Watson Boulevard. 
(3)  Any department head encountering an employee who refuses to submit to a drug and/or alcohol analysis upon request shall remind the employee of the requirements and consequences of this policy. Any employee refusing to submit to a drug and/or alcohol test shall not be forced to submit to such testing. The department head should ask the employee to wait a reasonable time until an authorized county representative can transport the employee home. 
(4)  Department heads and supervisors shall not physically search employees. 
(5)  Department heads and supervisors shall notify the county sheriff's department when they have reasonable suspicion to believe that an employee may have illegal drugs in his or her possession or in an area not jointly or fully controlled by the county. 
(Mo. of 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-340. - Results of drug and/or alcohol analysis. 
(a)  Upon a negative result, the employee shall return to work and job performance will continue to be monitored. 
(b)  If the test result in positive, a second screen using a different testing technique will be given on the same sample. If the second screen shows a negative result, it will be assumed that the individual is not under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances. If the second screen shows a positive result, the employee will be presumed to be impaired by alcohol or controlled substances. 
(c)  The discipline for being under the influence of alcohol or nonprescribed controlled substances will be based on the employee's work history, previous disciplinary actions and previous identification of substance abuse problems. 
(Mo. of 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-341. - Physical examinations. 
(a)  Physical examinations may be required of applicants selected for public safety positions with Houston County. As part of the physical examination, a urine drug screening will be given. Additionally, all applicants for full time positions will be required to pass a drug test prior to reporting for work. The drug analysis test for any substance which could impair an employee's ability to effectively and safely perform the functions of his/her job, including, but not limited to, the following substances: 
(1)  Amphetamine/methamphetamine (e.g. speed, crystal); 
(2)  Benzodiazepines (e.g. valium, librium, oxazepam, serax, dalmane, ativan); 
(3)  Barbiturates (e.g. amobarbital, butabarbital, pentobarbital, phenobarbital, secobarbital); 
(4)  Cocaine; 
(5)  Methaqualone (e.g. quaalude); 
(6)  Opiates (e.g. codeine, heroin, morphine, hydromorphone, hydrocodone); 
(7)  Phencyclidine (PCP); 
(8)  THC (marijuana); 
(9)  Alcohol. 
These drug groups were selected based upon known abuse in the community and the ability of each drug to adversely affect physical/mental performance. All are controlled substances under state and federal law. 
(b)  The amount of each chemical substance that is required to show as "positive" varies from drug to drug. The specific amount is a standard selected by the testing laboratory based upon the purpose of the testing program. In our situation, the laboratory will use standards that will ensure a drug is genuinely present when a positive result occurs. The length of time that drugs remain in the system varies tremendously from drug to drug. The length of time a drug remains in the system also varies from person to person. While these variables exist, none of them will cause drugs to test positive beyond what we consider recent usage. 
(c)  When an individual is directed by the county to the physician for drug screening, the following procedure shall be observed: 
(1)  The drug screening procedure is explained to the individual, a medical interview is done and any questions are answered by the physician or designated representative. 
(2)  The individual is asked to sign a waiver giving permission to perform the drug screening. 
(3)  The physician presents the individual with a special empty sterile container and the sanitary seal on the container is broken in front of the individual. 
(4)  The individual is accompanied to a restroom to give the sample in order to prevent tampering with the sample. 
(5)  The individual's social security number is placed on the container and it is placed in a special envelope. The individual then initials the container and envelope. 
(6)  The drug screening tests are conducted on part of the sample and if it tests positive, a second test using a different methodology is conducted to confirm the positive result. 
(7)  If the tests result in one positive and one negative result the overall test is considered negative. 
(8)  The results of the test are forwarded to the physicians office in a written report. That report is then forwarded to the county. 
(9)  The positive test samples are retained frozen so employee's appealing under the county's grievance procedure have the opportunity to have their sample retested if so required. 
(Mo. of 1-16-96; Amd. of 7-3-07) 
Sec. 2-342. - Results of drug analysis. 
(a)  Preemployment physicals: 
(1)  A positive result from a drug analysis may result in the applicant not being hired. 
(2)  If an analysis is positive for drugs, the department head and personnel manager shall decide whether the applicant may be hired after considering all relevant information (discussion with county physician, medical history, position applied for). 
(b)  Employee testing: 
(1)  A positive result from a drug analysis may result in counsel and/or disciplinary action, up to and including discharge. 
(2)  If a drug analysis is positive, the county shall conduct an investigation to gather all facts. The decision to discipline or discharge will be carried out in conformance with the county's disciplinary procedures. 
(Mo. of 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-343. - Confidentiality. 
Laboratory reports or test results shall appear in an employee's confidential personnel file. The reports or test results may be disclosed to management on a strictly need-to-know basis and to the tested employee upon request. Disclosures, without patient consent, may also occur when the information: 
(1)  Is compelled by law or by judicial or administrative process; 
(2)  Has been placed at issue in a formal dispute between the employer and employee; and 
(3)  Is to be used in administering an employee benefit plan. 
(Mo. of 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-344. - Procedures for commercial drivers license (CDL) and Class C license holders. 
County employees who are required to possess a commercial driver's license or a Class C license will be required to participate in alcohol and controlled substance testing. The types of testing are: 
(1)  Pre-employment; 
(2)  Post-accident; 
(3)  Random; 
(4)  Reasonable suspicion; 
(5)  Return to duty; and 
(6)  Follow-up. 
(Mo. of 1-16-96; Amd. of 7-3-07) 
Sec. 2-345. - Supervisor training. 
Supervisors of CDL holders shall be provided with a minimum of two hours of training which shall include: 
(1)  How to recognize signs of employee substance abuse; 
(2)  How to document and collaborate signs of employee substance abuse; and 
(3)  How to refer substance abusing employees to the proper treatment providers. 
(Mo. of 1-16-96) 
Sec. 2-346. - Testing. 
(a)  Preemployment. All newly selected employees will be required to pass a drug test prior to reporting to work. The personnel department will schedule the employee for testing by a physician/medical agency selected by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Post-accident alcohol and controlled substances. 
(1)  As soon as practicable following an accident involving a commercial motor vehicle, the county shall test for alcohol and controlled substances [from] each surviving driver when either: (1) the accident involved a fatality; or (2) the driver receives a citation under state or local law for a moving traffic violation arising from the accident. 
(2)  For the purpose of this rule, an accident is defined as an incident involving a commercial motor vehicle in which there is either a fatality, an injury treated away from the scene or a vehicle required to be towed from the scene. After an accident, an alcohol test is to be administered to the driver within two hours. A controlled substance test is to be administered within 32 hours. The breath alcohol test may be performed by the county sheriff's department. 
(3)  The controlled substance test will be performed by the Houston County Drug Action Council (HODAC). 
(c)  Random. 
(1)  Alcohol. The personnel director (representing the employer) shall ensure that a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the CDL driver positions and twenty (20) percent of the Class C driver positions are randomly tested annually. The tests will be unannounced and spread throughout the year. Drivers selected for random alcohol tests will proceed immediately to the test site upon notification of being selected. The test site will be announced at the same time. 
(2)  Controlled substance. The personnel director (representing the employer) shall ensure that a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the CDL driver positions and twenty (20) percent of the Class C driver positions are randomly tested annually. The tests will be unannounced and spread throughout the year. Drivers selected for random controlled substance tests will proceed immediately to the test site upon notification of being selected. The test site will be announced at the same time. 
(d)  Reasonable suspicion alcohol and controlled substances. This testing will be done in accordance with the policy outlined in Article VII, Section 7 of the Houston County Personnel Manual. 
(e)  Return-to-duty. 
(1)  The personnel director and department head shall ensure that before a driver returns to duty requiring the performance of a safety-sensitive function, after engaging in prohibited conduct regarding alcohol misuse, the driver shall undergo a return-to-duty alcohol test indicating a breath alcohol concentration of less than 0.02. 
(2)  The personnel director and department head shall also ensure that before a driver returns to duty requiring the performance of a safety-sensitive function, after engaging in prohibited conduct regarding controlled substance use, the driver shall undergo a return-to-duty controlled substances test with a result indicating a verified negative result for controlled substances use. 
(3)  In the event a return-to-duty test is required, the driver must also be evaluated by a substance abuse professional (SAP) and participate in any assistance program prescribed. 
(f)  Follow-up testing. 
(1)  Following a determination that a driver is in need of assistance in resolving problems associated with alcohol misuses and/or use of controlled substances, each employer shall ensure that the driver is subject to unannounced follow-up alcohol and/or controlled substances testing as directed by the substance abuse professional. 
(2)  The driver shall be subject to a minimum of six follow-up controlled substance and/or alcohol tests in the first 12 months. But testing shall not exceed 60 months. 
(3)  Alcohol follow-up testing shall be performed only when the driver is performing safety-sensitive functions, or immediately prior to performing or immediately after performing safety-sensitive functions. 
(Mo. of 1-16-96; Amd. of 7-3-07) 
Chapter 3 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 18, 1993, redesignated former ch. 18, art. IV, §§ 18-71—18-96 as ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-26. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments, § 6-97 et seq. 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meaning as indicated below: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sale from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine as defined in section 6-1 of this Code. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnished or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarter. 
Good moral character means according to this article if that person has not [been] convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The county may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine to good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or in the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-2. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license. 
(b)  No later than March 1st of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 2:00 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to open on Christmas Day. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths foot candles per square foot. 
(o)  If any portion or subsection of this section of this article or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-3. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-4. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the county any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a license to do so. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-5. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license, or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-6. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-7. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-8. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employed elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the licensing officer of his intended employed on forms supplied by the licensed officer and shall receive approval of such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the licensing officer requires, including a set of fingerprints on regular county or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the licensing officer for a hearing. The decision of the licensing officer after hearing may be appealed to which may issue such order as it proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the county laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the county shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relations with the owner or license of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-9. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the manager services director or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the board of commissioners shall be paid to the management services director to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The management services director shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-10. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation of employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violation, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its reasonable managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The county shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any; 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-11. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible manager officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the office of the board of county commissioners and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the county commissioners, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-12. - Application; investigation. 
The county shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the board of commissioners may grant the license if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this county or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulations of the county, state or the United States. 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the county to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-13. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose offices or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the county. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the county, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. (427 U.S. 50, 81). 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-14. - License—Refusal; appeal. 
If the county, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the management services director of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the management services director. The management services director shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the board of commissioners. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-15. - Same—Renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the licensees continued to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-16. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-17. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the board of commissioners has been deposited with the county and approval has been obtained from the management services director and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the county Code have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-18. - Appeal—Procedure. 
The licensee shall, within 10 days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit notice of appeal to the management services director. 
The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the board of commissioners and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the board of commissioners and the name and address of the applicant. 
The management services director shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for board of commissioners action. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-19. - Same—Board determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the board of commissioners agenda, the board may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the management services director to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing office and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The management services director shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-20. - Board of commissioners hearing. 
Whenever the management services director has scheduled an appeal before the board of commissioners, at the time and date set therefor, the board shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties and from county staff. The board of commissioners may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-21. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-22. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The board of commissioners and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-23. - Hearing officers—Report. 
The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the board. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the management services director and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/appellant the same day it is filed with the management services director, with addition copies furnished to the sheriff's department. 
The management services director shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular board meeting occurring not less than 15 days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-24. - Same—Action by commission. 
The board of commissioners may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the board does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points, in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-25. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-26. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment, and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Min. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; courts, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; taxation, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. 3, sec. 9, par. 6; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age, use of false identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined herein, the definitions contained within O.C.G.A. § 33-1-1 et seq. shall be applicable to this chapter. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
Establishment means any physical location or section thereof for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
License means the permit granted to a licensee for the operation of an establishment for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Licensee means any person engaged in selling or conducting the sale, at retail or wholesale, of any alcoholic beverages. 
Live means any activity or entertainment which is carried on by actual living persons in the physical presence of that patrons. 
Live entertainment means entertainment for the benefit of patrons which is carried on in the actual physical presence of such patrons, including, but not limited to dancing. 
Mainstream performance house means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which regularly features live performances such as plays or concerts which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or display or the featuring of specified anatomical areas of specified sexual activities and where such depiction, if any, is only incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed, including the sidewalk serving area or outside, open air or patio type serving area on the private property of an establishment. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered homan genitals or pubic region; cleft of the buttocks; or any portion of the female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intercept a point above the top of the areola, or any portion of the areola, or any simulation thereof. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; or 
(5)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (4) above. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-2. - Brown bagging. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee or any other commercial establishment to allow customers to bring with them their own alcoholic beverages, which is known as "BYOB" or "brown bagging." 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, II; alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulation of sales of alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-3. - Persons under the age of twenty-one. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to visit any establishment or section of an establishment which sells distilled spirits by the drink except persons under the age of 21 may enter a restaurant which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages to be served for a meal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of or employed by any establishment which sells distilled spirits by the drink to allow any person under the age of 21 to visit such place for business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or sell alcoholic beverages to a person under the age of 21. 
(d)  No person under the age of 21 shall enter into a package store which sells distilled spirits. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to: 
(1)  Allow anyone to purchase for him any alcoholic beverages; or 
(2)  Attempt to or enter the premises of an establishment for the purchase of alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to sell or furnish in any manner whatsoever alcoholic beverages to any person under the age of 21, except that alcoholic beverages in reasonable quantities may be sold and served at tables in restaurants and food type establishments to persons age 21 or older for consumption by such persons only, when accompanied by persons under the age of 21. 
(g)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under the age of 21 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any distilled spirits for consumption on premises. This section shall not prohibit persons under 21 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, drug stores and convenience stores from selling or handling packaged wine, beer, ale or malt liquors which are sold for consumption off the premises. This section does not prohibit such persons from setting up tables, clearing tables, or serving food in restaurant establishments when not in the same room with a bar or lounge. Further, persons that are 18 years or older may take orders and serve beer and wine beverages for consumption on the premises in restaurants. 
(h)  This section shall not prohibit invited persons under 21 years of age from being present in separate and distinct rooms restricted to private functions such as wedding parties and not open to the general public. Such persons shall not be permitted to consume alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
State Law reference— Alcohol and under ages persons, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-2.1, 3-3-23 et seq. 
Secs. 6-4—6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEALERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-26. - Compliance with federal, state and county ordinances required. 
All licensees shall at all times comply with federal and state laws, county ordinances and rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner, including licensing qualifications. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-27. - Compliance with this article required. 
No person shall operate an establishment involving the sale of alcoholic beverages without first having complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-28. - Display of license; copy of regulations to be kept on premises. 
All holders of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall promptly display said license in the licensee's establishment and shall keep a copy of this chapter on the premises. The licensee shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof and each licensee or its agents selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-29. - Open to inspection. 
Places of business under this article shall at all times during the period allowable by law for operation of the business, be open to inspection by the sheriff's department or any officer thereof and/or to any person designated by the sheriff. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-30. - Alcohol regulations; hours of service. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to every licensee, agent, servant and employee and any and all other persons affected, and all shall be equally guilty of a violation of any of the provisions contained herein, each such person being charged with responsibility for the acts of his officers, agents, servants and employees. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Packaged sales of beer and wine. Licensees whose only sale of alcoholic beverages consist of beer and/or wine by the package may sell such beverages at any time except between 12:00 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. on Sunday and between 11:30 p.m. on Sunday and 12:00 a.m. on Monday. 
(d)  Package stores. The sale of package distilled spirits shall be permitted at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on Monday through Saturday and between 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. No retail dealer or licensee for package sale of distilled spirits shall allow any person inside the establishment after said hours other than regular employees who are engaged in activities to close, clean, or stock the establishment, or if the doors to the establishment are unlocked. The only exception to the above may be caused by emergency repairs to equipment and/or facilities. 
(e)  Establishments that sell alcohol for consumption on premises. Licensees for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises may serve and sell such beverages and be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday and from 12:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. on Sunday. Any other sales on Sunday must be in compliance with the section entitled "Sunday alcohol sales" below. For purposes of this section, establishments will be considered "open" if at any time, there are any persons inside the establishment other than regular employees who are engaged in activities to close, clean or stock the establishment, or if the doors to the establishment are unlocked. The only exception to the above may be caused by emergency repairs to equipment and/or facilities. 
(f)  Election day. The sale of alcoholic beverages by the package and for consumption on the premises shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, that nothing herein shall authorized the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(g)  Christmas Day. 
(1)  No licensee shall sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages at any time on Christmas Day. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the above, licensees of food and restaurant establishments may rent separate and distinct rooms for private parties to be held on Christmas Day. In such event, the licensee shall not sell or serve any alcoholic beverages. Nothing contained in this section shall allow areas commonly regarded as lounges or bars to be open for any reason on Christmas Day. 
(h)  Sunday alcohol sales. Establishments holding a license for the sale of distilled spirits, wine or beer by the drink shall also be permitted to sell and serve between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Sundays provided that the criteria contained in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7(j) is met. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 8-7-12) 
State Law reference— Sales of alcohol on Sundays, Christmas Day and election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 6-31. - Management and operation. 
The licensee shall be responsible for his/her employee's compliance with all state and local laws pertaining to alcoholic beverages. Any violations of such laws by employees may subject the licensee to civil penalties not to exceed $1,000.00 fine and/or the possible suspension or revocation of the alcohol license. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-32. - Maintenance of premises. 
Each licensee shall keep and maintain an orderly, respectable, and sanitary place of business under this article. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-33. - Storage of inventory or stock. 
No licensed retailer shall keep any alcoholic beverage stored in any warehouse in the county, nor shall they enter into any type of arrangement whereby alcoholic beverages ordered by him are stored by him by any license wholesaler. A retailer shall keep no inventory or stock or alcoholic beverages at any place except at his licensed place of business and within his licensed place of business. The storage space for alcoholic beverages shall be: 
(1)  Immediately adjacent to the room in which it is licensed to do business; and 
(2)  There shall be but one entrance to the storage area and this shall be through the retail store area. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-34. - Off-premises sales prohibited. 
No retailer shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverage to any person except in the retailer's place of business. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-35. - Boisterous conduct. 
No boisterous, noisy or disorderly conduct will be permitted in or about any place of business under this article. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Secs. 6-36—6-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local licenses generally, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-49 et seq., 3-5-40 et seq., 3-6-40, 3-7-40. 

Sec. 6-56. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to all holders of a license to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-57. - Required. 
(a)  Every operator of an establishment for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages must obtain a license therefore. 
(b)  A separate retail license shall be required for each place of business. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-58. - Display. 
Licenses pursuant to this division must be posted in a conspicuous place and in such manner that it can be readily seen. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
State Law reference— Display of license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-3. 
Sec. 6-59. - Application. 
(a)  Generally. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail shall be granted until the application, accompanied by a check or cash in the amount required for the license, setting forth the name of the owners, the business and its location, shall have been approved by the sheriff's department, health department and the building inspections department. No person shall sell or attempt to sell alcoholic beverages at wholesale or retail until they have received their county and state licenses authorizing to do so. After all departments named have approved the issuance of the license, it shall be issued by the county commissioners office. All new alcoholic beverage applications shall receive two readings before the board of commissioners at two regular meetings before approval is granted. Applications for license shall be made on forms prescribed by the county clerk. 
(b)  Sworn statements. 
(1)  The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications according to this division and shall place such statement on file with the clerk before any license is issued. 
(2)  If the application covers a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements of those qualifications. 
(c)  In person. All applications for license shall be made in person to the board of commissioners. 
(d)  False information. Any statement on an application for license to sell alcoholic beverages which shall later be found to be false or omission of facts shall subject the applicant to prosecution for perjury under the laws of this state. 
(e)  [State application.] The applicant shall submit a copy of his state application upon applying for a local alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-60. - Eligibility. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person unless the person is 21 years of age prior to filing an application for the license. 
(b)  Licenses may be granted to a corporation existing under the laws of the state or to a foreign corporation authorized to do business in the state; provided, however, that any such corporation shall be required to designate a resident of the county as its local agent responsible for compliance with all the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-61. - Availability of investigation reports on applicant and employees; authority to require fingerprints and photographs of the applicant and employees. 
(a)  A consent statement by the applicant that all necessary investigation reports on the applicant and any employees in the applicant's establishment, including but not limited to credit reports and reports from law enforcement agencies, may be obtained; any information in these reports may be furnished to the county; and the applicant will be responsible for the costs thereof. If so requested, the applicant shall also obtain these consent forms from each employee who will be employed in applicant's establishment. The county may, at its option, require fingerprints and/or photographs of applicant's employees for the purpose of conducting its investigation. 
(b)  Licensees will, upon request, furnish to the sheriff the names and addresses of each employee hired, within one week of such hiring. The licensee also shall, upon request, furnish the consent form for investigation of each employee hired for the establishment during the continuance of the license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-62. - Character of applicant and employees. 
(a)  All applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses must be of good character, and all managers, clerks or other employees shall be of like character or the application will not be considered. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony involving moral turpitude. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may, in its discretion, consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application, or the proposed location of the business. If in its judgment, circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, these circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(d)  Ascertainable standards of good moral character which may be considered by the board of commissioners in deciding of a license will be issued include, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Present and prior compliance with county ordinances; 
(2)  Prior supervision over employees and customers; 
(3)  Truthfulness in submitted application; 
(4)  Criminal and civil court records; 
(5)  Employment history; 
(6)  Credit reports. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-63. - Persons to whom licenses not issued. 
No license shall be granted to any person for the operation of an establishment offering the sale of alcoholic beverages in any area prohibited by law or by the zoning regulations for the county. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-64. - Building to be complete; attachment of evidence of ownership or copy of lease of application. 
No license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the establishment will be located is complete, and every applicant for a retail license shall attach to its application evidence of ownership or a copy of a lease/rental agreement if the applicant is leasing or renting the building. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-65. - Proximity of premises to churches, schools, colleges. 
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages will be issued that does not meet the proximity requirements of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, and an applicant shall certify that the location of the establishment meets the requirements of such section. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-66. - License fee for sale of distilled spirits by the package or consumption on the premises. 
(a)  The annual fee for a retail license for the sale of distilled spirits by the package shall be $4,000.00. The annual fee for a retail license for the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be $4,000.00. Nonprofit clubs shall be charged an annual fee of $800.00 for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  Such annual fees shall not be prorated and are payable as prescribed in the Occupational Tax Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 12-6-94; Amd. of 10-20-09; Amd. of 10-16-12) 
State Law reference— Limitation on fee, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-50. 
Sec. 6-67. - License fee for sale of beer and wine. 
(a)  The annual fee for a retail license to sell beer by the package shall be $500.00. The annual fee for a retail license to sell beer for consumption on the premises shall be $500.00. 
(b)  The annual fee for a retail license to sell wine by the package shall be $500.00. The annual fee for a retail license to sell wine for consumption on the premises shall be $500.00. 
(c)  Such annual fees shall not be prorated and are payable as prescribed in the Occupational Tax Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 12-6-94; Amd. of 10-20-09; Amd. of 10-16-12) 
State Law reference— Authority to fix license fee, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-42. 
Sec. 6-68. - License fee for sale of alcoholic beverages by wholesalers. 
(a)  The annual fee for a wholesale license for the sale of beer shall be $100.00. 
(b)  The annual fee for a wholesale license for the sale of wine shall be $100.00. 
(c)  Such annual fees shall not be prorated and are payable as prescribed in the Occupational Tax Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2); Ord. of 12-6-94) 
State Law reference— Limitations on fee for wholesale licenses, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-50, 3-5-43. 
Sec. 6-69. - License expiration, date. 
Licenses will expire on December 31st. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-70. - Renewal of all alcoholic beverage licenses. 
All alcoholic beverage licenses in this division may be renewed by payment of the required fees provided: 
(1)  The license and location are the same; and 
(2)  The licensee is still in compliance with the requirements of state and county laws and regulations pertaining to the original issuance of the license and pertaining to the operation of the business under the license at the time of application for renewal; but 
(3)  If a complaint is received as to the licensee's alleged violation of state or county law or regulation, the license shall not be renewed but shall be referred to the board of commissioners for decision as to whether renewal shall be granted as follows: 
a.  The board of commissioners shall conduct a hearing after giving the licensee reasonable notice of the time and place of such hearing, as well as the purpose thereof; 
b.  The licensee may remain open for business until a decision by the board of commissioners is made and shall have a period of three days following that decision in which to pay the required fees if the decision of the board is to permit renewal of the license. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-71. - Sale of retail alcoholic beverage business. 
It shall be unlawful ( and shall call for immediate revocation of all licenses involved, both of the seller and purchaser) for any retail alcoholic beverage licensee to purchase the business of any other licensee and attempt to operate the purchased business with seller's license. In the event of a bona fide sale of any licensed retail business under this classification to persons other than licensed dealers, full disclosure of the persons involved, the purchase price, and such other information as the board of commissioners shall determine shall be given to them as a condition to this sale. In addition to the revocation of the license of any person violating the provisions of this section, the person shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-72. - Transferability; surrender of license upon sale; closing business. 
Licenses for the sale of distilled spirits only shall be transferable or assignable under the following conditions: 
(1)  Licenses may be transferred to members of the licensee's immediate family provided the transferee has first been approved to hold such license under the terms and conditions of this section. 
(2)  In the event of the death of a license holder, the holder's heirs or estate shall be permitted to operate the establishment or transfer the license to another qualified individual who has first been approved under the terms and conditions contained in this section. 
(3)  In no event shall any license be transferable if there are any fees, taxes or other revenues due to the county by the license holder. 
(4)  Any permitted transfers of licenses under this section shall be subject to a transfer fee payment of $125.00. 
(5)  In any other event in which a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender the license to the county clerk. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-73. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the county under this division shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Upon failure of the licensee to comply with the terms, provisions, requirements and responsibilities of this article, or upon the failure of the licensee to timely pay the annual license fee called for herein, or upon the violation by the licensee of any law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages or upon the conviction of the licensee of any felony, aggravated misdemeanor or drug-related conviction or upon licensee's permitted or maintaining a breach, or breaches, of the peace at licensee's establishment, or upon the existence of any other condition which would make the continued operation of the licensee's establishment detrimental, harmful or undesirable to the community, then the license provided for hereinunder may be suspended or revoked by the county. 
(c)  Upon information concerning any of the provisions outlined in this section hereinabove, the county shall serve notice upon licensee, by mail addressed to licensee's establishment, requiring him to appear before the board of commissioners and show cause why his license should not be suspended or revoked. This hearing shall not be held sooner than three days from the receipt of this notice, and the notice shall set forth the date, time and place of the hearing on the matter; this notice shall also state the condition alleged which could, if sustained, result in suspended or revocation of a licensee's license. 
(d)  Within five working days following the hearing on this matter, the board of commissioners shall render a decision on the matter, notifying licensee in writing of its decision by mail or by personally delivering it to licensee. In the event of revocation, no refund shall be made on any portion of any license fee paid and the establishment will cease to operate upon notification. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-74. - Bar disciplinary action reporting. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined in the same manner and in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1 as follows: 
Disciplinary action means any citation or arrest arising out of the violation of any law, rule, regulation, resolution, or ordinance of a governmental entity relating to the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of alcoholic beverages against a licensee, an employee of a licensee, or any person holding a financial interest in the license of the licensee on the premises or place of business of any licensee. 
Governmental entity means the United States government, any state governmental, any local government, and any department, agency, or instrumentality thereof. 
Licensee means any person issued a license pursuant to this title by a governmental entity to operate a bar. 
(b)  Notification and reporting of disciplinary actions. 
(1)  a.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1(b)(1), a licensee in Houston County shall be required to notify the Georgia Department of Revenue of the details of any disciplinary action taken against such licensee, including the date such action was taken, the nature of such action, and any other information required by the Georgia Department of Revenue. Such notification shall be reported within 45 days of any officer, department, agency, or instrumentality of the county taking such disciplinary action. 
b.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1(b)(2), the first violation of paragraph a. of subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be subject to a fine by the state revenue commissioner and a second or subsequent violation within a three-year period may constitute grounds for suspension, revocation, or cancellation of the license of the licensee. 
(2)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1(c), the county commissioner's office shall be required to report to the Georgia Department of Revenue any disciplinary action taken against a licensee. Such action shall be reported within 45 days of any officer, department, agency, or instrumentality of the county taking such disciplinary action. 
(3)  All notification and reporting of disciplinary actions under subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section shall be made by utilizing the reporting method implemented by rule[s] and regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(Amd. of 10-18-16) 
Secs. 6-75—6-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAX 

Sec. 6-91. - Tax to be in addition to other charges. 
The excise tax provided for in this division shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling alcoholic beverages at retail or wholesale, within the unincorporated area of the county. The county shall collect the maximum excise tax allowable by law upon the wholesale of malt beverages, spirituous liquors and wine as prescribed in O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-80, 3-4-80, 3-6-60, or as hereafter prescribed by subsequent state law. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-92. - Payment of taxes. 
The taxes levied in this division shall be paid by the retailer to the wholesaler at the time of delivery of the beverages to the retailer. It shall be the duty of each retailer to pay and it shall be the duty of each wholesaler to receive the proper amount of the tax levied upon each case delivered. It shall further be the duty of all persons, firms or corporations selling these beverages at wholesale or making delivery of them in the unincorporated area of the county to remit by the tenth of the calendar month all sums collected by the wholesaler during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-93. - Examination of books and records. 
The books and records of all wholesalers selling or delivering these beverages and all retailers thereof in the unincorporated area of the county shall be subject to inspection and audit by the agents of the county to ensure compliance herewith. It shall be unlawful for any person to deny to any authorized agent of the county reasonable access to its books and records and shall be the duty of each person to keep accurate records of payments and collections of the case tax and remittances. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-94. - Penalties. 
(a)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance required shall render a wholesaler liable for a penalty equal to 25 percent of the total due during the first 30-day period following the date the report and remittance were due and a further penalty of 50 percent of the amount of this remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof during which the report and the remittance were not filed. 
(b)  The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making the report liable to a penalty equal to 100 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(c)  Any person, wholesaler or retailer that shall violate the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed by the magistrate court and may in addition be subject to suspension or revocation of the license to sell such beverages. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-95. - Taxes collected upon delivery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any retailer of alcoholic beverages to receive and retain these beverages unless he shall have paid the tax thereon. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of alcoholic beverages to sell or deliver beverages to any retailer thereof unless he shall concurrently with this delivery collect the tax imposed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of alcoholic beverages to fail to remit to the county when promptly due, the taxes levied, and collected by the wholesaler. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged as a retailer of these beverages to receive these beverages from another retailer unless tax has been paid. 
(d)  It shall further be unlawful for any retailer of alcoholic beverages to receive and retail these beverages from another retail store, whether the other store shall be owned by the receiving retailer or not unless the tax shall have been paid and remitted to the county. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-96. - Unpaid taxes. 
Alcoholic beverages on which county taxes have not been paid are subject to seizure and may be destroyed or sold by public sale as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS 

Sec. 6-97. - Findings; public purpose. 
(a)  Based on the demonstrated experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including but not limited to Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; Dekalb County, Georgia; Orlando, Florida; Orange County, Florida; Indianapolis, Indiana; Los Angeles, California; Beaumont, Texas; Phoenix, Arizona; St. Paul, Minnesota; and Austin, Texas, which experience is found to be relevant to the problems that face Houston County. 
(b)  It is the finding of the Board of Commissioners of Houston County that public nudity (either partial or total) under circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "adult entertainment" in conjunction with the sale of alcoholic beverages, enhances criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. 
(c)  Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public indecency and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with the concentration of adult entertainment establishments are depreciation of property values in neighborhoods surrounding nude bars or adult entertainment establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burdens on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of adult establishments in particular areas. 
(d)  Other negative effects which were found by the board are the apparent connection of these establishments to organized crime and illegal drug sales; the potential spread of communicable disease to law enforcement personnel who answer calls at adult establishments and to patrons of such establishments; and the potential proliferation of adult entertainment establishments after the initial siting of an adult entertainment establishment in a particular neighborhood. 
(e)  The board, therefore, finds that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals and preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, and parks to prevent the adverse impact of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the board finds that the prohibition of live nude conduct establishments licensed to serve alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare of furthering legitimate governmental interest, such as reducing criminal activity, protecting against property devaluation and deterioration, and eliminating undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and allow and/or encourage nudity, and that such prohibition will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-98. - Conduct prohibited. 
The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or disperse alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within unincorporated area of the county. 
(1)  The employment or use of any person live, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose any portion of his or her specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her specified anatomical areas or where such person performs acts of specified sexual activities or acts which simulate specified sexual activity, as defined herein. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct proscribed in subsections (1) and (2) above. 
(4)  Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house or museum which derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Sec. 6-99. - Penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any acts prohibited in section 6-98 above and any such conduct will be a violation of this Code and shall be punishable as provided under section 1-11 of this Code. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit any conduct prohibited in section 6-98 above which he knows or has reasonable cause to know is taking place on the premises. Any such conduct by a licensee shall be a violation of this Code and shall be punishable as provided under section 1-11 of this Code. Also, upon conviction, a licensee may have his license revoked or suspended as provided in section 18-14 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-20-93(2)) 
Chapter 10 - UNIFIED ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 10 was repealed and reenacted in its entirety by a Resolution of June 7, 2005. Formerly, said chapter pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 30; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— City's and county's authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(3); livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
Abandonment means the intentional or complete forsaking of any animal by its owner, without making reasonable arrangements for the adequate care and custody of the animal to be assumed by another person or the failure to return and resume responsibility of an animal at the designated time as arranged with the care giver. Abandonment also means the act of placing an animal on public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or on or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property. An animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate and proper food and water for a period in excess of 36 hours, regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. 
Adequate food and water means food and water which is sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from a lack of food or water. 
(1)  Adequate food means palatable, non-contaminated and nutritionally adequate food that is appropriate for the species. Adequate food does not include garbage. 
(2)  Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water. 
Adequate shelter means a structure having three sides, a top and bottom which is suitable for the animal's size to protect it from cold, wind and rain and other elements. During cold weather, sufficient bedding inside the shelter shall be present. 
Altered means it shall be the duty of the owner of a dog or cat declared by an authority or court of competent jurisdiction to be a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animal, to have the animal surgically sterilized. Such sterilization must be performed by a licensed veterinarian within 30 days of a final order of an authority or court of competent jurisdiction declaring the animal to be a potentially dangerous animal, dangerous animal, or vicious animal. 
Animal means any living thing, not a plant, other than man. (excludes: rodents and insects.) 
Animal control officer means any person designated by the Houston County Board of Commissioners as a law enforcement officer or agency for the purpose of administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by the City of Warner Robins or the City of Perry in conjunction with the county or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
Cruelty means: 
(1)  Every act, omission, or neglect by which death, unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused, permitted, or allowed to continue to any animal when there is a reasonable remedy of relief. 
(2)  Also includes transporting an animal in an unrestrained open-air vehicle or transporting an unrestrained animal in the trunk of any vehicle or leaving an animal unattended in a closed vehicle without proper ventilation or temperature control, where the outside air temperature is 80 degrees Fahrenheit or above. 
(3)  Also means allowing or causing any animal to participate in training for or engaging in an animal fight operated for sport, entertainment or gaming purposes. Routine medical procedures by a licensed veterinarian shall not be regarded as cruelty. 
Electronic animal confinement system shall mean a commercially produced, functioning and professionally installed electronic fence which utilizes an invisible electrically generated perimeter, in which the animal within the perimeter wears an electronic collar that produces an electric shock when the animal approaches or exceeds the perimeter. 
Fence means any structure of wire, being 16 gauge or higher, wood, stone or other material, which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. A fence shall be sufficient to prevent the animal from being able to jump, dig, or escape from confinement; and shall have slats installed for chain link if it is the only barrier to contain a dangerous/vicious animal. 
Governing authority means the governing body or officials in which the legislative powers of Houston County are vested. 
Guard dog means any trained or untrained dog that is maintained for the purpose of safety or security and which is reasonably expected to attack persons or other animals independently or upon command. 
Humane care of animals means but is not limited to the provision of adequate shelter and wholesome and adequate food and water consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the breed. 
Inhumane care means any act, omission or neglect which causes unjustifiable physical pain suffering or death to any living animal. 
Inoculation against rabies means the injection subcutaneously or otherwise, of rabies vaccine approved by the state department of public health, and administered under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian and a certificate of vaccination or inoculation issued by the veterinarian. 
Jurisdiction means, for the enforcement of this chapter, the unincorporated areas of Houston County. 
Open-air vehicle means the cargo area of any pickup truck that is not covered by a permanent attached utility cover or any convertible vehicle with its top down. 
Owner means any person partnership or corporation owning, possessing, keeping or harboring one or more animals. A person who continually feeds a stray cat shall be considered its owner. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for seven or more consecutive days; or in the case of an animal owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor child. 
Pen means a pad locked, fenced area within a perimeter fenced area that has secure sides that are buried two feet in to the ground or sunken in concrete and a secure top. 
Public nuisance. An animal shall be deemed to be a public nuisance if the animal: 
(1)  Is permitted to go upon the property of another person other than its owner or keeper without the express consent of such other property owner or occupant; 
(2)  Attacks or acts so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways; 
(3)  Is permitted to cause annoyance, alarm, or noise disturbance for more than 15 minutes at any time of day or night, by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling, braying or other like sounds which can be heard beyond the boundary of the owner's property, where said such owner has been given one warning by law enforcement personnel to control the animal or animals. 
(4)  Is repeatedly running at large. 
(5)  Trespasses on school grounds. 
Records of appropriate authority means records of any county or municipal animal control agency, records of any county board of health, records of any federal, state or local courts, or records of an animal control officer provided for in this chapter. 
Residential lot means the lot with a dwelling located thereon, exclusive of any vacant lots adjacent thereto under the same ownership. 
Restraint means any animal which is: 
(1)  On a hand held leash; or 
(2)  At a heel or beside a competent person and obedient to the person's commands while on the owner's real property limits; or 
(3)  Within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets and roads of the county; or 
(4)  In a fenced area within the real property limits of the owner ( If zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RMH, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2 or PUD ); or 
(5)  Within the property limits of a R-Ag zone; or 
(6)  Within a designated off-leash area of the dog park; or 
(7)  Within an electronic animal confinement system and provided they are maintained in good working order and keep the animal contained; and 
a.  Contain permanent and prominently displayed signs around the perimeter of the electronic animal confinement system. The signs shall be clearly visible prior to entering such premises and shall read: "Caution - Electronic Animal Confinement System". 
(8)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to ensure that the animal is kept under restraint, and that precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of every owner to ensure that the enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended, after being issued a warning or citation by the dog control officer. 
(10)  It shall be the duty of every owner of a classified animal to ensure that the animal is securely and humanely enclosed within a proper enclosure as a means of restraint. 
Running-at-large means any animal which is off the property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person. 
(Res. of 6-7-05; Amd. of 9-7-10; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11 of the Houston County Code of Ordinances. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-3. - Citations. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter may be issued a citation for that violation to appear in Magistrate Court. Such a citation may be issued by an animal control officer, based upon his own personal knowledge or upon a sworn written statement of another person who has witnessed the violation, in which case the witness shall be subpoenaed to testify for Houston County in the court. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-4. - Joint government services. 
Any county or municipality or any combination of such local governments may contract or enter into agreements with each other for joint animal control services and codes and for the separate or joint use of personnel, facilities and equipment used in the provision of such services. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-5. - Designation and powers of animal control officer. 
(a)  The director of administration shall designate an individual to carry out the duties of an animal control officer as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  One animal control agency may carry out the duties of animal control for more than one local government pursuant to a contract or agreement under section 10-4. 
(c)  The animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Law enforcement agencies of local governments and the sheriffs of counties shall cooperate with animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Persons carrying out the duties of an animal control officer shall not be authorized to make arrests, unless the person is a law enforcement officer having the powers of arrest. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-6. - Authority to remove abused or neglected animals. 
Animal control officers shall be authorized to remove or cause to have removed to a safe location any animal that appears to be abused or suffering undue pain from abuse or neglect, as may be necessary to prevent further, suffering. A sheriff's deputy or animal control officer may use any force necessary to remove an animal locked in a closed vehicle when the ambient temperature is 80 degrees Fahrenheit or above outside the vehicle. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, the sheriff's deputy or animal control officer shall not be liable for any damage to the vehicle. The owner or possessor of the animal may be charged according to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4 concerning cruelty to animals. 
(Res. of 6-7-05; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-7. - Interference with animal control officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere, harass or otherwise obstruct the performance of any animal control officer in the official performance of their duties as provided for in this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-8. - Keeping of wild animals, livestock, or fowl. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to raise, keep or permit to be raised or kept on premises that he owns or controls within Houston County any wild nondomestic animal, or any cattle, horses, ponies, donkeys, mules, goats, sheep, or fowl, unless permitted by the ordinances of the county. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-9. - Restraint of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to keep any animal under restraint which is owned by or in the custody or control of such person. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-10. - Creation of nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance as defined in this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-11. - Confinement of female animals in season. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person who has custody or control of a female animal that is in season to fail to keep the female animal confined in such a manner that such female animal cannot come in contact with a male animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-12. - Animal neglect. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to provide his animals with sufficient and wholesome food and water, with proper shelter and protection from the weather, with veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment. 
(Res. of 6-7-05; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted June 20, 2017, changed the title of § 10-12 from "Animal care" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 10-13. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit acts of cruelty towards any animal; and 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cock fight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(Res. of 6-7-05; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
State Law reference— Dog fighting unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160. 
Sec. 10-14. - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an animal. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-15. - Exposure of poisons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the substance is liable to be eaten by any animal; provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with raw vegetable substances. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-16. - Removal of waste. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to: 
(1)  fail to immediately remove any excrement deposited by his animal on public property, walks, recreation areas or private property not owned or controlled by the owner of the animal. 
(2)  fail to remove any excrement from their property and dispose of this waste on a daily basis. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-17. - Confinement and quarantine of biting animals. 
It shall be unlawful for an animal that is known to have bitten a person not to be confined for the purpose of quarantine by a method to be determined by the county health department for a period of not less than ten days. All expenses incurred for such confinement and observation shall be paid by the owner of such animal. State law reference O.C.G.A. § 31-19 and the Georgia Rabies Control Manual. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-18. - Rabies inoculation for dogs and cats and ferrets. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat or ferret housed, kept or boarded past three months of age within the unincorporated or incorporated limits of the county to fail to have the animal(s) inoculated against rabies, and to have a rabies tag attached to animal's collar. The owner shall be liable for the inoculation of the animal. State law reference O.C.G.A. § 31-19 and the Georgia Rabies Control Manual. 
(Res. of 6-7-05; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted June 20, 2017, changed the title of § 10-18 from "Rabies inoculation for dogs and cats" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 10-19. - Number of dogs and cats per residential lot. 
It shall be unlawful for there to be more than three dogs and three cats on any residential lot subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Pet owners in compliance with any prior ordinance limiting the number of dogs and cats shall be allowed to continue to keep said number of animals. 
(2)  A litter of puppies or kittens will be permitted to remain on property for a period of 12 weeks after their birth. 
(3)  Limitation does not apply to residential lots of five (5) or more acres or for lots zoned Residential Agricultural (R-AG). 
(4)  Limitation does not apply to licensed foster home operators, breeders or other individuals who have been granted a waiver by the (board of commissioners / mayor and council) consistent with the procedures and criteria outlined in section 10-20. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-20. - Waiver to animal limitations. 
(a)  Upon application to and approval by the Houston County Board of Commissioners, a citizen may keep animals in greater numbers than provided in section 10-19 of this chapter, provided that the board of commissioners find that: 
(1)  There are exceptional and extraordinary circumstances existing such that a waiver should be granted; 
(2)  Granting the waiver would not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied to others; 
(3)  The wavier will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the neighborhood; and 
(4)  The applicant can demonstrate a special use or need to house animals in greater numbers than provided in section 10-19. This item shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, participation in a licensed animal rescue organization (licensed in State of Georgia), use of animals for therapeutic or other purposes, emergency care of pets owned by other persons, or other circumstances which are specified in the application for waiver. 
(b)  The person making application for such a wavier shall submit, with his/her application a fee of $100.00. A sign containing information as to the proposed waiver, and the date and time at which the application will be considered by the board of commissioners shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the property not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(c)  The application shall be sent to the board of commissioners for review, public hearing and approval/denial thereof. The board of commissioners shall have 30 days in which to make a decision. 
(d)  Any waiver approved by the board of commissioners may be revoked upon the applicant being found in violation of the nuisance provisions of this article. 
(e)  The waiver shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal of a waiver an animal control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with provisions of this article section. Failure to be in compliance shall cause the animal control officer to bring violations to the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 6-7-05; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-21. - Warning notice on premises using guard dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or custodian of property upon or within which a guard dog is located to fail to conspicuously and prominently post a notice on the outside of the property. Such notice shall comprise the words "Warning—Guard Dog" and shall be in clearly distinguishable block letters of either red or black on a white background which are easily read at a distance of 50 feet. In the case of a guard dog being kept inside a building or fence, such notice shall be conspicuously posted upon the building or fence at a distance not greater than 50 feet apart, as well as upon each and every entrance and exit to the building. In the case of apartments, condominiums or businesses located within a larger building where the guard dog is located within the apartment, condominium or business solely, this notice shall be conspicuously posted on each and every entrance and exit to the apartment, condominium or business. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-22. - Tethering. 
It shall be unlawful to restrain an animal by tethering or any similar use of chain, cable, rope, runner or other stakeout or tie-out device. 
(Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-23. - Limiting ownership. 
(a)  Any person convicted of cruelty, neglect or abandonment of animal shall not be allowed to adopt an animal from an animal shelter or rescue for at least three years after the date of conviction, without written waiver from the county commissioners; and 
(b)  Any person who has been convicted of cruelty, neglect or abandonment of animal as provided in this Code and has been required to or voluntarily relinquished ownership of said animal, shall not be allowed to own a pet in their household for at least three years from the date of conviction; and 
(c)  Any person who has been convicted of failure to keep animal under restraint while on owner's property as provided in this Code and has been required to provide additional confinement requirements and had not complied with the court's order, shall not be allowed to own a pet in their household for at least three years from the date of conviction. 
(Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-24. - Aggressive dogs. 
No person shall in any area zoned for residential use engage in the business of training dogs to attack humans or maintain dogs which are being trained to attack humans unless such use is expressly permitted under the applicable zoning regulations in effect for such residential area. 
(Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-25. - Dead animals. 
No person shall place any dead animal upon public property, their premises or upon the premises of any other person, or allow any dead animal to remain upon public property, their premises or any dead animal belonging to them to remain upon the premises of another without disposing of same or causing the same to be properly removed or disposed of within 24 hours. 
(Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-26. - Feeding of stray (feral) cats. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed stray and/or feral cats, where such feeding causes a nuisance to neighbors or businesses, or creates a condition contrary to the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-27. - Cats injuring or destroying property of others. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, or allow to be in or upon any premises occupied by him or her or under his or her charge or control, any cat that in any manner injures or destroys any real or personal property of any description belonging to another. 
(Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Secs. 10-28—10-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 10-76. - Animals subject to impoundment. 
Any animal that is out of control or unattended or otherwise in violation of this ordinance, whether or not the animal is on private or public property, may be impounded by the animal control officer in accordance with rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-77. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to notify the owner, if the owner is known or can be reasonably ascertained, of every animal impounded, by telephone, if possible, or by mail, within two workings days of the impoundment. The owner of any animal impounded may claim and take custody of the animal within four working days of such impoundment by the payment of an impoundment fee, plus the boarding fee and providing proof of rabies inoculation. If the animal is not current on rabies inoculation, the animal may be released to the owner and the owner shall have the animal inoculated within five working days and provide a copy of the rabies certificate to the animal control officer. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-78. - Impoundment fee. 
(a)  All fees for impoundment under this article shall be set from time to time by the Houston County Board of Commissioners. Impoundment fees are separate and distinct from penalties for violations of any part of this chapter. 
(b)  Effective July 1, 2005 impoundment fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense, $25.00. 
(2)  Second offense for the same animal, $50.00. 
(3)  Third and subsequent offense for the same animal, $100.00. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Sec. 10-79. - Disposition of unclaimed animals. 
The animal control officer shall be authorized to dispose of any animal impounded under this article in as humane and painless a manner as possible, or to donate any animal to a public or nonprofit institution or agency, if such animal has remained unclaimed for the prescribed period of time or if it has been injured and is suffering or in great pain and such animal does not display an identification tag and no determination of the owner can be made from a reasonable investigation. The disposal of any animal as provided in this section does not relieve the owner of any liability for any violation of this chapter. If the owner of any animal is known or ascertainable, but for a valid reason cannot be reached within the four working day period, the animal control officer shall be authorized to hold the animal until such time as the owner can be reached. 
(Res. of 6-7-05) 
Secs. 10-80—10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESPONSIBLE DOG OWNERSHIP[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment of Aug. 21, 2012, repealed art. III in its entirety and enacted a new art. III to read as set out herein. Former art. III, §§ 10-101—10-109, pertained to dangerous dog control and derived from a resolution adopted June 7, 2005; and amendment adopted Feb. 5, 2008; and an amendment adopted Nov. 15, 2011(1). 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 10-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Altered means it shall be the duty of the owner of a dog or cat declared by an authority or court of competent jurisdiction to be a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animal, to have the animal surgically sterilized. Such sterilization must be performed by a licensed veterinarian within 30 days of a final order of an authority or court of competent jurisdiction declaring the animal to be a potentially dangerous animal, dangerous animal, or vicious animal. 
Classified animal means any animal that has been classified as either dangerous or vicious animal pursuant to this article. Classifications are permanent until the death of the animal. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph. 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog; where certain conditions apply, see section 10-102; or 
(4)  Has previously been found to be a potentially dangerous animal and has repeated the same behavior under potentially dangerous animal subsections (1), (2), or (3). 
Fence means any structure of wire, being 16 gauge or higher, wood, stone or other material, which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. A fence shall be sufficient to prevent the animal from being able to jump, dig, or escape from confinement; and shall have slats installed for chain link if it is the only barrier to contain a dangerous/vicious animal. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation partnership, firm or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or care or control of an animal. In the case of an animal owned by a minor, the term 'owner' includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Pen means a pad locked, fenced area within a perimeter fenced area that has secure sides that are buried two feet in to the ground or sunken in concrete and a secure top. 
Potentially dangerous animal means any animal that: 
(1)  Endangers the safety of humans; or 
(2)  An animal that bites or attacks a person or pet animal without causing injury; or 
(3)  An animal that has been found "running at large" more than one time in a six-month period; or 
(4)  Which, because of temperament, conditioning, or training has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, bite, or injure humans or other animals without provocation. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping: 
(1)  A potentially dangerous animal, while on the owners property, securely and locked confined indoors or in a securely enclosed pad locked fenced in area. Such enclosure shall be suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. All sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
(2)  A dangerous animal, while on the owner's property, securely confined indoors or inside an enclosed and locked pen constructed with a fence of 16 gauge or lower, or inside a fence of 16 gauge or lower with slats inserted, if said fence is the only barrier to maintain said dangerous animal and maintained and suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top. If the animal is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
(3)  A vicious animal, while on the owner's property, securely confined and enclosed and locked pen, with fence 16 gauge or higher, and shall be separate from the chain link fencing and it shall have slats, and such structure shall be suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top and a secure bottom. The pen shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
Residential lot means the lot with a dwelling located thereon, exclusive of any vacant lots adjacent thereto under the same ownership. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsion; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious animal means any animal that: 
(1)  Inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the animal's attack; or 
(2)  In the opinion of a judge, presents a threat of serious harm to other animals or humans; or 
(3)  Has previously attacked or bitten a human or injured a pet animal and has attacked or bitten a human or pet animal for second time; or 
(4)  Has been previously classified as a dangerous animal and has attacked or bitten a human or pet animal for second time. 
(Amd. of 8-21-12; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-102. - Exemptions from article. 
No dog shall be classified as a potentially dangerous dog, dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement or military officer's official duties. No dog shall be classified as a potentially dangerous dog, dangerous dog or vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Training, hunting, herding exemption from dangerous dog restraint/leash requirement: 
(1)  In addition to the requirements otherwise specified by this Code section and O.C.G.A. § 4-8-29(a)(3), the person training the dog(s) must be the owner thereof, and must be in compliance with all department of natural resources requirements including without limitation: 
a.  A valid hunting license on his/her persons; 
b.  Has the consent of the property owner where he/she is hunting; 
c.  Training, hunting, herding and/or predator control cannot take place off the property of the owner thereof, unless with the express written permission and acknowledgement of dangerousness of the dog granted by the owner of the land being used; and 
d.  Only with a dog that will instantly respond to the verbal commands of the dog's owner, including without limitation a command to immediately heel and/or return to the owner. 
(Amd. of 8-21-12; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-103. - Violation of article. 
Except as otherwise specified in this article, any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous or vicious animal to leave said animal: 
(1)  Unattended with minors. 
(2)  A person who violates subsection (1) of this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous or vicious animal to leave said animal unattended with other pets. 
(Amd. of 8-21-12; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-104. - Animal control board. 
(a)  The board of commissioners hereby establish an animal control board to hold hearings as provided by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23(a)(1). This board is created in conjunction with the cities of Warner Robins, Centerville and Perry and shall be comprised of one representative each from the Houston County Board of Commissioners and the cities of Centerville, Perry and Warner Robins. 
(b)  No member of the animal control board may participate in a hearing on any matter in which such member previously participated in the classification of the animal at issue. 
(Amd. of 8-21-12) 
Sec. 10-105. - Investigation; notice to owner. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term: 
Authority means a court of competent jurisdiction an animal control board or local board of health, as determined by the governing authority of a local government; provided, however, that if an authority has not been established for the jurisdiction, the owner shall be informed of the right to request a hearing from the probate court for such jurisdiction where the dog was found or confiscated within five days after the date shown on the notice. 
Mail means to send by certified parcel mail or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
(b)  Upon receiving a report of an animal believed to be subject to classification as a potentially dangerous animal within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such animal is subject to classification as a potentially dangerous animal. 
(1)  Dog control officer shall mail a dated notice within 72 hours. 
(2)  Notice shall include dog control officer's determination and shall state what qualifications/regulations the owner must be in accordance with. 
(3)  Shall have no appeal process under potentially dangerous classification. 
(4)  If it is determined that the potentially dangerous animal shall be classified as a dangerous animal, the owner shall comply with the requirements under section for dangerous animal. 
(c)  Dangerous animal or vicious animal within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such animal is subject to classification as a dangerous animal or vicious animal. 
(d)  When a dog control officer determines that an animal is subject to classification as a dangerous animal or vicious animal, the dog control officer shall mail a dated notice to the animal's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the authority on the dog control officer's determination within five business days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. 
(e)  When a hearing is requested by an animal owner in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 15 days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the authority or probate court for good cause shown. At least five days prior to the hearing, the authority or probate court conducting the hearing shall mail to the animal owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the animal owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the authority or probate court conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify which only means to upgrade or downgrade classification, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
(f)  Within ten days after the hearing, the authority or probate court which conducted the hearing shall mail written notice to the animal owner of its determination on the matter. If the determination is that the animal is to be euthanized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(g)  Judicial review of the authority's final decision may be had in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.9. Judicial review of a probate court's final decision shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 5-3-2 and costs shall be paid as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-3-22. 
(Amd. of 8-21-12; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted June 20, 2017, repealed former § 10-106 which pertained to procedures for classification, and derived from an amendment adopted Aug. 21, 2012. 
Sec. 10-107. - Duties of owner; registration fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this state a potentially dangerous animal, or classified animal without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this Code section. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified by this section, a certificate of registration for a potentially dangerous animal shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained a proper enclosure for a potentially dangerous animal; and 
(2)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the animal; and owner must provide verifiable proof of registration to the dog control officer within five business days; and shall be kept up to date; and 
(3)  The animal has been altered and owner must provide verifiable proof to the dog control officer within 30 days from date of classification; and 
(4)  The animal is current on rabies inoculations and provide proof and attach rabies tag to animal's collar at all times; and 
(5)  The owner nor any occupant of such residence, where said owner is residing, is already in possession of a potentially dangerous or classified animal; and no certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article; and no person shall be the owner of more than one potentially dangerous, or classified animal; and 
(6)  Owner or lessor of said property, where owner of animal resides, must give written consent granting approval and knowledge that the resident owns a potentially dangerous animal. 
(7)  Notify dog control officer upon the animal being sold, transferred ownership, died or attacked a human or pet animal with 24 hours or owner has moved. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specified by this section, a certificate of registration for a dangerous animal shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner had maintained a proper enclosure designed for a dangerous animal; and 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at or on all entrances to the pen and posted at the entrance to the premises where the animal resides; and 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the animal; and owner must provide verifiable proof of registration to the dog control officer within five business days; and shall be kept up to date; and 
(4)  The animal has been altered and owner must provide verifiable proof to the dog control officer within 30 days from classification or date of hearing; and 
(5)  The animal is current on rabies inoculations and provide proof and attach rabies tag to animal's collar at all times; and 
(6)  The owner nor any occupant of such residence, where said owner is residing, is already in possession of a potentially dangerous or classified animal, or any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this section; and no person shall be the owner of more than one potentially dangerous, or classified animal; and 
(7)  The owner shall maintain and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous animal against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the animal; and 
(8)  No owner can keep/house a classified animal within 200 yards of any structure or manmade improvement that is an aquatic center, church, convenience store, daycare, grocery store, hospital, humane society, library, nursing home, park, playground, restaurant, school, skilled nursing unit, or walking trail, due in part to these areas being frequented by children and senior citizens, and in some cases having food present; and 
(9)  Owner or lessor of said property, where owner of animal resides, must give written consent granting approval and knowledge that resident owns a potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal; and 
(10)  Owner of a dangerous animal shall be charged an annual registration fee of $300.00. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specified by this section, a certificate of registration for a vicious animal shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the animal on the owner's property in a securely pad-locked and enclosed pen; and 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at or on all entrances to the pen and posted at the entrance to the premises where the animal resides; and 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the animal; and owner must provide verifiable proof of registration to the dog control officer within five business days; and shall be kept up to date; and 
(4)  The animal has been altered and owner must provide verifiable proof to the dog control officer within 30 days of classification or date of hearing; and 
(5)  The animal is current on rabies inoculations and provide proof and attach rabies tag to animal's collar at all times; and 
(6)  The owner nor any occupant of such residence, where said owner is residing, is already in possession of a potentially dangerous or classified animal, or any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this section; and no person shall be the owner of more than one potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animal; and 
(7)  Owner or lessor of said property, where owner of animal resides, must give written consent granting approval and knowledge that resident owns a vicious animal. 
(8)  The owner shall maintain and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious animal against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the animal; and 
(9)  No owner can keep/house a classified animal within 200 yards of any structure or manmade improvement that is an aquatic center, church, convenience store, daycare, grocery store, hospital, humane society, library, nursing home, park, playground, restaurant, school, skilled nursing unit, or walking trail, due in part to these areas being frequented by children and senior citizens, and in some cases having food present. 
(10)  Owner of a vicious animal shall be charged an annual registration fee of $300.00. 
(e)  No certificate shall be issued to the owner of more than one potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animal nor any occupant of such residence, where said owner is residing, is already in possession of a potentially dangerous or classified animal, or any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this section. 
(f)  No person shall be the owner of more than one potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal. 
(g)  No certificate of registration for a vicious animal shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dog fighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-31 and O.C.G.A. § 16-13-31.1 from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his or her sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(h)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal, a dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with provisions of this article. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(i)  The owner of a classified animal shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the animal is on the loose or has attacked a human or attacked a pet animal and shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the animal has died or has been euthanized. 
(j)  A vicious animal shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
(k)  The owner of a potentially dangerous animal or classified animal who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the State of Georgia shall register the potentially dangerous or classified animal in the new jurisdiction within ten days of becoming a resident and notify the dog control officer of the jurisdiction from which he or she moved. The owner of a similarly classified animal who moves into this state shall register the animal as required in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27 within 30 days of becoming a resident. 
(Amd. of 8-21-12; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-108. - Confinement. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner of a: 
(1)  Potentially dangerous animal to allow that animal outside of a proper enclosure unless that animal is: 
a.  On a leash less than four feet; and 
b.  Is under the immediate control of a person capable of preventing the animal from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; and 
c.  Flexi-leashes are not allowed. 
(2)  Dangerous animal or vicious animal to allow that animal outside of a proper enclosure unless that animal is: 
a.  On a leash less than four feet; and 
b.  Is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the animal from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; and 
c.  Shall have on a wire basket muzzle at all times; and 
d.  Flexi-leashes are not allowed. 
(Amd. of 8-21-12; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-109. - Confiscation of dogs. 
(a)  A potentially dangerous animal, dangerous animal or vicious animal shall be immediately confiscated by any dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation of this article. A refusal to surrender an animal subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  The owner of any animal that has been confiscated pursuant to this article may recover such animal upon payment of all reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this article, unless such confiscation is deemed to be in error by a dog control officer, an authority, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23, or a probate court. All fines and all charges for services performed by a law enforcement or dog control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the animal. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the animal. 
(c)  In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 14 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such animal shall be released to an animal shelter, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-14-2, or euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. The owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(Amd. of 8-21-12; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-110. - Liability. 
Under no circumstances shall Houston County or its employees or officials be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by an animal as a result of a failure to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Amd. of 8-21-12; Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Sec. 10-111. - Reclassification. 
(a)  (1)  Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as a potentially dangerous dog shall on and after that date be classified as a dangerous dog under this article. 
(2)  Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall on and after that date be classified as a vicious dog under this article. 
(b)  The owner of any dog referred to in subsection (a) of this Code section shall come into compliance with all current provisions of this article by January 1, 2013. 
(Amd. of 8-21-12) 
Sec. 10-112. - Jurisdiction, power, and duties of probate courts. 
(a)  In addition to any other jurisdiction vested in the probate courts, such courts shall have the right and power to hear cases of violations of O.C.G.A. Title 4 Chapter 8 Article 2 and to impose: 
(1)  Civil penalties for such violations, other than euthanasia; and 
(2)  Criminal penalties for such violations as provided by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-32. 
(b)  An appeal from a decision by an animal control board or local board of health pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23(f) shall lie in probate court. No appeal shall be heard in probate court until costs which have accrued in the tribunal below have been paid, unless the appellant files with the probate court or with the tribunal appealed from an affidavit stating that because of indigence he or she is unable to pay the costs on appeal. In all cases, no appeal shall be dismissed in the probate court because of nonpayment of the costs below until the appellant has been directed by the court to do so and has failed to comply with the court's direction. 
(c)  Filing of the notice of appeal and payment of costs or filing of an affidavit as provided in subsection (b) of this Code section shall act as supersedeas, and it shall not be necessary that a supersedeas bond be filed; provided, however, that the probate court upon motion may at any time require that supersedeas bond with good security be given in such amount as the court may deem necessary unless the appellant files with the court an affidavit stating that because of indigence he or she is unable to give bond. 
(Amd. of 6-20-17) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; personnel, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 68; zoning, ch. 72. 
State Law reference— Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); adoption and continuation of state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; state-wide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Board of adjustments and appeals. 
There is hereby established a board of adjustments and appeals for the county. This board is to consist of one licensed architect, one engineer or general contractor and five other people involved in some capacity in the building business. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1125; Res. of 10-1-91; Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 11) 
Sec. 14-2. - Approval of sewage disposal facilities. 
The building official shall not issue any building permits until a site approval is received from the health department for proper sewage disposal. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1122) 
Sec. 14-3. - Contents of permits for utility companies. 
No permit shall be issued under this chapter to any utility company unless the permit has shown thereon the type of facility to be installed and specifies its location. A map shall accompany each permit. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1124) 
Secs. 14-4—14-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 14-36. - Technical building and construction codes adopted. 
The following technical building and construction codes are adopted by reference and may be amended for later editions as required by the Georgia Uniform Codes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25: 
(1)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code (International Building Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(2)  Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code (International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings with Georgia State Amendments); 
(3)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code (International Fire Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(4)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code (International Plumbing Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(5)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code (International Mechanical Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(6)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code (International Gas Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(7)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code (National Electrical Code with Georgia State Amendments); and 
(8)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code (International Energy Conservation Code with Georgia State Supplements and Amendments). 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-1001, 8-1011, 8-1021, 8-1031, 8-1041, 8-1051, 8-1061; Res. of 10-1-91; Ord. of 4-12-94(2); Res. of 8-2-08) 
Secs. 14-37—14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the State of Georgia's mandatory building and construction codes with Georgia State Amendments as referenced in section 14-36 for unincorporated Houston County. 
(Res. of 10-3-95; Res. of 8-2-08) 
Sec. 14-52. - Code remedial. 
(a)  General. This Code is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this Code, except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan by the county under the requirements of this Code, shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. No jurisdiction or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-53. - Scope—Applicability. 
(a)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this Code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code and International Residential Code with Georgia Amendments shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(c)  Electrical. The provisions of the International Electrical Code with Georgia Amendments shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(d)  Gas. The provisions of the International Gas Code with Georgia Amendments shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances, and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories. 
(e)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code with Georgia Amendments shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems. 
(f)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code with Georgia State Amendments shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenance, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(g)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code with Georgia State Amendments shall apply to all matters safeguarding life and property from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of materials, structures or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation. 
(h)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code with Georgia State Supplements and Amendments shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings with regard to energy efficiency. 
(Res. of 10-3-95; Res. of 8-2-08) 
Sec. 14-54. - Same—Federal and state authority. 
The provisions of this Code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this Code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-55. - Same—Appendices. 
To be enforceable, the appendices included in the technical codes must be referenced in the code text or specifically included in the adopting ordinance. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-56. - Same—Referenced standards. 
Standards referenced in the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes without separate adoption. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-57. - Same—Maintenance. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices of safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-58. - Building department. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established a department to be called the Houston County Building Inspection Department and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this Code, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the county in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the county attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in such report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustments and appeals during such year. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-59. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-60. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-61. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system in violation of a detailed statement of drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Secs. 14-62—14-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 14-71. - Authorization. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Code. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of this Code, which are consistent with their spirit and purpose. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-72. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by the Code, provided that if such buildings or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner of occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-73. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provision of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-74. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this Code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application of plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this Code. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-75. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
(a)  All buildings, structures, substantially damaged by fire in which the electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(b)  Whenever a building or structure is repaired, boarded and secured, or demolished in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the cost of such repair, boarding and securing, or demolition is borne by the county, procedures for the budgeting, expenditure and recovery of such funds shall be as set forth herein: 
(1)  Upon expiration of the appeal period and with no appeal having been taken, the building official, after proceeding under this article, shall report the abatement of the nuisance by the county to the county commission which shall assess the entire cost of such abatement action against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. The entire cost of the abatement, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition when employed, all administrative costs, postal expense, newspaper publication and the like shall be a lien against the real property upon which such costs were incurred. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(2)  As soon as possible after the adoption of the resolution assessing the lien, the director of administration shall mail a copy of such resolution to the owner of the parcel of land described in the resolution at the last available address for such owner as shown by reference to the latest approved ad valorem tax roll. 
(3)  The county attorney shall record a certified copy of such resolution in the office of the clerk of superior court. After filing a copy of the lien with the clerk of superior court, the county attorney shall forward a copy of the lien and a final statement of costs to the tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the county whose ordinance is being enforced. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(Res. of 10-3-95; Amend. of 10-6-09) 
Sec. 14-76. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-77. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Secs. 14-78—14-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 14-91. - Application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
Exception: Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance. 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment. 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit. 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this Code. 
(5)  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe. 
(6)  Any portable evaporate cooler. 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(b)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. 
(c)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(d)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(e)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-92. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details computations, stress diagrams and other data necessary to describe the construction or installations and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice or architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to such drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All group A (large assembly), E and I occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m2) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
Exception: Group R3 buildings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect or engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistant wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistant floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(f)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazardous materials stores. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous material stored. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-93. - Examination of documents. 
(a)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-94. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-95. - Contractors responsibilities. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, fire or energy systems for which a permit is required, to comply with state and local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. 
(b)  Any person offering contracting or construction services as a general contractor in excess of $2,500.00 in materials, labor, or any combination thereof shall hold the proper class of state contractor's license issued by the state licensing board for residential and general contractors prior to the issuance of any permit. Specialty contractors and agricultural and farm buildings are exempt from the contractor licensing requirements. 
(c)  Property owners may still act as their own general contractor when constructing a building or structure for their own personal use and not for use by the general public and not offered for sale or lease. However, for a property owner to be exempt from the state licensing requirement, he or she may not construct more than one building or structure in any 24-month period. All property owners shall sign an affidavit to such before the issuance of any permit. 
(Res. of 10-3-95; Res. of 8-2-08) 
Sec. 14-96. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction or violations of this Code. Every permit issued shall become invalid, unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(b)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which in the opinion of the building official are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(c)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall endorse in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings to reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-97. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the county have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other moneys collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(c)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the schedule as established by the county board of commissioners. 
(d)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-98. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture of fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(c)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(d)  Posing of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected for the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(e)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical codes: 
Foundations: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
Drywall: To be made after the roof, framing, plumbing, gas, electrical, mechanical, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of insulation, wall or ceiling membranes. 
Final inspections: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures, plumbing fixtures, mechanical and gas systems are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. Furthermore, the posting of the energy code compliance certificate in accordance with the Georgia State Energy Code. 
(f)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(g)  Reinforcing steel and structural frames. Reinforcing steel or structural frame work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(h)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied under the release from the building official has been received. 
(Res. of 10-3-95; Amd. of 11-15-11) 
Sec. 14-99. - Certificates—Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Such certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, sewage disposal and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances. The environmental health inspector shall be responsible for inspecting and releasing all on-site sewage disposal systems. The building official shall inspect and release all other building component systems. 
(b)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, sewage disposal and fire protection systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, after the final inspection and a copy of the energy code compliance certificate being on file with the building inspection department. 
(c)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(d)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings or general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(Res. of 10-3-95; Res. of 3-20-07; Amd. of 11-15-11) 
Sec. 14-100. - Service utilities. 
(a)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure of system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-101. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distribute. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record or the building department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-102. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Secs. 14-103—14-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS 

Sec. 14-111. - Appointment. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of seven members and two alternates. The board shall be appointed by the county board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-112. - Membership and terms. 
(a)  Membership. The construction board of adjustment and appeals should consist of seven members. Such board members should be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience in the technical codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members there should be two alternate members, one member at large from the building industry and one member at large from the public. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(b)  Terms. The terms of office of the board members shall be staggered so no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. The two alternates, if appointed, shall serve one year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(c)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this Code, the affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three affirmative votes shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than four affirmative votes, but not less than a majority of the board, shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(d)  Secretary of board. The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all of its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-113. - Powers. 
The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power, as further defined, to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the technical codes. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-114. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of this Code do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form or installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of this Code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. The construction board of adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all or the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  The granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Code to other buildings, structures or serve system. 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this Code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Conditions of the variance. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(d)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building official. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(e)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building officials, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may in his order, limit the time for such appeals to a shorter period. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 14-115. - Procedures of the board. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(b)  Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of this Code, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Res. of 10-3-95) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted on Oct. 18, 1994, repealed former ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-15, 18-31—18-36 and 18-51—18-54, which pertained to similar subject matter, and added a new ch. 18 to read as herein set out. Article IV, §§ 18-71—18-96 of former ch. 18 have been redesignated as ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-26. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 68; zoning, ch. 72. 

Sec. 18-1. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in unincorporated Houston County. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in unincorporated Houston County, Georgia, whether with a location in unincorporated Houston County or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall register and pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in unincorporated Houston County, Georgia. If the tax payer has no permanent business location in unincorporated Houston County, Georgia, such business tax registration shall be shown to the management services director or this officer's deputies upon request. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-2. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
Wherever the term: 
County is used herein, it shall be construed to mean Houston County, Georgia. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee means any individual working full-time or part-time for the business. The fractional working times of part-time employees shall be combined and rounded to provide a more accurate count of employees hired by a business. The owner and other family members working for a business, whether paid or not, shall also be defined as employees and included in the employee count. 
Houston County is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean Houston County, Georgia; 
Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an application fee. Development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-3. - Regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
The county reserves the right to impose a regulatory fee as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9, on those businesses it customarily investigates or inspects as a protection to the public health, safety or welfare or in the course of enforcing state or local building, health or safety codes. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-4. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner as of January first of each tax year. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule; number of employees. The tax rate determined by number employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the director of administration. 

 
(c)  A one-time application fee of $15.00 shall be assessed those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations applying for an occupational tax certificate issued by the Houston County Commissioners. If the applicant is required to go before the board of zoning appeals, then the application fee shall be waived. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94; Amd. of 10-5-04; Amd. of 10-4-07(1)) 
Sec. 18-5. - Issuance of tax certificate; proper zoning required; revocation of tax certificate. 
(a)  Under the payment of the occupational taxes assessed in this article, it shall be the duty of the commissioners office to issue to each person an occupational tax certificate, provided that all information required has been furnished; and provided further that the applicant is not disentitled to such under other provisions of this Code, or federal or state law. Any corporate applicant may be required to produce a certificate from the Secretary of State of Georgia that such corporation is in good standing according to the records of his office. 
(b)  No tax certificate shall be issued unless the business and premises for which such application is made shall comply to all respects with the county comprehensive land use and zoning ordinance and with all other laws and ordinances applicable thereto of whatever jurisdiction. 
(c)  A tax certificate shall not be issued or a current tax certificate shall be revoked if the business fails to pay personal property taxes to the county. Payment of said taxes shall allow said tax certificate to be issued or reinstated. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94; Amd. of 1-18-11) 
Editor's note— Amd. of Jan. 18, 2011, changed the title of § 18-5 from issuance of tax certificate; proper zoning required to issuance of tax certificate; proper zoning required; revocation of tax certificate. 
Sec. 18-6. - Change of address. 
Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the commissioners office of this move and the new address in writing no later than 30 days after moving. The same occupational tax certificate will be valid at the new location provided the person still complies with all land use and zoning laws at the new location. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-7. - Change of ownership. 
No occupational tax certificate may be transferred from one person to another. Additions to or deletions from the ownership of a business which do not affect the liability and the principal ownership of a business for which the certificate is issued may be made without cancelling the old occupational tax certificate and applying for a new certificate. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-8. - When liable; advertising. 
Any person advertising by signs, cards, circulars, newspaper advertising or otherwise that he is in business of any kind shall be held liable for the tax required for this business. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-9. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state of Georgia if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in Houston County and the business or practitioner has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of Houston County for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-10. - Line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the county shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-11. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in Houston County. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-12. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. 48-13-9(c), paragraphs 1 through 18. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees. 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done on or before March thirty-first of each year. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-13. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-14. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 through 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-15. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent; payment of tax prorated. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by February 28 of each year, be subject to a 25 percent penalty for delinquency. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in Houston County in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a 25 percent penalty imposed. In addition to the 25 percent penalty, Houston County shall be authorized to charge 1.5 percent interest per month (18 percent per year) on all delinquent taxes. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the county commissioners office and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in Houston County any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this chapter without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the appropriate county judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, either or both in the discretion of the county judge. 
(b)  Any business commencing after July first shall be taxed at one-half the annual prescribed rate. The tax shall be payable in a single installment and expire on December thirty-first of each year. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94; Mo. of 5-16-95; Mo. of 7-20-99) 
Sec. 18-16. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the employee tax method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. Those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of Houston County shall be taxes only on those employees who work at locations within the county's local jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-17. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this chapter shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-18. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-19. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-20. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this chapter shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this chapter, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in Houston County after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in Houston County any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-21. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 60 days, either or both, in the discretion of the county judge. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-22. - Subpoena and arrest powers. 
The director of administration or his designee is duly designated to have full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business tax ordinance for 1995 and succeeding years. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-23. - Businesses not covered by this chapter. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-24. - Inspections of books and records. 
The county, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The management services director shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in Houston County, Georgia, and upon demand of the management services director such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the county within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept in Houston County, Georgia, for examination by the management services director at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of ten percent will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-25. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any occupation tax registration granted by the county under this chapter permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new occupation tax registration shall be granted by the county for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the management services director in accordance with provisions found in section 18-24. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-26. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the county commission to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-27. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This chapter shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the Houston County Board of Commissioners. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-28. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the Houston County Board of Commissioners shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Sec. 18-29. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this chapter between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94) 
Chapter 19 - OTHER BUSINESS OPERATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of Apr. 20, 2010 changed the title of Ch. 19 from transient vendors, solicitors and peddlers to other business operations. 

ARTICLE I. - TRANSIENT VENDORS, SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of Apr. 20, 2010 designated existing §§ 19-1—19-6 as Art. I, transient vendors, solicitors and peddlers. 

Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Transient vendors means those who have no permanent or regular place of business within the county and who sell articles of any kind in the county. 
For the purpose of this section, the terms "permanent" and "regular" mean: 
1.  Any person, corporation, partnership or any other legal entity which operates any sort of enterprise, as described above, who owns the real property or building from which said business is transacted; or 
2.  Any person, corporation, partnership or any other legal entity which operates any sort of enterprise, as described above, upon any property or building which is leased or rented for a period of 12 months or longer from which such business is transacted. 
Solicitors means those who act as an agent that solicits house to house or makes personal phone calls displaying samples of products either delivered at the time of sale or shipped directly from the manufacturer. 
Peddlers means those engaged in selling fruits, vegetables and Christmas trees not grown on the premises. 
(Amd. of 6-1-04(2); Amd. of 4-20-10) 
Sec. 19-2. - License required; application; information; fee; violation. 
(a)  No transient vendor, solicitor or peddler shall sell any article in the county without having first made application for a license to do business. 
(b)  Said application shall include a copy of a consent form obtained from the sheriff's office authorizing a GCIC/NCIC criminal history check of the applicant. The applicant is responsible for the cost of the criminal history check. No person shall receive any transient vendor, solicitor or peddlers license in unincorporated Houston County who has been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony for three years immediately prior to the filing of the application. 
(c)  All persons must be at least 18 years of age to provide solicitation service in unincorporated Houston County. 
(d)  Any person who shall undertake to do business as a transient vendor without having complied with the terms of this article or who shall make any false statements in any application for a transient vendor's license shall be guilty of an offense. 
(e)  It is necessary to have transient vendors, solicitors or peddlers selling any articles in unincorporated Houston County to have state and national criminal background check. 
(f)  This section is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 35-3-35(a)(1) to regulate the issuance of licenses of those engaged in being transient vendors, solicitors or peddlers in unincorporated Houston County. 
(g)  An applicant or volunteer seeking to engage in being a transient vendor, solicitor, or peddler shall submit, if required, two sets of his/her fingerprints taken by the Houston County Sheriff's Department to Houston County Commissioner's Office. 
(h)  Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, Houston County will transmit the fingerprints and appropriate fees (unless a satisfactory billing arrangement has been entered into between Houston County and the Georgia Bureau of Investigations) to the Georgia Bureau of Investigations (GBI). The GBI will compare the subject's fingerprints against its criminal file and (1) if no disqualifying conduct is found therein (or) (2) if necessary, submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI) for a comparisons with nationwide records. The results of the FBI check will be returned to the GBI which will disseminate the state and national results to Houston County. 
(i)  If an employer or organization is a private entity, Houston County shall render a fitness determination based upon the results of the criminal background check and communicate its fitness determination to such private employer or organization. If an employer or organization is a public entity, Houston County shall: 
(1)  Render a fitness determination based upon the results of the criminal background check and communicate its fitness determination to such public entity, or 
(2)  Disseminate the results of the criminal background check to the public entity for a fitness determination. 
(j)  In rendering a fitness determination, Houston County will decide whether the record subject has been convicted of or is under pending indictment for: 
(1)  A crime which bears upon his/her ability or fitness to be a transient vendor, solicitor or peddler in unincorporated Houston County; or 
(2)  Any felony or a misdemeanor which involved force or threat of force, controlled substances, or was a sex-related offense; or 
(3)  Enumerated disqualifiers. 
(k)  A record subject may request and receive a copy of his/her criminal history record information from Houston County. Should the record subject seek to amend or correct his/her record, he/she must contact the GBI for a Georgia state record or the FBI for records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(Amd. of 6-1-04(2); Amd. of 2-19-13) 
Sec. 19-3. - License fees. 
License fees to do business in unincorporated Houston County as a transient vender, solicitor or peddler shall be the same as those charged businesses with a permanent place of business. 
(Amd. of 6-1-04(2)) 
Sec. 19-4. - Permitted locations; restriction. 
Transient venders and peddlers shall be permitted to locate in unincorporated areas of the county only if the proposed location of any such transient vendor has a zoning classification of C-2. 
(Amd. of 6-1-04(2)) 
Sec. 19-5. - Lease required. 
No transient vendor or peddler shall be permitted to operate his business with unincorporated Houston County without proof of a written lease from the owner of the property upon which such transient vendor business is to be operated. 
(Amd. of 6-1-04(2)) 
Sec. 19-6. - Orderly display. 
Any displays of samples, model goods, wares or merchandise by any transient merchant must be arranged in an orderly manner and must be placed upon some sort of structure other than the paved space upon which the business is located. 
(Amd. of 6-1-04(2)) 
Secs. 19-7—19-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS/LIMOUSINE SERVICE 

Sec. 19-10. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business license fee means a regulatory fee paid to the county to ensure the qualifications and records of drivers of taxicabs and other vehicles for hire, as well as the safety and comfort of taxicabs. 
Taxicab means a motor-driven vehicle of not more than eight-passenger capacity operated by the owner thereof or an agent, lessee or employee of the owner and which is regularly available for hire to transport persons within or outside unincorporated Houston County. 
Taxicab business means any separately owned and operated taxicab; or a fleet of owned or leased taxicabs; or a fleet of taxicabs owned separately, but operating under one name. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10) 
Sec. 19-11. - Fee. 
Fees for a taxicab business license shall be determined using the county's occupational tax fee schedule, as amended. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10) 
Sec. 19-12. - Inspection of cabs. 
The owner of a taxicab will be responsible, on an annual basis, for having all cabs inspected by a certified mechanic of his/her/its own choosing. The business owner will provide the most current maintenance records to the director of administration prior to renewing the business license by the end of February each year. Failure to maintain vehicles in good mechanical condition may result in the suspension or revocation of the business license. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10) 
Sec. 19-13. - Schedule of fares to be posted. 
The schedule of fares shall be posted in each taxicab and in the office of each taxicab company. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10) 
Sec. 19-14. - Application; license. 
(a)  No person shall receive a taxicab license in unincorporated Houston County without first completing an application to be provided by the director of administration. This application shall contain the name and address of the owner, the make and vehicle serial number, model, year, total mileage and passenger-carrying capacity for each vehicle operated; the names of each operator are to be listed as well. Said application shall include a copy of a consent form obtained from the sheriff's office authorizing a GCIC/NCIC criminal history and driving history check of the applicant and each operator. The applicant is responsible for the cost of both the criminal history check and driving history of each operator. 
(b)  The application shall be reviewed by the sheriff's office for any record of excessive recklessness on the part of the applicant or those operating taxicabs under the applicant's name. No person shall operate a taxicab in unincorporated Houston County who has been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony for three years immediately prior to the filing of the application. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10) 
Sec. 19-15. - Liability insurance required. 
Every applicant for a taxicab business license shall, before the license is granted, deposit with the director of administration, for each taxicab for which the privilege to operated is sought, a policy or certificate of liability insurance, indemnifying the applicant in the sums required by law. The certificate or policy of liability insurance shall be issued by a company or companies authorized to do business in the state. The certificate or policy of insurance shall identify by serial number all vehicles insured under the policy or policies. The license for the operation of the taxicab business shall expire upon the lapse or cancellation or termination or revocation of any policy covering any taxicab operated under the business. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10) 
Sec. 19-16. - License issued; display of license. 
If application meets all requirements, a license shall be issued upon the payment of the proper license fee prescribed by the board of commissioners. This license or a copy thereof shall be displayed on each taxicab operated in unincorporated Houston County. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10) 
Sec. 19-17. - License amendment. 
(a)  Each licensee under this article shall amend the license application originally filed for the license to include new taxicabs or exclude old taxicabs promptly upon adding or deleting taxicabs from the licensee's business so that an up-to-date list of operating taxicabs may be maintained. 
(b)  Each licensee hereunder shall also provide the director of administration proof that any new taxicab added to the application is fully insured as required under this article. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10) 
Sec. 19-18. - Revocation of license or permit. 
Any license under this article may be suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners upon a finding that any provision of this article has been violated or that the person or business holding the license or permit no longer meets the standards required for the issuance of the license or permit. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10) 
Chapter 20 - HOME OCCUPATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 20-1. - Definition and standards. 
The term home occupation is understood to mean any home office or home business conducted entirely within a dwelling which is carried on by an occupant thereof and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and which fully complies with the following standards: 
(1)  The applicant must be the owner of the property on which the home occupation is to be located, or must have written approval of the owner of the property if the applicant is a tenant. 
(2)  The home occupation shall be operated only by the members of the family residing on the premises, and no article or service shall be sold or offered for sale, except as may be produced by members of the immediate family residing on the premises. 
(3)  The home occupation shall be restricted to the main building only and shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the floor area within said building. 
(4)  The home occupation shall not generate excessive traffic or produce obnoxious odors, glare, noise, vibration, electrical disturbance, or radio-activity or other condition that will be a nuisance to the surrounding area. 
(5)  Any business sign placed on the premises shall not be larger than two square feet in sign area, unlighted and fixed to a wall. 
(6)  The home occupation and dwelling unit shall comply with all applicable building and fire codes. 
(7)  The home occupation shall not involve group instruction or group assembly of people on the premises. 
(8)  The portion of the residence in which the business is conducted shall be completely enclosed in a manner that the business is not visible from the surrounding property. 
(9)  Outside storage of equipment or materials is prohibited if visible by adjacent homeowners. 
(10)  The principal practitioner shall be permitted to park one commercial vehicle in the approved parking area. The commercial vehicle is limited to a passenger car, van or light truck of up to one-ton carrying capacity. 
(Amd. of 10-5-04) 
Sec. 20-2. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence that these conditions have been met. The zoning official and director of administration, or his designee, may administratively approve home occupation applications that meet the provisions of section 20-1. Applications not meeting the provisions of section 20-1 shall be denied. The Applicant may appeal to the board of commissioners by following the procedures outlined in Houston County's Comprehensive Land Development Regulations. 
(b)  If the home occupation is approved, the applicant is responsible for the operation of the said home occupation in conformance with these conditions. Failure to abide by these conditions will result in prosecution of the applicant in the appropriate county court and revocation of the occupational tax certificate. 
(Amd. of 10-5-04) 
Sec. 20-3. - Expiration. 
An occupational tax certificate for a home occupation shall expire under the following conditions: 
(1)  Whenever the applicant ceases to occupy the premises for which the home occupation was issued, no subsequent occupant of such premises shall engage in any home occupation until he shall have been issued a new tax certificate after proper application. 
(2)  Whenever the holder of such an occupational tax certificate fails to exercise the same for any period of six consecutive months. 
(Amd. of 10-5-04) 
Chapter 22 - COURTS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty, § 1-11; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62. 
Related laws reference— Courts, art. II. 
Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; punishment for misdemeanors, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a). 

Sec. 22-1. - County courthouse. 
The Houston County Courthouse shall be located at 201 Perry Parkway, Perry, Georgia, and shall hold all the official sessions of the Superior Court of the county, including the grand jury thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1001; Amd. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 22-2. - Assessment of additional penalty for use in funding of county correctional facilities. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent and desire of the board of commissioners, as the governing authority of the county, to have imposed and collected by the courts in the county the additional penalties provided for in the Jail Construction and Staffing Act (O.C.G.A. § 15-21-90) and to expend the monies collected for the purposes set out in the act. 
(b)  Imposition generally. In every case in which any court in the county, including any court of a municipality which has entered into the intergovernmental contract provided for in this section, shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any offense against a county or municipal ordinance, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(c)  Imposition on persons posting bail or bond. At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this state or a violation of a county or municipal ordinance, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which any court of the county, including any court of a municipality which has entered into the intergovernmental contract provided for in this section, shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be collected. 
(d)  Penalty to be additional to other assessments. The additional penalties set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the peace officer's annuity and benefit fund and by O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 to be paid into the judges of the probate courts retirement fund of the state, or by any other provision of law. 
(e)  Collection, deposit and expenditure. The additional penalties prescribed in this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds. Such additional penalties shall be paid over to the board of commissioners by the tenth day of the month following the month in which these sums are collected. All such sums collected and paid over to the board of commissioners shall be deposited into a special account, which shall be known as the county jail fund. All monies collected pursuant to this section and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended solely and exclusively for constructing, operating and staffing the county correctional facilities, or for such other purposes as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. 
(f)  Imposition by municipal courts. The additional penalties provided for by this section shall not be imposed or collected in any court operated by any municipality located in the county unless the municipality and the county enter into an intergovernmental contract providing for use of the county jail, correctional institution or detention facility by municipal prisoners. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1002) 
Chapter 26 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Floods, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70; authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY 9-1-1 SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Telephone Number "911" Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - 9-1-1 SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of July 19, 2011, enacted provisions codified herein as Art. II, Div. 2, §§ 26-47—26-51. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, §§ 26-36—26-46 have been redesignated as Art. II, Div. 1, §§ 26-36—26-46. 

Sec. 26-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency 9-1-1 system means a local telephone exchange service which facilitates the placing of calls by persons in need of emergency services to a public safety answering point by dialing the telephone number "9-1-1," and under which calls to the number "9-1-1" are answered by public safety answering points established and operated by the county. The term "emergency 9-1-1 system" also includes enhanced 9-1-1 service, which means an emergency telephone system that provides the caller with emergency 9-1-1 system service and, in addition, directs 9-1-1 calls to appropriate public safety answering points by selective routing based on the geographical location from which the call originated and provides the capability for automatic number identification and automatic location identification features. 
Exchange access facility means the access from a particular telephone subscriber's premises to the telephone system of a service supplier. Exchange access facilities include service supplier provided access lines, PBX trunks and Centrex network access registers, all as defined by tariffs of the telephone companies as approved by the state public service commission. Exchange access facilities do not include service supplier owned and operated telephone pay station lines, wide area telecommunications services (WATS), foreign exchange (FX) or incoming-only lines. 
9-1-1 charge means a contribution to the local government for the 9-1-1 service start-up equipment costs; subscriber notification costs; addressing costs; billing costs; nonrecurring and recurring installation, maintenance, service and network charges of a service supplier providing 9-1-1 service pursuant to this article; and costs associated with the hiring, training and compensating of dispatchers employed by the county to operate the 9-1-1 system at the public safety answering points. 
Public agency means the county or any of the incorporated cities within the county which provide or have authority to provide firefighting, law enforcement, ambulance, medical or other emergency services. 
Public safety agency means a functional division of a public agency which provides firefighting, law enforcement, emergency medical, suicide prevention, civil defense, poison control, drug prevention, child abuse, spouse abuse or other emergency services. 
Service supplier means a person who provides local exchange telephone service to a telephone subscriber. 
Telephone subscriber means a person to whom local exchange telephone service, either residential or commercial, is provided, and in return for which the person is billed on a monthly basis. When the same person, business or organization has several telephone access lines, each exchange access facility shall constitute a separate subscription. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3045) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-37. - Advisory board. 
(a)  Establishment; membership. The board of commissioners may, by resolution, create an advisory board consisting of individuals knowledgeable in emergency 9-1-1 systems and the emergency needs of the citizens of the county. 
(b)  Duties. The advisory board shall assist the board of commissioners in: 
(1)  Reviewing and analyzing the progress by public safety agencies in developing 9-1-1 system requirements; 
(2)  Recommending steps of action to effect the necessary coordination, regulation and development of a 9-1-1 system; 
(3)  Identifying mutual aid agreements necessary to effect the 9-1-1 system; 
(4)  Assisting in the promulgation of necessary rules, regulations, operating procedures, schedules and other such policy and administrative devices as shall be deemed necessary and appropriate; and 
(5)  Providing other services as may be deemed appropriate by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Compensation of members. The members of the advisory board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3056) 
Sec. 26-38. - Exemptions from liability. 
(a)  Neither the county nor the county emergency 9-1-1 telephone system, nor their employees, officers and agents, except in cases of wanton and willful misconduct or bad faith, shall be liable for death or injury to any person or for damage to property as a result of either developing, adopting, establishing, participating in, implementing, maintaining or carrying out duties involved in operating the 9-1-1 emergency telephone system or in the identification of the telephone number, address or name associated with any person accessing the emergency 9-1-1 system. 
(b)  A service supplier, including any telephone company and its employees, directors, officers and agents, is not liable for any damages in a civil action for injuries, death or loss to persons or property incurred by any person as a result of any act or omission of a service supplier or any of its employees, directors, officers or agents, except for willful or wanton misconduct, either in connection with developing, adopting, implementing, maintaining or operating any emergency 9-1-1 system or in the identification of the telephone number, address or name associated with any person accessing an emergency 9-1-1 system. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3055) 
Sec. 26-39. - Charge imposed. 
There is hereby imposed a monthly 911 charge upon each exchange access facility and wireless connection subscribed to by subscribers whose billing address is within the jurisdiction of Houston County. Such 911 charge shall be $1.50 per month per exchange access facility and wireless connection provided to the subscriber. All exchange access facilities and wireless connections billed to federal, state or local governments shall be exempt from the 911 charge. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3046; Amd. of 6-22-04) 
Sec. 26-40. - Collection of charge by service supplier. 
The service supplier shall, on behalf of the county, collect the 9-1-1 charge from those telephone subscribers to whom it provides exchange telephone service in the area served by the county emergency 9-1-1 system. As part of its normal monthly billing process, the service supplier shall collect the 9-1-1 charge for each month an exchange access facility is in service, and shall list the 9-1-1 charge as a separate entry on each bill. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3047) 
Sec. 26-41. - Failure to pay charge. 
(a)  Every telephone subscriber in the area served by the county emergency 9-1-1 system shall be liable for the 9-1-1 charge imposed in this article until it has been paid to the service supplier. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any telephone subscriber to fail or refuse to pay the 9-1-1 charge imposed in this article. 
(c)  The service supplier shall provide to the county, within 60 days, the name and address of each telephone subscriber who has failed or refused to pay the 9-1-1 charge after such 9-1-1 charge has become due. 
(d)  In addition to other penalties provided by law, a collection action may be initiated by the county, and reasonable costs and attorneys' fees associated with that collection action may be awarded to the county. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3048) 
Sec. 26-42. - Remittance of funds to county. 
The service supplier that collects 9-1-1 charges on behalf of the county is entitled to retain as an administrative fee an amount equal to three percent of the gross 9-1-1 charge receipts to be remitted to the county. The remaining amount shall be due quarterly to the county, and shall be remitted to the county no later than 60 days after the close of a calendar quarter. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3049) 
Sec. 26-43. - Records of collections; audits. 
The service supplier shall maintain records of the amount of the 9-1-1 charge collected for a period of at least three years from the date of collection. The county may, at its expense, require an annual audit of the service supplier's books and records with respect to the collection and remittance of the 9-1-1 charge. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3052) 
Sec. 26-44. - Emergency telephone system fund. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established a county emergency telephone system fund, which shall be a separate restricted revenue fund into which the 9-1-1 charges collected by the service supplier shall be deposited and accounted for. The county may invest the money in such fund in the same manner that other moneys of the county may be invested, and any income earned from such investment shall be deposited into the emergency telephone system fund. 
(b)  Use of funds; acceptance of additional funds. 
(1)  Money from the county emergency telephone system fund shall be used only to pay for: 
a.  The lease, purchase or maintenance of emergency telephone equipment, including necessary computer hardware, software and data base provisioning, addressing, and nonrecurring costs of establishing the 9-1-1 system; 
b.  The rates associated with the service supplier's 9-1-1 service and other service supplier's recurring charges; 
c.  The actual cost of salaries of employees hired by the county solely for the operation and maintenance of the emergency 9-1-1 system; 
d.  Office supplies of the public safety answering points used directly in providing emergency 9-1-1 system services; and 
e.  The cost of leasing or purchasing a building used as a public safety answering point. 
(2)  The county may contract with a service supplier for any term negotiated by the service supplier and the county for an emergency 9-1-1 system, and may make payments from the emergency telephone system fund to provide any payments required by the contract. 
(3)  In order to provide additional funding for the county for emergency 9-1-1 system purposes, the county may receive federal, state, municipal or private funds for the emergency telephone system fund, which shall be expended for the purposes set out in this article. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-3050, 3-3051) 
Sec. 26-45. - Reduction of charge. 
The monthly 9-1-1 charge may be reduced at any time by the board of commissioners by resolution; provided, however, that the board of commissioners shall be required to reduce such monthly 9-1-1 charge at any time the projected revenues from 9-1-1 charges will cause the unexpended revenues in the emergency telephone system fund at the end of the fiscal year to exceed by 1½ times the unexpended revenues in such fund at the end of the immediately preceding fiscal year, or at any time the unexpended revenues in such fund at the end of the fiscal year exceed by 1½ times the unexpended revenues in such fund at the end of the immediately preceding fiscal year. Such reduction in the 9-1-1 charge shall be in an amount which will avert the accumulation of revenues in such fund at the end of the fiscal year which will exceed by 1½ times the amount of revenues in the fund at the end of the immediately preceding fiscal year. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3053) 
Sec. 26-46. - Annual reaffirmation of charge. 
The board of commissioners shall, by resolution, reaffirm the necessity for the 9-1-1 charge beginning with the 13th month following the month in which emergency 9-1-1 service is first provided in the county, and during such month annually thereafter. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3054) 
DIVISION 2. - 9-1-1 CHARGE ON PREPAID WIRELESS TRANSACTION 

Sec. 26-47. - Charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(Res. of 7-19-11) 
Sec. 26-48. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8 with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Res. of 7-19-11) 
Sec. 26-49. - Administrative provisions. 
The director of administration is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this division and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten days of enactment of this division. 
(Res. of 7-19-11) 
Sec. 26-50. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this division shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by this county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 (f). 
(Res. of 7-19-11) 
Sec. 26-51. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this division are hereby repealed. 
(Res. of 7-19-11) 
Secs. 26-52—26-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of May 1, 2012, repealed Art. III in its entirety and enacted a new Art. III to read as set out herein. Former Art. III, §§ 26-61—26-64, 26-71, 26-72, 26-81—26-90, 26-100—26-105, pertained to state of emergency and derived from Ord. of April 2, 2002, §§ (1)—(4). 

Sec. 26-61. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this article, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-1-12) 
Sec. 26-62. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the county and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the chair of the board of commissioners may declare a local emergency for Houston County. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the chair may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the county to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the chair finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the chair shall execute and file with the director of administration of the board of commissioners a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the chair. The board of commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the chair shall automatically activate the county emergency operations plan and shall be the authority for deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The Houston County Emergency Management Agency ("HEMA") Director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the emergency management agency, including the implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
2.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the director or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the county; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the board of commissioners. 
3.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the chair is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the chair may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this article as appropriate: section 26-65 (registration of building and repair services) to become effective if the governor declares a state of emergency; and section 26-66 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the director of administration of the board of commissioners and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the board of commissioners is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 26-64 of this article as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the director of administration of the board of commissioners. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The chair of the board of commissioners shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
4.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters. 
5.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any county departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
6.  To utilize all available resources of the county and subordinate agencies over which the county has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
7.  To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
8.  To suspend any law, Code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any county agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
9.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
10.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration of local emergency. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the county director of administration and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this article which shall be in effect. 
DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, Houston County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [ description of event ] on [ date ]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Chair of the Houston County Board of Commissioners, with advice from the Director of the Houston County Emergency Management Agency, there exist emergency circumstances located in [ describe geographic location ] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Houston County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event. 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1) That the Houston County Emergency Management Agency activates the Emergency Operations Plan; 
(2) That the following sections of the Houston County Code be implemented : [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: section 26-65, Registration of Building and Repair Services, to be effective only if the Governor has declared a state of emergency; and/or section 26-66, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews] ; and 
(3) That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from section 26-62(a)(4)c. or d. or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [ time ] on [ date ]. 
[Signed]  Chair, Houston County Board of Commissioners 
(c)  Contracts with municipalities. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the county's emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the board of commissioners may contract with any municipality for the administration of additional emergency response program(s) for the declared emergency. 
(Ord. of 5-1-12; Amd. of 1-20-15(1)) 
Sec. 26-63. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the Houston County Sheriff's Office shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this article and/or implemented by the chair or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this article, or with any Code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the chair or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. Any person who violates any provision in this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, Code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this article, this article may be enforced by the sheriff's office, the EMA director and their authorized agents. 
(Ord. of 5-1-12) 
Sec. 26-64. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  County business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the board of commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. County officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the county, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean-up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the county on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the county pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department, the building inspections department of the AHJ, and the AHJ for fire protection. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of a continuing hardship, and in the discretion of the board of commissioners or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of up to an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. of 5-1-12) 
Sec. 26-65. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the Houston County Building Inspections Department and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this section constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $50.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security Number or Federal Employer Identification Number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required; 
(9)  Copy of license from the secretary of state, if required. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon a declaration of emergency by the governor and a local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the board of commissioners, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. of 5-1-12) 
Sec. 26-66. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the chair until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the chair shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The chair shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the county emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the county; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the county emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by EMA, and the sheriff of the county as provided through the emergency operations center (EOC). 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. of 5-1-12) 
Sec. 26-67. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which Houston County has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in Houston County to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(1)  Severability. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this division is for any reason held by the court to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void, such holding shall not the remainder of the division. 
(2)  Effective date. This division shall take effect on the date of its being duly adopted but shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
(Ord. of 5-1-12) 
Sec. 26-68. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief that are not in conflict with this article are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the county director of administration. 
(Ord. of 5-1-12) 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; floods, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 68; zoning, ch. 72. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Common continuing nuisance means a wrong that arises from the unreasonable, unhealthful, unwarranted or unlawful use by a person of his property, either real or personal or from his improper, indecent or unlawful personal conduct, working an obstruction of or injury to the rights of the public, and producing material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt to the public continuously or at frequent intervals. 
Miscellaneous refuse means any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material or other item in a partially rusted, junked, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition. 
Wrong means a violation of public rights and duties which affect the community. 
(Ord. of 8-20-96) 
Sec. 30-2. - Prohibited generally. 
(a)  Injury to persons. Within the unincorporated area of the county, it shall be unlawful for any person to create, carry on or maintain any nuisance which hurts or inconveniences any person or persons. 
(b)  Injury to health. Within the unincorporated area of the county, it shall be unlawful for any person to create, carry on or maintain any nuisance which tends to injure or does injure or jeopardize the health of any person or persons. 
(c)  Injury to property. It shall be unlawful for any person to create, carry on or maintain any nuisance which shall damage property located within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(d)  Annoyance. No person shall keep or maintain on his premises any nuisance to the annoyance of his neighbor. 
(Ord. of 8-20-96) 
Secs. 30-3—30-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment of Dec. 7, 2010, deleted the former Art. II, §§ 30-36—30-41, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to nuisances and derived from Ord. of 8-20-96. 

Sec. 30-36. - Title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the "Nuisance Ordinance." 
(Amd. of 12-7-10) 
Sec. 30-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Common continuing nuisance means a wrong that arises from the unreasonable, unhealthful, unwarranted or unlawful use by a person of his property, either real or personal, or from his improper, indecent or unlawful personal conduct, working an obstruction of or injury to the rights of the public, and producing material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt to the public continuously, or at frequent intervals. 
County means unincorporated areas of Houston County, Georgia. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Furniture means tables, chairs, beds, etc., necessary for a house or business to include indoor and outdoor furniture and broken furniture. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act which are in force and effect on February 1, 1998, codified as C.F.R. § 261.3, and any designated hazardous waste. 
Litter means all discarded substances and materials, including without limitation all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material(s), tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, building or construction materials, demolition debris, mechanical equipment or parts, scrap tires, or any and all other material or substance of any kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, or mining operations. 
Overgrowth means: 
(1)  Vegetation or plant material that overhangs, encroaches upon, obstructs or in any manner interferes with the full and free use by the public of any street, sidewalk or sidewalk area upon which such property so owned or occupied abuts; 
(2)  Vegetation or plant material that has grown and died upon any premises owned, occupied or in control of the responsible person or persons and which constitutes a detriment to the public health, safety or welfare, including, but not limited to, a fire hazard; or 
(3)  Vegetation or plant material that is so overgrown upon any premises owned, occupied or in control of the responsible person or persons, as to cause the degradation of the character of the neighborhood, as determined by the code enforcement officer. 
Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership, association, firm, receiver, guardian, trustee, executor, administrator, fiduciary or representative, or group of persons or entities of any kind. 
Private property means any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, whether inhabited to be used permanently or temporarily, or continuously uninhabited or vacant, which is 100 percent privately owned, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, parking area, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or pertinent to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public view means any area that is used or held out for use by the public, whether owned or operated by public or private interest, including but not limited to streets, parking lots, parking garages, sidewalks, rights-of-way, parks, campgrounds, highways, alleys and other public ways. 
Vegetation means and includes, but is not limited to trees, plants, shrubs, bushes, flowers, garden vegetables, grasses and all growth of every kind and character, whether domestic or wild, causing the obstruction or interference detriment prohibited by this section. 
Vehicle includes every device capable of being moved upon a public highway and in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, including devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Amd. of 12-7-10) 
Sec. 30-38. - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 and for the authority and to protect and preserve the public health, safety, morality, order, property values, and welfare of the citizens of the county as well as to maintain a healthful, clean and beautiful environment. This chapter is intended to supplement and to coordinate existing litter control and removal efforts, and not terminate existing efforts nor, except as specifically stated, to repeal or affect any other ordinance governing or prohibiting litter or the control and disposition of waste. 
(Amd. of 12-7-10) 
Sec. 30-39. - Nuisances prohibited generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create, carry on or maintain any nuisance which hurts or inconveniences any person or persons within the county. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create, carry on or maintain any nuisance which tends to injure or does injure or jeopardize the health of any of the people of the county. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create, carry on or maintain any nuisance within the city which shall damage property located within the county. 
(d)  No person shall keep or maintain on his premises any nuisance to the annoyance of his neighbor. 
(Amd. of 12-7-10) 
Sec. 30-40. - Property maintenance; storage of refuse generally. 
(a)  Duty of property owner and/or occupant. Each owner of private or public property in the shall keep the property free and clear of any liter or other refuse which may constitute a threat or detriment to the public safety, welfare, property values, morality or good order. The occupant of said property shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Removal of litter and other refuse. Each person who owns private property in the county shall, at such time as the county may prescribe, removed to a prescribed and approved location or permit employees to enter and remove from such property any and all litter and other substances which might endanger the health, safety, morality, order, property values or welfare of residents of the county. A failure to remove such litter or other substances may result, whenever the code enforcement officer or sheriff, or their designees deem necessary, and after reasonable notice, in the removal of such litter or other substances which might endanger the health, safety or welfare of residents of the county in which event the costs and/or expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owners of such property and may be collected in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Weeds. 
(1)  All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from overgrowth as defined in section 30-37, weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches in height. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants, and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs. Provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. Further, this subsection (c)(1) shall not apply to properties zoned R-AG, unless such R-AG properties are in a platted subdivision. 
(2)  A failure to abide by this requirement may result, whenever the county deems necessary and after reasonable notice, in having such weeds cut by agents or employees of the county, which event the cost and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the person who owns such property and may be collected by the county or otherwise enforce by the county in the manner provided in section 30-44 of this article. 
(Amd. of 12-7-10) 
Sec. 30-41. - Storage of junk vehicles; removal by county. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure or otherwise shielded or screened from public view, on any property unless properly zoned or permitted, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is inoperative or which has no current tag. Covering the motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer with a tarp does not meet this criteria. As used in this chapter, the term "inoperative motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle which is not in operating condition; or which for a period of 30 days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires, wheels, engine or other essential parts required for the operation of the vehicle. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which is regularly engaged as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
(Amd. of 12-7-10) 
Sec. 30-42. - Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise. 
(a)  [ Intent. ] This section is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health safety and welfare of the citizens of unincorporated Houston County through the control of noise. It is the intent of this section to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. 
(b)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any individual in the unincorporated area of the county or upon property owned or controlled by the county to create any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare. 
(c)  Prohibited noises enumerated. The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such listing shall not be deemed exclusive: 
(1)  The playing of any radio, phonograph or musical instrument in such a manner or with such a volume, particularly during the hours between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(2)  Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(3)  The erection, including excavating, demolition, alteration or repair, of any building in a residential area, or the excavation of streets and highways in any residential area, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except by or on the behalf of the city, county or state, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform this work during the day, or work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances. 
(4)  The creation of excessive noise on any street or property adjacent to any school, institution of learning, hospital, church or court, while in session, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof. 
(5)  The use of loudspeakers or amplifiers on moving motor vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(6)  The use of loudspeakers or amplifiers upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places of the county, provided that nothing in this subsection shall apply to any governmental agency. 
(7)  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any motor vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal, or the creation of noise by means of any signal device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(8)  Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. except for the days and times set out in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2(b)(3)(B)(ii) and (iii). 
(d)  Penalty. Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Amd. of 12-7-10; Amd. of 7-3-18) 
Sec. 30-43. - Duty of owner; county's right to correct conditions. 
(a)  The owner or tenant of any property, lot, building or premises, occupied or vacant, shall be deemed the party or parties responsible, for purposes of this section. 
(b)  At its option and in addition to all other remedies provided for in this chapter, the county may correct conditions existing on property in violation of this chapter, keeping an account for the expenses of same, and charge the total cost against the owner to be collected by any lawful means including, but not limited to, the issuance of a FiFa against the owner. 
(Amd. of 12-7-10) 
Sec. 30-44. - Abatement of nuisances; costs. 
(a)  Authority of county. Upon giving written notice to a person or his agents, if the person creating or maintaining the nuisance is a nonresident of the county or state, if he has agents within the county or state, to abate it, and the nuisance not being abated by the person creating or maintaining it within 15 days after giving the notice, then the county, through the appropriate county court or officers designated by the chairman, is authorized to employ labor and purchase materials to make repairs, changes or eliminations, and do every other thing that may be necessary to abate the nuisance. In addition, creation of a nuisance shall be deemed a violation of this Code subjecting the offenders to punishment as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  Costs; execution. In the event the costs of abating the nuisance are not paid, then an execution shall be issued against the property owner or property for the cost thereof. The execution issuing hereunder shall be issued, enforced and collected in the same manner as that provided by law for executions for ad valorem taxes due in the county. 
(Amd. of 12-7-10) 
Secs. 30-45—30-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted Aug. 1, 2017, repealed art. III in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. The former art. III pertained to erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Res. of Sept. 7, 2004. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-61. - Title. 
This article will be known and cited as the "Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Amd. of 8-1-17) 
Sec. 30-62. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Envirocert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Ocmulgee Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 30-64(c) of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 30-63, paragraph (5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present: 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Ocmulgee Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Amd. of 8-1-17) 
Sec. 30-63. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 30-64(c). of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Amd. of 8-1-17) 
Sec. 30-64. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 30-64(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in section 30-64(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection (c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 30-64(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraphs (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970" and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in EPD Rule 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 30-64(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Amd. of 8-1-17) 
Sec. 30-65. - Application process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application process. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Houston County without first obtaining a permit from the county engineer to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the county engineer and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 30-65(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 30-64(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 30-64(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 30-65 (b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 30-64(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 30-64(c) (15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 30-65(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Amd. of 8-1-17) 
Sec. 30-66. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The county engineer and chief building officer will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation (i.e., the county engineer shall inspect all commercial lots and general subdivision development, while the chief building official shall inspect all residential building lots.) Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The county engineer and chief building officer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Amd. of 8-1-17) 
Sec. 30-67. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and; 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 30-65(b)(6) the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Amd. of 8-1-17) 
Sec. 30-68. - Application process. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Amd. of 8-1-17) 
Sec. 30-69. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Houston County Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Houston County. 
(Amd. of 8-1-17) 
Sec. 30-70. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 1st day of August, 2017. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Amd. of 8-1-17) 
Secs. 30-71—30-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SLUDGE LAND APPLICATION 

Sec. 30-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the following meaning: 
Sludge means the solid or semisolid residue generated at a wastewater treatment or pretreatment plan. Such term specifically excludes treated effluent septage, and sludge treated to further reduce pathogens by such processes as composting, heat drying or heat treating. 
Sludge land application means the placement of sludge on or under the ground surface for the purpose of sludge disposal, soil conditioning, or agricultural enhancement. Such term specifically excludes the disposal of sludge in a permitted landfill. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95) 
Sec. 30-92. - Approval measurements and permit. 
No person shall operate a sludge application system in unincorporated Houston County without first obtaining a state permit including public notice and public hearing requirements. A copy of such permit and notices shall be filed with the county environmental health department upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95) 
Sec. 30-93. - Fee required. 
The board of commissioners shall charge the generator of sludge applied in unincorporated Houston County a fee of $1.00 per ton/per month for environmental monitoring of the site. Payment of the assessed fee shall be made on a quarterly basis based on the previous three months application of sludge. Failure to pay such fees shall be grounds to seek an injunction to stop the land application of sludge. The provisions of the subsection shall not apply to the land application of sludge which is generated by the treatment of industrial process wastewater only. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95) 
Secs. 30-94—30-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 30-101. - Adoption of the water resource protection overlay districts. 
Pursuant to Georgia Planning Act of 1989, DCA's Minimum Planning Standards for Local Comprehensive Planning and DNR's promulgated Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, Article 8 of the Houston County Water Resources Protection Ordinance is hereby adopted in its entirety as the policy for protecting wetlands and river corridors in all of unincorporated Houston County, with the like effect as if recited in this section. 
(Res. of 11-15-05) 
Secs. 30-102—30-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER RESOURCES PROTECTION ORDINANCE 

Sec. 30-121. - Adoption of the water resources protection ordinance. 
Pursuant the NPDES Phase II requirements, Articles 1 through 4 of the Houston County Water Resources Protection Ordinance and the Local Design Manual are hereby adopted in their entirety as the water quality and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters in unincorporated Houston County, with the like effect as if recited in this section. 
(Res. of 11-15-05) 
Secs. 30-122—30-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 30-141. - Adoption of the flood prevention control ordinance. 
Pursuant to the Georgia Code Annotated, Article IX, Section II, which delegates the responsibility of local governments to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry, Article 5 of the Houston County Water Resources Ordinance is hereby adopted its entirety and shall be the flood plain management policy applicable to all of unincorporated Houston County, with like effect as if recited in this section. Said Ordinance is designed to regulate construction in special flood hazard areas in Houston County as identified in the September 28, 2007 Flood Insurance Rate Maps. 
(Res. of 11-15-05; Amd. of 10-4-07(2)) 
Secs. 30-142—30-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AND MINIMUM LOT SIZE 

Sec. 30-161. - Adoption of the groundwater recharge and minimum lot size ordinance. 
Pursuant to Georgia Planning Act of 1989, DCA's Minimum Planning Standards for Local Comprehensive Planning and DNR's promulgated Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, Article 7 of the Houston County Water Resources Protection Ordinance is hereby adopted in its entirety as the policy for protecting groundwater and determining minimum lot size policy applicable to all of unincorporated Houston County, with the like effect as if recited in this section. 
(Ord. of 11-15-05) 
Secs. 30-162—30-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ABANDONED PROPERTIES 

Sec. 30-170. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the county commissioners through the adoption of this chapter, to establish a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of maintenance and security of abandoned properties; to establish an abandoned property registration program and to set forth guidelines for the maintenance of abandoned properties. 
(Amd. of 9-7-10) 
Sec. 30-171. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Abandoned. Any building, structure or real property that is vacant or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy, and subject to a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessors lien sale and/or any real property conveyed via a foreclosure sale resulting in the acquisition of title by an interested beneficiary of a deed of trust, and/or any real property conveyed via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
Abatement order. A hearing officer's "order to abate" issued pursuant to sections 30-41, 14-75, or 42-4 of this Code written final order decision issued pursuant to sections 30-41, 14-75 or 42-4 of this Code, if any. 
Accessible property. Real property that is accessible to the public, in general or through an open and unsecured door, window, gate, fence, wall, or the like. 
Accessible structure. A building or structure that is not secured or is open in such a way as to allow public or unauthorized access to the interior. 
Administrative penalty payment due date. The date that is the 11th day after the issuance of a hearing officer's issuance of a written "order to abate" pursuant to sections 30-41, 14-75 or 42-4 of this Code or the issuance of a final order decision pursuant to sections 30-41, 14-75 or 42-4 of this Code, if any. 
Buyer. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity that agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for real property. 
Dangerous building. Any building or structure reasonably deemed by qualified county staff to represent a violation of any provision specified in section 14-75. 
Days. Calendar days. 
Deed to secure debt. An instrument whereby an owner of real property, as grantor, grants a secured interest in the real property in question to a lender, said instrument relating to a loan issued in the context of a real property transaction. This definition applies to any and all subordinate deeds to secure debt, such as second or third deeds to secure debt, and the like. 
Deed in lieu of foreclosure. A recorded instrument that transfers ownership of real property between parties to a particular deed to secure debt as follows: from the grantor, borrower, to the lender. 
Default. The material breach of a legal or contractual duty arising from or relating to a deed to secure debt, such as a grantor's failure to make a payment when due. 
Distressed. Any building, structure or real property that is subject to a current notice of default and/or notice of foreclosure sale, pending tax lien sale and/or any real property conveyed via a foreclosure sale resulting in the acquisition of title by the lender under deed to secure debt, and/or any real property conveyed via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale, regardless of vacancy or occupancy by a person with no legal right of occupancy. 
Enforcement official. The building inspector or his agent or the sheriff and/or any employee or agent of the county designated and/or charged with enforcing the code, including but not limited to applicable codes adopted by reference therein. 
Evidence of vacancy. Any real property condition that independently, or in the context of the totality of circumstances relevant to that real property would lead a reasonable enforcement official to believe that a property is vacant or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. Such real property conditions include but are not limited to: overgrown or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail; past due utility notices or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk or debris; the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters; the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation; and/or statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. 
Foreclosure. The process by which real property subject to a deed to secure debt is sold to satisfy the debt of a defaulting grantor, borrower. 
Grantee. A lender participating in a real property transaction that holds a secured interest in the real property in question identified in a deed to secure debt. 
Grantor. Any owner/borrower identified in a deed to secure debt, who transfers an interest in real property to a grantee as security for payment of a debt by that owner/grantor. 
Neighborhood standard. The condition of real property that prevails in and through the neighborhood where an abandoned building, structure or real property is located. When determining the neighborhood standard no abandoned or distressed building, structure or real property shall be considered. 
Notice of default. An instrument or notice that reflects and provides notice that a default has taken place with respect to a deed to secure debt, and that a lender intends to proceed with a foreclosure sale. 
Owner. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in real property. 
Owner of record. The person holding recorded title to the real property in question at any point in time when official records are produced by the county clerk of superior court's office. 
Property. Any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, including but not limited to buildings or structures located on said real property, regardless of condition. 
Residential building. Any improved real property or portion thereof, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, including buildings and structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered under any circumstances for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as "residential," whether or not said property is legally permitted and zoned for such use. 
Securing. Such measures as may be directed by an enforcement official that assist in rendering real property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to repairing fences and walls, chaining/pad locking gates, the repairing or boarding doors, windows or other openings. Such measures shall be implemented in conformance with all applicable standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Vacant. Any building, structure or real property that is unoccupied or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. 
(Amd. of 9-7-10) 
Sec. 30-172. - Registration. 
(a)  Each holder a deed to secure debt on a property located within the unincorporated county shall perform an inspection of the property in question prior to or simultaneously with recording a foreclosure deed or deed in lieu of foreclosure instrument with the county superior court clerk's office. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, as defined by this chapter, it is hereby deemed to be abandoned. 
(b)  Within ten days of identification of any abandoned property, the holder of the deed to secure debt must register the property with the building inspection department on specified forms. 
(c)  If the property is occupied but distressed; the holder of a deed to secure debt or a designee shall inspect the property on a monthly basis until: 
(1)  The owner or another party remedies the default; or 
(2)  The property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, deemed abandoned and rendered subject to subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  The registration pursuant to subsection above shall contain the identity of the owner, the direct mailing address of the owner and, in the case of a corporate or out of area owner, the local property management company, if any, responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the property in question. 
(e)  The registration pursuant to subsection (b) above shall be renewed annually. 
(f)  An annual registration fee, adopted in conformance with section 30-176, shall accompany the submission of each registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for one year from the date of registration. Registration fees will not be prorated. 
(g)  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale wherein title has been transferred to the holder of a deed to secure debt involved in the foreclosure, and to any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale. 
(h)  Properties subject to this chapter shall remain subject to the annual registration requirement, security and maintenance standards of this chapter as long as they remain vacant. 
(i)  Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity that has registered a property under this chapter must make a written report to the building inspection department of any change of information contained in the registration within ten days of the change. 
(j)  The duties/obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. 
(Amd. of 9-7-10) 
Sec. 30-173. - Maintenance requirements. 
It is declared a public nuisance for any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity, that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any property subject to the to the registration requirement contained in section 30-172 of this article, to cause, permit, or maintain any property condition contrary to any provision of this chapter. Consequently, the following maintenance requirements as to any property subject to the registration requirement contained in section 30-172 are adopted. 
(a)  Any property subject to this section must comply with all other requirements of this Code. 
(b)  In addition, the property shall be kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspaper, circular, flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state or local law), discarded personal items including but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
(c)  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar marking. Any removal or painting over of graffiti shall be with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
(d)  Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the neighborhood standard. 
(e)  Landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. 
(f)  Landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material. 
(g)  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris and does not constitute a breeding ground for mosquitoes, or alternatively shall be drained and kept dry. In either case, properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the State of Georgia and, County of Houston. 
(h)  Adherence to this section does not relieve the holder of the deed to secure debt or property owner of obligations set forth in any covenants conditions and restrictions and/or home owner's association rules and regulations which may apply to the property. 
(i)  The duties/obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all parties and their respective agents. 
(j)  The sole exception to these maintenance requirements shall, within the sole reasonable discretion of a duly authorized enforcement official, apply to property subject to the registration requirement contained in section 30-172 of this article that is under construction and/or repair, not less than three business days per week, undertaken in compliance with all applicable law including but not limited to county permitting requirements. 
(Amd. of 9-7-10) 
Sec. 30-174. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  Secure manner includes but is not limited to closing and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage) gates and any other opening that may allow access to the interior of the property and or structure(s). In the case of broken windows securing means reglazing or boarding the window. 
(c)  If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out of area owner, a local property management company shall/will be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws, are being met. 
(d)  The property shall be posted with the name and 24-hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than 18 inches by 24 inches, shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of 45 feet, and shall contain the following verbiage: "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY ____________ ," and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL (name and phone number)". 
(e)  The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street of the front of the property so it is visible from the street. If no such area exists, the posting shall be on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting, in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property, and to the extent possible, not readily accessible to potential vandalism. Exterior posting must be constructed of, and printed with weather resistant materials. 
(f)  The local property management company shall inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. If the property management company determines the property is not in compliance, it is the company's responsibility to bring the property into compliance. 
(g)  The duties/obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all owners and their respective agents. 
(Amd. of 9-7-10) 
Sec. 30-175. - Additional authority. 
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this chapter, the county shall have the authority to require the owner or owner of record of any property affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing onsite inspection frequency, employment of an onsite security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to secure and reduce the visual decline of the property. 
(Amd. of 9-7-10) 
Sec. 30-176. - Fees. 
The fee for registering and re-registering an abandoned property shall be set, from time to time, by resolution of the county commissioners. The amount of the fee charges shall not exceed the cost of administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amd. of 9-7-10) 
Sec. 30-177. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any violation of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense; a violation shall be deemed to have occurred regardless of a violator's intent. 
(b)  Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity, that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any property subject to the to the registration requirement contained in section 30-172 of this article, and causes, permits, or maintains a violation of this chapter as to that property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(c)  This section is intended to be cumulative to, and not in place of, other rights and remedies available to the county pursuant to the code. Above and beyond the violation and penalty specified in this section, the county attorney or a duly authorized enforcement official may pursue any other right or remedy permitted by the code, including but not limited to commencement of any civil action, or administrative action to abate the condition of a property as a public nuisance pursuant to [section] 30-41. 
(d)  In the event that the county takes administrative action to abate the condition of a property subject to the to the registration requirement contained in section 30-172 of this article, above and beyond the rights and remedies specified in [section] 30-41, the following administrative penalties shall apply. 
(1)  On the administrative penalty due date, each party subject to an abatement order shall pay an administrative penalty of $1,000.00. 
(2)  In the event that a violation of this chapter addressed by an abatement order has not been abated, cured, remedied and/or eliminated to the reasonable satisfaction of a duly authorized enforcement official by the 30th day after the administrative penalty due date, each party subject to said abatement order shall pay a supplemental administrative penalty of $3,000.00. 
(3)  In the event that a violation of this chapter addressed by an abatement order has not been abated, cured, remedied and/or eliminated to the reasonable satisfaction of a duly authorized enforcement official by the 60th day after the administrative penalty due date, each party subject to said abatement order shall pay a second supplemental administrative penalty of $5,000.00. 
(e)  In each instance when a party becomes subject to an administrative penalty specified in this section, an enforcement official shall issue an order providing written notice of that party's obligation to make payment of said administrative penalty. Each such order shall constitute a special assessment against the property in question having the same legal status as an order determining the cost of abatement of a public nuisance pursuant the provisions of section 30-41 of this chapter. 
(f)  In each instance when a party becomes subject to an administrative penalty specified in subsection (d) of this section, and the order providing for said administrative penalty issues when that party is either seeking to perfect its interest in the subject property subsequent to the recordation of a notice of default, or is the property's owner of record, that party is not relieved of its obligation to pay any administrative penalty based upon the sale of the property in question to another. 
(Amd. of 9-7-10) 
Sec. 30-178. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this chapter may appeal a determination made hereunder in the manner specified with respect to appeals under section 14-75 of this Code. 
(Amd. of 9-7-10) 
Secs. 30-179—30-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HOUSTON COUNTY TIMBER OPERATIONS 

Sec. 30-190. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Houston County Timber Operations Ordinance." 
(Amd. of 2-7-17) 
Sec. 30-191. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Commissioners means board of commissioners of Houston County or their successors in office, being the governing authority of Houston County. 
County means Houston County, Georgia. 
Timber means pine, cypress and hardwood trees and trees of every size, species and description. Also, for purpose of this article, "timber" includes such trees after harvesting and while being transported as logs or in shorter lengths. 
Timber operations means purchasing and/or cutting and harvesting timber in Houston County, or transporting such timber from the site at which it was cut; or the moving of equipment to and from the site of such cutting. 
Timber operator means any persons, firm or corporation engaged in commercial timber operations, whether engaged in one or all of said activities described in "timber operations" above. It shall not include persons cutting or transporting timber solely for non-commercial personal use or firewood. 
(Amd. of 2-7-17) 
Sec. 30-192. - Permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No timber operator shall engage in timber operations in the county without first obtaining a permit to conduct such operations as provided herein; provided, however, employees of a timber operator shall not be required to obtain separate permit for activities within the scope of such employment if their employer has obtained a valid permit for such activities; and provided further, that an independent contractor transporting timber for another timber operator shall not be required to obtain a separate permit if the timber operator for whom he is transporting timber has obtained a valid permit for such timber operations at the same location. 
(b)  Place of filing. The application for permit shall be signed by the applicant and filed with the office of Houston County Board of Tax Assessors, and forms shall be available at such office. The chief appraiser or his designee at said office of the Houston County Tax Assessors shall review the application and issue the permit if all required information is provided. Completed application forms may be emailed to said office, and if the applicant provides email address, the permit may be emailed back to the applicant. 
(c)  Application for permit. The application for permit shall be in form prescribed by the commissioners and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, timber operator or timber purchaser. 
(2)  If the applicant or timber operator intends to engage another or other contractor(s) to harvest or to transport the timber, the applicant shall also include name, address and telephone number of each such contractor or harvester. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property on which the applicant/purchaser/timber operator will engage in timber operations. 
(4)  The location of the property on which the applicant/purchaser/timber operator will engage in timber operations (including tax map and parcel number). 
(5)  The roads in Houston County upon which motor vehicles will travel in transporting such timber and in transporting the equipment to be used in the timber operations and showing all locations of ingress and egress from the timber tract to the public road(s). 
(6)  The applicant shall be responsible for all damages and shall present a letter of credit or a cashier's check for $5,000.00 to protect the county against damage caused by applicant. All damage exceeding $5,000.00 shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(7)  The dates cutting operations are expected to commence and end. 
(8)  The applicant shall present a copy of his/her/its current business license. 
(d)  Posted notice. Once application requirements have been met the board of tax assessors will provide a permit at no cost. Said permit must be displayed and available for review at the main point of ingress and egress to a public road and in such a location as to be seen by the traveling public. 
(e)  Incomplete applications. Incomplete applications will not be accepted and will be returned to applicant. 
(f)  Other laws. In addition to provisions of this article, the applicant for a permit shall comply with all state and federal regulations pertaining to its timber operations, including payment of all applicable ad valorem tax on the timber. 
(g)  Cost. There shall be no cost or fee imposed for filing the application or issuing the permit. 
(h)  Separate applications. Applicants must file a separate application and receive a separate permit for each separate timber cutting operation and each separate landowner. 
(Amd. of 2-7-17) 
Sec. 30-193. - Violations; penalties. 
Any timber operator who shall willfully fail to comply with this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; amenable to the process of the Magistrate Court of Houston County, Georgia and, upon conviction, shall be punished by fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Amd. of 2-7-17) 
Sec. 30-194. - Repealer. 
All ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Amd. of 2-7-17) 
Sec. 30-195. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective April 1, 2017. 
(Amd. of 2-7-17) 
Sec. 30-196. - Notice of timber operators. 
The Houston County Board of Tax Assessors shall mail or deliver a copy of this article to all timber operators and other persons whom the board has knowledge of or can identify as persons or business which cut, harvest or transport trees or timber on or from lands in Houston County, and publicize or make known by any reasonable means the general contents of this article to as many persons as possible dealing with timber in this county. 
(Amd. of 2-7-17) 
Sec. 30-197. - Application/permit numbers. 
Each application filed shall be assigned a number consisting of the year and quarter of the year of filing, followed by a number representing the order in which that application was filed in that year. (For example, the first application filed in the first quarter 2017 would have a number of "2017-1-1"). The permit number will be the same number as the application number. 
(Amd. of 2-7-17) 
Chapter 32 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 32-21. - Issuance of county permit authorization. 
(a)  [Issuance.] 
(1)  Permits will be issued beginning at 8:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday. 
(2)  Permits may be issued between 3:00 p.m. and 5:30 p.m. for the following day's burning based on the afternoon forecast. The commission reserves the right to recall the permit the next morning if the morning forecast predicts a bad day. 
(3)  Unless otherwise specified, all permits will be good for a 24-hour period beginning at 8:00 a.m. on the permitted day. Weather conditions and/or local ordinances may restrict hours of burning. 
(4)  County unit offices will be open to issue permits on weekdays and district dispatcher will issue permits on all holidays, Saturdays and Sundays. 
(5)  Permits must be obtained from the county where the burn is to be conducted. Exception to this guideline will be given to landowners who live within a county but have to call long distance to get that county office. In this case, landowners may call the adjoining county who will radio the county where the burn is to take place for a permit number. This type of permitting is only allowed between adjoining counties where positioning of telephone exchanges causes this situation. 
(b)  Counties that have a burning ordinance in place. 
(1)  The state forestry commission county ranger or the other authorized employee of the forestry unit will call the county permitting authority each morning Monday through Friday at 8:30 a.m. to discuss the burning conditions and the fire danger for that day. 
(2)  Those persons calling the county permitting authority for permission to burn forest land will be referred to the local Georgia Forestry Commission County Headquarters to obtain a permit number and the fire weather information. 
(Ord. of 1-31-95) 
Sec. 32-22. - Outdoor burns requiring permits. 
(a)  The state forestry commission will require a permit number to be obtained for all types of legal burns in the county outside incorporated city limits with the exception of cultivated cropland. 
(b)  Landowners who burn improved pasture or cultivated crop residue must notify the county forest ranger or authorized employee prior to initiating the burn. 
(c)  U.S. government military installations will not be required to obtain a permit. They will be urged, however, to make their intent to the burn known to the appropriate state forestry commission county office. 
(d)  The burning of forest land inside city limits will require a permit number. No other burns inside the city limits will require a permit number. 
(Ord. of 1-31-95) 
Sec. 32-23. - Burn ban. 
State forestry commission permitting must be in accordance with the environmental protection division regulations for air quality control. 
(1)  Under the rules of air quality control, the following burns are not prohibited by EPD in counties with population less than 65,000. 
a.  Burning of leaves by the residents of properties on which they fall. 
b.  Burning of vegetative matter for agricultural purposes for production of harvesting crops. 
c.  Forest land for timber production and pasture land for pasture improvement may be burned. 
d.  Small fires are allowed to keep warm for outside working. Burning manmade materials or treated wood that could cause dense smoke is prohibited. 
e.  Operating devices using open flame such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, and other flame-making equipment is allowed. 
f.  Burning for the cooking of food for immediate consumption and recreational activities is allowed. 
g.  Demolition and construction materials (not roofing or synthetic materials that cause malodorous or heavy smoke) unless prohibited locally. 
h.  Weed abatement and tree limbs from storm damage. 
i.  Disposal of packing previously containing explosives can be burned. 
j.  Burning for firefighter training. 
k.  Land clearing debris from right-of-way clearing and/or construction activities is allowed when: 
1.  Prevailing winds are away from populated areas. 
2.  Burning material is at least 1,000 feet from any dwelling located in a predominately residential area. 
3.  Dirt is minimized in the burning material. 
4.  No more than one pile 60 feet by 60 feet in a nine acre area, or equivalent volume area ratio is burning at one time. 
5.  No tires, asphaltic materials, heavy oils or items containing natural or synthetic rubber or plastics or any other material that is not plant growth. 
l.  Burning of wood slabs at portable sawmill sites. 
(2)  In counties exceeding 65,000 population, all except (1)g. and k. of the above are allowed. The state forestry commission will permit burns for forestry practices in counties exceeding 65,000 population. As of the latest U.S. census, these counties are Cobb, Fulton, Clayton, DeKalb, Gwinnett, Hall, Clarke, Lowndes, Dougherty, Floyd, Houston, Whitfield, Richmond, Bibb, Muskogee, and Chatham. 
(3)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning from May 1st to September 30th of each year except as follows: Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops, the "prescribed burning" of any forest land by the owner's or the owner's designee, for recreational purposes or cooking food for immediate human consumption, fires set for purposes of training fire-fighting personnel when authorized by the appropriate governmental entity, operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame-making equipment, disposal of all packaging materials previously containing explosives, in accordance with U.S. Department of Labor Safety Regulations. 
(4)  State forestry regulations and permitting procedures in accordance with the environmental protection division regulations for air quality control and those regulations found in the Article II, section 32-23 subsections (1) and (2) will be in effect before and after the dates of the burn ban. 
(Ord. of 1-31-95; Amd. of 5-1-05) 
Sec. 32-24. - EPD statewide prohibited burning actions. 
(a)  Burning of tires, synthetic material or other materials that give off malodorous, heavy smoke emissions. 
(b)  Burning of garbage. 
(c)  Open burning of any material which exceeds 40 opacity of smoke density. 
(Ord. of 1-31-95) 
Sec. 32-25. - [County requirements.] 
County ordinances with more restrictive requirements for outdoor burning will take precedence over the state forestry commission's state permitting law. 
(Ord. of 1-31-95) 
Sec. 32-26. - Additional county regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to burn any processed wood products in the county. 
(b)  All fires that are permitted are to be burned between the hours of 10:00 a.m and 6:00 p.m. 
(c)  After a permit has been obtained from the state forestry unit the applicant must call the county fire department and report the following: 
(1)  The size and nature of the fire. 
(2)  The address of proposed burn. 
(3)  The permit number issued by the state forestry unit. 
(d)  The county fire department has the authority to deny any and all permits issued by the state forestry unit or the state department of natural resources. 
(e)  All fires shall be closely supervised at all times with a garden hose in place and operable. 
(f)  If the county fire department responds to an illegal burn the following course of action shall be taken: 
(1)  First offense of subject or owner of property—Written warning and extinguishment. 
(2)  Second offense—A written ticket and extinguishment of fire. Fine of $100.00 to go to the county fire department. 
(3)  Third offense—Same as subsection (f)(2) with a fine of $200.00. 
(4)  All other offenses—Fines to range from $200.00 to $15,000.00 at the discretion of the judge. 
(Ord. of 1-31-95) 
Secs. 32-27—32-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 32-30. - Fireworks prohibited. 
(a)  "Fireworks" as used in this section, means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, balloons requiring fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. 
The term "fireworks" shall not include: 
(1)  Model rockets and model rocket engines, designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models; toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content does not average more than 0.25 grains of explosive mixture per paper cap; nor toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term "fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes. 
(2)  Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are non-explosive and non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops each containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm corporation or other entity to sell, offer to sell or use, explode, cause to be exploded, manufacture, or transport any fireworks within the limits of Houston County, except those individuals and companies recognized by the State of Georgia who are in the pyrotechnic business who perform fireworks displays during publicly recognized and sanctioned 4th of July and/or other publicly sanctioned events. 
(Res. of 6-21-05; Res. of 6-20-06) 
Chapter 38 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 68; zoning, ch. 72. 
State Law reference— Classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. 7, sec. 1, par. 3; The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas; conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-38; removal of transportable housing from lands subject to writ of possession, O.C.G.A. § 44-7-59; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Temporary location. 
Before any person shall locate or relocate a mobile home within the limits of the county for any purpose other than resale, he shall apply for and obtain from the county tax commissioner of the county a permit authorizing this location or relocation. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1071; Ord. of 11-2-93) 
Sec. 38-39. - Relocation outside county. 
The owner of a mobile home or relocatable home, before relocating it from a point within the limits of the county to a point outside the limits of the county, shall make application to the county tax commissioner for a permit and decal authorizing this relocation. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1072; Ord. of 11-2-93) 
Secs. 38-3—38-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCATION OR RELOCATION PERMIT 

Sec. 38-36. - Violation of article. 
Any person who shall fail to comply with or violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided by law, all as provided by 1971 Ga. Laws, page 631. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1086) 
Sec. 38-37. - Authority to prescribe additional regulations. 
The board of commissioners may adopt such other reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the intent of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1079) 
Sec. 38-38. - Location or relocation inside county. 
Before any person shall locate or relocate a mobile home within the limits of the county for any purpose other than resale, he shall apply for and obtain from the county tax commissioner a permit authorizing this location or relocation. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1071) 
Sec. 38-39. - Relocation outside county. 
The owner of a mobile home or relocatable home, before relocating it from a point within the limits of the county to a point outside the limits of the county, shall make application to the county tax commissioner for a permit and decal authorizing this relocation. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1072) 
Sec. 38-40. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall own or have located within the limits of the county any mobile or relocatable home, for any purpose other than resale, unless application for a current year's permit shall have been made and a permit received in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No person shall initially locate any mobile or relocatable home or relocate any mobile or relocatable home within the limits of the county or outside the limits of the county, for any purpose other than resale, without having made application and obtained the required permit. 
(c)  No person shall occupy any mobile home as a residence unless a current year's permit shall have been issued therefor as required by this article. 
(d)  No owner or operator of a mobile home park shall permit any mobile home to be located or relocated within the confines of that park for residential use unless the permit required by this article has been obtained. No owner or operator of any mobile home park shall permit any mobile or relocatable home presently located within the limits of that park owned by him to remain in the park unless a current year's permit authorizing the continued location as required by this article has been obtained. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-1080—8-1083) 
Sec. 38-41. - Attachment of decal. 
Every owner of a mobile home or relocatable home to be used for any purpose other than resale within the limits of the county shall have a proper permit and decal affixed to the mobile or relocatable home in such a manner as to cause the decal to be easily visible for inspection at all times the mobile or relocatable home is being used within the limits of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1073) 
Sec. 38-42. - Fee. 
A fee in an amount determined by the board of commissioners from time to time for the issuance and annual renewal of each mobile home or relocatable home permit and decal shall be paid by the owner to the county tax commissioner when the permit is issued. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1074; Ord. of 11-2-93) 
Sec. 38-43. - Application and permit forms. 
The county tax commissioner may prescribe forms for the application for a permit under this article and for any permit issued pursuant thereto, as well as any other document required in connection with the application or permit, and the county tax commissioner may require that applicants furnish such information in writing as may be reasonably required to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1075; Ord. of 11-2-93) 
Sec. 38-44. - Approval of site. 
Upon receipt of an application for the location or relocation of a mobile home or relocatable home, the county tax commissioner shall determine whether or not it is located on a site approved by the county planning and zoning commission. If the location or proposed location of the mobile home or relocatable home has not been approved by that commission, the application therefor shall be denied. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1076; Ord. of 11-2-93) 
Sec. 38-45. - Payment of taxes. 
All applicable ad valorem taxes must be paid prior to the issuance of any prescribed deed. The applicant for location or relocation of a mobile or relocatable home shall present to the county tax commissioner a tax receipt from the tax commissioner of the county, and, if the mobile home is located or to be located within the city limits of any municipality in the county, a tax receipt from the city clerk of Centerville, Perry or Warner Robins. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1077; Ord. of 11-2-93) 
Sec. 38-46. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
If, upon application for a permit for location or relocation of a mobile home as required by this article, it shall be determined that there are past due ad valorem taxes owing either to the municipalities or to the county, the county tax commissioner shall collect such delinquent taxes due to the county, and may add any penalty, interest and costs as provided by law on any delinquencies; and further if there are outstanding ad valorem taxes due to a municipality, the county tax commissioner shall require proof that such delinquent taxes and any penalty, interest and costs as provided by law on any delinquencies have been paid. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1084; Ord. of 11-2-93) 
Sec. 38-47. - Issuance; contents; use. 
If the site of location or proposed location of a mobile home or relocatable home has been approved for that use by the county planning and zoning commission and if all ad valorem taxes due under the provisions of this article have been paid, the county tax commissioner shall issue a permit with a decal as prescribed in 1971 Ga. Laws, page 631, as amended. The permit shall identify the mobile home or relocatable home involved and the site on which it is to be located, and shall be valid only for that structure and for that site. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1078; Ord. of 11-2-93) 
Sec. 38-48. - Connection of utilities. 
No person supplying electricity, gas or water shall connect any electricity, gas or water into any mobile home or relocatable home unless that home shall have been issued a current year's permit as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1085) 
Secs. 38-49—38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME PARKS AND SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 38-81. - Guidelines for installation. 
Installation of manufactured homes within the unincorporated areas of Houston County shall be according to Appendix A to Chapter 120-3-7, Rules and Regulations of the Office of Commissioner of Insurance Safety Fire Division, as amended, being herein incorporated by reference for all purposes. 
(Min. of 2-6-01) 
Sec. 38-82. - Inspections. 
There shall be two required inspections on any manufactured home being installed before the power is allowed to be connected: 
(1)  Setup inspection: Before any underpinning is installed and after the electrician and plumber have completed their connections, an inspection of the home shall be required. The home will need to be unlocked for this inspection. 
(2)  Final inspection: Before the power is connected to the home, a final inspection of the home must be approved. This will require all entrances to have completed stairs and landings and installation of the underpinning shall be completed. Power will not be connected until the required type of underpinning, stairs and landings are installed. 
(Min. of 2-6-01) 
Sec. 38-83. - Permit issuance procedure. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued for the construction, establishment or alteration of a mobile home park or subdivision until a preliminary plan and a final plan have been submitted to the building inspector, who will forward those plans within five days to the planning board for review and approval, with or without conditions. A copy of the approved preliminary plan and conditions, if any, shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector. The planning commission shall have 30 days in which to complete its review. The planning commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the board for review and approval or disapproval. 
(b)  Approval of the preliminary plan shall indicate approval of location only and no work shall commence on the site until a final plan has been completed, approved and a public hearing held thereon. 
(c)  A final plan shall be prepared which shall correct any conditions placed on the preliminary plan in addition to the requirements listed in section 38-84(b). The final plan shall be prepared for all of the property ultimately to be developed but may show several stages of construction. In no case shall an individual stage of construction be less than five acres in size. Subsequent stages of construction shall conform to the approved final plans. 
(d)  The planning commission shall have 30 days to complete its review of the final plan and forward it to the board, which shall approve or disapprove the final plan. 
(e)  When a final plan is approved, the plan shall be kept on file in the office of the board of commissioners. If the property approved for a mobile home park or subdivision is sold, subsequent owners shall construct according to the approved plan. Departures from the approved plan shall not be permitted without first following the procedures described in this chapter for preliminary and final plans. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2002) 
Sec. 38-84. - Plan requirements. 
(a)  Preliminary plan. A preliminary site plan shall show the following information: 
(1)  Existing features: 
a.  The bearings and distances of the boundary lines of the property in single ownership to be subdivided or developed. 
b.  The location of any streams, natural drainageways and other waterways which exist on the property. 
c.  The distance and direction to public water lines. 
d.  The name, location and right-of-way width of existing streets on the property or on the land adjoining the property. 
(2)  Proposed design features: 
a.  The location and specifications of proposed streets, improvements to existing streets including right-of-way lines, proposed paving and proposed pavement widths and street names. 
b.  The location and size of all mobile home spaces. In the case of a mobile home subdivision, the dimensions of each lot shall be indicated. 
c.  Proposed location of all service buildings and structures, including structures to be used in connection with water and sewage treatment. 
d.  Proposed setback lines for all mobile homes and service buildings. 
e.  Proposed location and design treatment of all vehicular entrances and other landscaping features. 
f.  A statement which shall describe the electrical distribution system and electrical feeders. 
g.  A statement which shall describe the method by which sanitary sewers and treatment facilities will be provided and the method of treatment. 
h.  A statement which shall describe the method by which water facilities will be provided and the method of treatment. 
(b)  Final plan. A final plat plan shall show the following information: 
(1)  All of the information shown on the preliminary plan. 
(2)  The location and size of the electrical distribution system and feeders for street lighting, entrances and exits, common areas, buildings and mobile home spaces, with supporting engineering data necessary to evaluate the electrical design. 
(3)  The location and size of all water distribution lines and sewer collection lines to and from mobile home spaces, buildings and structures and related facilities and engineering data necessary to evaluate the systems. 
(4)  A drainage plan for the entire park or subdivision showing the ultimate disposition of all surface water. 
(5)  The location, size, layout, design and construction of each building in accord with the standards set by the Southern Building Code and Insurance Underwriters' Laboratory. 
(6)  A certificate of approval signed by the county administrative assistant or his duly authorized representative. 
(7)  A certificate of approval signed by the health officer or his duly authorized representative. 
(8)  A certificate that the plan and all engineering data were prepared by, or under the supervision of, a registered engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2003) 
Sec. 38-85. - Site provisions. 
(a)  Area. The minimum area per park or subdivision shall be five acres. 
(b)  Lot size. The minimum mobile home space shall be 4,500 square feet; minimum width 50 feet, except that where septic tanks are used the minimum lot size required by the health department shall prevail. 
(c)  Setbacks. No mobile home shall be set back less than ten feet from the right-of-way line; ten feet from the rear line; seven feet from a side line in mobile home parks, subdivisions or travel trailer parks. 
(d)  Boundary setbacks. 
(1)  No mobile home space, building, or related structure shall be set back less than 30 feet from the boundary lines of the park, unless the adjacent property is utilized for mobile home parks or subdivisions, in which case the same setbacks as shown in subsection (c) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  When a mobile home park or subdivision abuts a residential, business or commercial district, a planted buffer four feet thick and maintained to a height of eight feet shall be provided along the entire boundary. 
(e)  Number of spaces. The minimum number of spaces completed and ready for occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted in a mobile home park or subdivision shall be 30 spaces. 
(f)  Commercial facilities. Convenience establishments of a commercial nature, including stores, laundry and dry cleaning establishments and pickup stations, beauty shops and barber shops and management offices may be permitted in the final plans or future alterations of mobile home parks or subdivisions provided these establishments and the parking areas relate primarily to their operations, and these commercial facilities: 
(1)  Shall not occupy more than ten percent of the total area of the park. 
(2)  Shall be subordinate to the residential use and character of the park. 
(3)  Shall be located, designed and intended to serve frequent trade or service needs of persons residing in the park. 
(4)  Shall present no visible evidence as to their commercial character from any portion of any district outside the park. 
(g)  Access. No park or subdivision shall be located except with direct access to a county, state or federal highway, with a minimum right-of-way width of not less than 60 feet for the portion used for entrance and exit. 
(h)  Street width. The minimum right-of-way width of a street within a park or subdivision shall be 60 feet. All streets therein shall be paved to a width of 20 feet. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2004) 
Sec. 38-86. - Inspections. 
The health officer shall make frequent inspections of all mobile home parks or subdivisions to ensure safeguarding the health and safety of mobile home occupants and the general public. Whenever the health officer finds conditions or practices in violation of these regulations and/or state or county health regulations, he shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the permit was issued, stating the violation and giving a reasonable period of time for correction of the violation. The health officer shall reinspect the facility in violation, at the end of the reasonable period of time, and if the violation remains uncorrected, he shall give notice to the person responsible that his permit has been suspended, with copies of this notice sent to the director of the building and zoning department and the county attorney. Upon notice of suspension, the person responsible shall cease operation of the mobile home facility or travel trailer park; the director of the building and zoning department shall suspend the occupancy and use permit and the county attorney shall take such action as he deems necessary to correct the conditions. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2005) 
Sec. 38-87. - Porches, carports and awnings; additions and/or alterations. 
(a)  Additions and/or alterations to mobile homes in mobile home parks and subdivisions shall not protrude beyond the setback limits described in section 38-85(c). The design and materials used in additions and/or alterations shall be those associated with the mobile home industry and approved by state and county building codes. 
(b)  Application for the approval of additions and/or alterations and the issuance of a building permit shall be made to the building inspector. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2006) 
Sec. 38-88. - Mobile home park, subdivision offices. 
The park or subdivision office will keep on file, for inspection and reference, the approved final plan and any subsequent plans of additions and alterations. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2007) 
Sec. 38-89. - New mobile home parks, subdivisions. 
New parks and subdivisions shall be established and existing uses enlarged only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, provided all other sections of these regulations are complied with. Applicants shall submit to the planning commission their application containing all required and necessary information, including written approval signed by the county health officer and the building inspector. If the application is approved, as prescribed in these regulations, a permit shall be issued, provided the applicant signs an agreement approved by the board agreeing to comply with all state and county laws, specifications and regulations. An annual permit shall be obtained from the board by all mobile home park and subdivision operators, as evidence that the facility is operating in accordance with all requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2008) 
Sec. 38-90. - Temporary use. 
A single mobile home or travel trailer may be used for an office in a subdivision by the developer, or for other special purposes upon written approval of the board. These mobile homes shall meet all the setback requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2009) 
Cross reference— Temporary location of a mobile home, § 38-1. 
Sec. 38-91. - Incidental structures; sales of mobile homes. 
Each type of development shall provide automobile parking space, utility systems and other structures incidental thereto. Mobile home sales shall not be permitted in any mobile home park or subdivision. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2010) 
Chapter 42 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; adult entertainment, ch. 18-76 et seq.; courts, ch. 22; solid waste, ch. 26; emergency services, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Violation of ordinances of counties, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60; Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; authorization to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 

Sec. 42-1. - Trespassing on county property. 
There shall be no trespassing on any property owned by the county and posted with appropriate signs informing the public that trespassing is prohibited. For purposes of this section, trespassing shall include but shall not be limited to the overnight parking of any vehicles, including but not limited to certain large trucks commonly known as 18-wheelers, in any parking lot which the county may own. Signs will be posted in the parking lots, and this section shall be enforced by the county marshal. 
A violation of this section shall be punishable for the first offense by imposition of a fine not to exceed $100.00; for the second offense imposition of a fine not to exceed $250.00 and for the third offense imposition a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Each day any violation of this section shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1001; Mo. of 7-7-92; Amd. of 2-21-12) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq. 
Sec. 42-2. - Discharge of firearms. 
It shall be unlawful to willfully and recklessly discharge a firearm so that the projectile from the firearm trespasses on the property of another. Violation of this section shall be punishable upon conviction as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1002) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; discharge of firearm on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105. 
Sec. 42-3. - Houston County public boat landing; acts prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person while on the property owned by the county known as the Houston County Public Boat Landing, located at Georgia Highway 96 and the Ocmulgee River, to commit any of the following acts: 
(1)  Consume any alcoholic beverage; 
(2)  Discharge any firearm; 
(3)  Camp or stay overnight; 
(4)  Building or maintain any open fire; or 
(5)  Swim in the Ocmulgee River. 
Violation of this section shall be punishable upon conviction as provided in section 1-11. 
(Min. of 9-7-93(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-4. - Public nuisance in relation to dwelling, building, structure or property. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of the county, is authorized by the O.G.C.A. title 41, nuisances, chapter 2, abatement of nuisances generally, section 7 to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish certain defined dwellings, buildings, or structures in the manner provided in said Code section and Code sections 41-2-8 through 41-2-17 when such property is in violation of the aforementioned Code sections. 
(b)  The board of commissioners of the county, finds that there exist in the unincorporated area of the county dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; which have other conditions in existence which render such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of such county; and which are vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed. 
(c)  The definitions of terms in O.G.C.A. § 41-2-8(1) through (12), are adopted as the definitions of those terms as used in this section. 
(d)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the unincorporated areas of the county to construct and to maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or to maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(e)  The Houston County Building Inspector's Office, and any agent of such office, are designated to exercise the powers prescribed by this section, and, as such, come within the definition of "public officer" in O.G.C.A. § 41-2-8(10). 
(f)  (1)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer designated in subsection (e) to exercise the powers prescribed by this section by a public authority or by at least five residents of the unincorporated area of the county charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property located in the unincorporated area of the county is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, said public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.G.C.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the county where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(2)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
a.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
b.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this Code section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.G.C.A. chapter 39A of title 43, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
c.  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the designated officer or agent may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
d.  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; 
e.  That the amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(3)  The lien provided for in paragraph e. of subsection (2) of this Code section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (g) of O.G.C.A. § 41-2-12. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.G.C.A. chapter 4 of title 48; provided, however, that the limitation of O.G.C.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the county whose ordinance is being enforced. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(4)  The board of commissioners of the county may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(5)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.G.C.A. § 5-3-29. 
(6)  In addition to the procedures and remedies in this section, the board of commissioners of the county may provide by ordinance that designated public officers may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this section. 
(7)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(g)  Complaints issued by the public officer pursuant to this section shall be served in the manner provided for in O.G.C.A. § 41-2-12(a) through (h). 
(Ord. of 3-5-02) 
Sec. 42-5. - Yard sales/garage sales. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term yard sale/garage sale shall mean the sale or trading of used clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise on a residentially zoned lot or parcel of land within the county. 
(b)  Said yard sales/garage sales shall be allowed on a residential lot or parcel for not more than two sales not to exceed two days each during a 12-month period. 
(c)  Said yard sales/garage sales shall be allowed on commercially zoned property within the county when conducted completely within an enclosed building. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Amd. of 3-27-90) 
Chapter 50 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 68. 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. 
Building material means any material such as lumber, roofing material, brick, concrete block, plaster, gutters, sand, gravel or other substances used in repairs or alteration of existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing structures. 
Bulk container means a metal container not less than four cubic yards in capacity, and not larger than eight cubic yards in capacity, with a lid opening on top and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by specially equipped trucks used by the county landfill, placed in county-designated areas, for the disposal of household trash only. 
Compactor site means a container of approximately 42 cubic yards in capacity, constructed by the county, for the disposal and compaction of county household trash only. 
Director means the county engineer or his designee, who shall be the principal officer responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. 
Garbage means the byproducts of animal or vegetable matter resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as a breeding area or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. Garbage shall also include putrescible wastes which are capable of being quickly decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include but are not necessarily limited to kitchen waste, animal manure, offal, and hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poisons, acids, caustic matter or solutions, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, explosives, sewage sludge, radioactive materials and highly flammable substances. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Junked vehicle includes any wrecked or inoperable automobile, truck or other vehicle, or any vehicle which does not bear a current license plate or a current inspection sticker. 
Landfill means a disposal site where solid waste, other than putrescible waste or hazardous waste, is disposed of using landfilling techniques. 
Landfilling means a method of disposing of solid waste, except putrescible waste or hazardous waste, on land, by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Litter means any garbage, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals or other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Loading and unloading area means a space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid waste for future use in accordance with an approved procedure. 
Recycling means the process by which reclaimed resources are transformed into new products in such a manner that the original products may lose their identity. 
Rubbish includes wastepaper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metal, cans, glass, packing material and similar material. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes are disposed of using sanitary landfilling techniques. 
Scavenge and scavenging mean unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
Small dead animals means cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size having a weight of less than 50 pounds. 
Solid waste means putrescible waste, except water-carried body waste, and shall include garbage, rubbish (paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metal, tin cans, glass, crockery and dunnage), ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial waste (waste materials from industrial operations), residue from incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, abandoned automobiles, dredging wastes, construction waste and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this section. 
Tree and shrubbery trimmings means waste accumulations of tree branches, tree limbs, tree stumps, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery cuttings or clippings or other natural waste. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2023(e)) 
Sec. 50-3. - Enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  The county sanitarian, the county marshal, or the director or inspectors designated by him shall investigate complaints or violations of any provisions of this chapter. They shall determine if there has been a violation and initiate an attempt to obtain compliance with this chapter by the person in violation thereof. 
(b)  The director or his designated inspectors, the county sanitarian or the county marshal shall be authorized to sign a complaint or issue a summons against the violator. 
(c)  In case of any violation of this chapter, the director, with the approval of the county attorney, in addition to any other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate proceedings to prevent such violation, or to correct or abate such violation. 
(d)  Upon appropriate notice to the person violating this chapter, the director may suspend any service or the use of any facility maintained by the board of commissioners during the period such violation continues to exist. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2023(a)—(d)) 
Sec. 50-4. - Authority of director of county landfill. 
The collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste shall be under the supervision and control of the director of the county landfill. In the performance of his duties, the director shall have the authority to establish routes and days of collection and such other matters as may pertain to the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste as he may deem necessary and reasonable. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2002) 
Sec. 50-5. - Operating hours for county landfill. 
The operating hours of the county landfill shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and from 8:30 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. on Saturday. The landfill shall be closed on Sundays. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2004; Min. of 12-7-93) 
Sec. 50-6. - Use of public disposal sites. 
(a)  Use required; exceptions. All domestic and other acceptable solid waste shall be delivered and deposited at authorized public disposal sites in accordance with the directions and orders of the director or his designee in charge of operations; except, however, privately operated sites may be used for the sanitary disposal of industrial waste or other specified waste upon the written approval of the director and the board of commissioners, upon the issuance of appropriate disposal permits as required by the regulations of the state department of natural resources and the federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
(b)  Designation of sites; use regulations. 
(1)  Public sites approved for the disposal of refuse shall be identified by appropriate directional signs posted near the roadside and at the location of the county sanitary landfill. 
(2)  Such sites shall be maintained in use until permanently closed, at which time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting and through public advertisements. 
(3)  The board of commissioners may restrict certain sites or portions thereof to specific types of refuse. Only household trash shall be disposed of in compactor sites and bulk container sites. 
(4)  Commercial collectors shall only use the county landfill. 
(5)  Residents of the county, other than commercial collectors, may use public compactor sites and bulk container sites without charge, in accordance with the regulations for the particular site and under the instruction of the site attendant. 
(6)  No refuse generated outside the county will be accepted at any disposal site. 
(c)  Ownership of waste. All materials delivered and deposited for disposal in a disposal site shall immediately become the property of the county. 
(Code 1976, §§ 4-2015—4-2017) 
Sec. 50-7. - Disposal of certain materials at county landfill prohibited. 
Hazardous or liquid waste or highly combustible industrial waste shall not be disposed of in the county landfill. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2009) 
Sec. 50-8. - Private disposal sites. 
(a)  Location, design and operation. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited, on land under his ownership and control, any refuse without first having obtained a disposal area permit as required by the regulations of the state department of natural resources, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency and the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Any person operating a private landfill site of any kind shall be required to comply with the following provisions: 
a.  These facilities shall not be permitted within: 
1.  Five hundred feet of the nearest residence. 
2.  One-half mile of a private well. 
3.  Two miles of a public well or water supply. 
4.  Ten thousand feet of an airport. 
b.  Traffic routes, entrances and exits to the facility shall be approved by the county engineer. 
c.  All facilities shall have an operator in attendance at all times when the landfill is in use, and the landfill must be barricaded when closed to the public. 
d.  All facilities permitted after January 1, 1987, shall be enclosed with a security fence at least six feet in height, consisting of wire of not more than a two-inch mesh, or some other similar fencing material or device approved by the county engineer. 
e.  Any changes in the normal drainage of the property upon which the facility is located shall be accommodated by storm sewers or other appropriate drainage structures as necessary to properly care for drainage. These stormwater structures shall be approved by the county engineer prior to their installation and shall be installed at the expense of the user. Design of these structures shall be by a registered professional engineer. 
f.  These facilities shall be approved or disapproved by the board of commissioners. Certification by a registered engineer that the site meets state standards shall be submitted to the board of commissioners prior to the approval of the permit. A state permit, a county license and written approval of the county engineer shall be required before any fill operation begins. 
g.  The operator shall permit to be placed in the facility only those materials which are authorized by appropriate permits. Specifically, and without limiting the provisions of this subsection, there shall be no disposition in any facility of solid waste or nonsolid waste which would be classified as hazardous material. 
h.  Nonsolid waste shall not be disposed of in the facility. 
i.  All waste deposited or disposed of in nonputrescible landfills must be covered with a minimum six-inch thickness of soil once per week. 
j.  The operator of the facility shall obtain and maintain in force a performance bond, payable to the county, conditioned upon the operation of the facility in accordance with the terms of this Code and all state and federal regulations applicable thereto. The bond shall be set at $10,000.00 per acre of property zoned for a landfill, with a minimum bond of $250,000.00. Evidence of compliance with the bond requirement shall be submitted to the county attorney prior to approval by the board of commissioners. 
k.  The operator of the facility shall obtain and maintain records which will reflect, as a minimum, the date and hour of the deposit of each load of solid waste, the name and address of the owner of the truck in which the waste was delivered, and a general description of the waste which is deposited. 
l.  Every operator shall make the facility and the records maintained in connection therewith available for inspection at reasonable times by the county engineer or other person designated by the governing authority of the county so as to enable the county to determine whether the facility is being operated properly. 
(3)  In addition to other remedies, if the county shall determine that the facility is being operated in violation of provisions of this section, and the violations are not corrected in a reasonable time thereof, the county may order the facility closed or its operation suspended. In default of compliance with such order, the county may seek an injunction to restrain further operations either on a permanent basis or until violations of this section are corrected. 
(b)  Maintenance. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health. 
(c)  Inspection. The director or his designated representative shall have the right to enter a private disposal site at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting the site to determine whether or not the site is in compliance with this chapter and all other pertinent laws and regulations of the county. The inspections shall not in any way constitute approval of the operation therein, and shall not relieve or release the owner or operator of the liability for operating the facility in accordance with applicable county, state or federal regulations. 
(Code 1976, §§ 4-2018—4-2020) 
Sec. 50-9. - Permits and licenses for refuse collectors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect refuse within the unincorporated area of the county, except from his own residence, business or industrial plant, without first having obtained a proper permit from the state department of natural resources and the county and without first having obtained a county business license. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2003) 
Sec. 50-10. - Cover for refuse collection vehicles. 
All persons who desire to haul refuse over roads which are a part of the county road system shall use a vehicle provided with a cover and operate it so as to prevent refuse from being dropped, blown or spilled therefrom. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2013) 
Sec. 50-11. - Property maintenance generally. 
All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a litter-free condition. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2014(a)) 
Sec. 50-12. - Storage of refuse or junk. 
Refrigerators and other airtight containers. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing therefrom the lock or door. This subsection shall not apply to any appliance, refrigerator or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and which has been crated, strapped or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2005(2)—(4); Ord. of 8-20-96) 
Sec. 50-13. - Blocking storm drain or drainage ditch. 
No person shall place any refuse, trash or refuse receptacle or container on, over or near any storm drain or drainage ditch, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2005(1)) 
Sec. 50-14. - Sweeping litter into street or sidewalk. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk the accumulation of litter from any building or property. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2014(b)) 
Sec. 50-15. - Scavenging. 
No person other than the owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the director, shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, or remove any contents therefrom or remove such container from its location. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2005(5)) 
Sec. 50-16. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Throw or deposit any solid waste on any public or private street or to scatter such solid waste or litter on any public or private property. 
(2)  Throw or deposit any solid waste, trash or debris in any marsh area, stream, drainage ditch, body of water or beach area. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2005(6)) 
Sec. 50-17. - Transport of loose materials. 
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any county roadway to transport the materials without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle. This section shall not apply to the transportation of poultry, livestock, or silage or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2005(7)) 
Sec. 50-18. - Disposal of industrial waste. 
In accordance with the regulations of the state department of natural resources and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by any factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing such waste. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2006) 
Sec. 50-19. - Disposal of hazardous waste. 
No hazardous waste shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of solid waste by the county landfill. Any hazardous waste should be disposed of in a manner consistent with the regulations of the state department of natural resources and the federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2007) 
Sec. 50-20. - Disposal of waste building material—Generally. 
(a)  The director shall not be responsible for the collecting or hauling of building material originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of a new building or alternations or additions to an existing building, of whatever type, or from demolition of existing structures. All construction site operators and/or owners are required to control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter and sanitary waste at construction sites that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor, and disposed of only at the county landfill. 
(b)  Building materials as described in subsection (a) of this section shall be dumped only in the county landfill at the same rate charged for commercial haulers. 
(c)  The dumping of asbestos and asbestos-containing debris is allowed in the county landfill under the following circumstances: 
(1)  All deliveries of asbestos debris must be scheduled a minimum of one day in advance. 
(2)  All deliveries of asbestos debris must be double-bagged in heavy duty polyurethane bags in accordance with the requirements of the Environmental Protection Division. 
(3)  The director of the county landfill has the authority to cut off the dumping of asbestos debris at any time should he feel the quantity is not manageable. 
(4)  The fee required for handling asbestos debris shall be $30.00 per ton for in-county asbestos and $40.00 per ton for out-of-county asbestos. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2008; Amd. of 9-16-14(1)) 
Sec. 50-21. - Same—Burial or burning. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any accumulation of building materials on property other than that located within the county landfill. Burning excess and scrap materials is permissible, provided that any and all residue therefrom is gathered and properly disposed of at the county landfill. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2005(8)) 
Sec. 50-22. - Disposal of waste contaminated by contagious disease. 
The clothing, bedding or other refuse from places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be decontaminated prior to removal under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in compactor sites. Such materials shall only be disposed of at the county landfill and only after they have been decontaminated. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2010) 
Sec. 50-23. - Disposal of hypodermic needles. 
No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe or hypodermic needle or any other instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device and without safeguarding the disposal thereof by wrapping or securing the device in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2011) 
Sec. 50-24. - Compaction of cardboard boxes and cartons. 
Prior to depositing refuse for collection in authorized containers or receptacles or in commercial containers, the person disposing of any such boxes or cartons or the person in charge of the premises shall collapse all cardboard boxes and cartons. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2012) 
Sec. 50-25. - Disposal of personal property after the issuance of a writ of possession. 
Upon the issuance of a writ of possession pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-7-55(c), the owner of the premises subject to the writ shall cause any personal property of the tenant removed from the premises to be placed in a container for pick up. The owner shall not violate any other provisions of this Code as to the location of the container. 
If the owner does not have a utility account at the premises subject to the writ with the county utility department, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to transport or have transported to the county landfill or some other permitted landfill any personal property containerized after the execution of the write, within seven days of being put out for pick up. 
The county or its agent will not transport any items it would not transport pursuant to other provisions of this Code, including, but not limited to, construction and demolition materials. 
(Amd. of 10-20-09; Amd. of 9-7-10) 
Secs. 50-26—50-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment of Apr. 5, 2005, repealed ch. 50, art II, in its entirety. Said ordinance further provided for a new art. II to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by an ordinance of Mar. 4, 1997. 

Sec. 50-36. - Application. 
This article applies to the preparation, storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of all residential solid waste in the area under the jurisdiction of the county within the unincorporated areas of the county. It prescribes rules and regulations therefore, regulates the private collection of solid waste, and prohibits the dumping of solid waste within the district. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-37. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Agreement. This agreement, including exhibits and any amendments thereto, agreed to by the county and the contractor during the term of the agreement. 
Bags. Plastic sacks furnished by customer designed to store refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by top. Total weight of bag and its contents shall not exceed 50 lbs. 
Bulky waste. White goods (stoves, freezers, dishwashers, trash compactors, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, dryers, water heaters, air conditioners), furniture and other waste materials not included: (construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste or stable matter) with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for containers. (This item does not include yard waste.) 
Bundle. Newspapers and magazines securely tied together forming an easily handled package not exceeding 50 lbs. in weight. (May be bagged or otherwise containerized in lieu of being tied together.) 
Collection equipment. Equipment used on this contract which shall not exceed seven years in age. 
Commodity. Material that can be sold in a spot or future market for processing and use or reuse. Each commodity shall retain its own identity and be kept separate. 
Commodity buyer. A buyer or processor of material described in this section. 
Construction debris. Waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations. 
Container—Solid waste (or roll-out solid waste container). A roll-out receptacle with a capacity of 90 to 100 gallons constructed of plastic, metal, or fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for lifting and having a tight fitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by vectors. The mouth of a container shall have an opening greater than or equal to that of the base. The containers shall be dark green in color bearing the county's name. 
Container—Recyclable materials. A receptacle with a capacity of 18 gallons designed for the purpose of curbside collection of recyclable materials. The receptacle shall be one made of hard plastic and shall be dark green in color. 
Contract documents. The request for proposals, instructions to contractors, contractor's proposal, general specifications, the contract performance bond and any addenda or changes to the foregoing documents agreed to by the county and the contractor. 
Contractor. The person, corporation, or partnership performing or proposing to perform refuse collection and disposal under contract with the county. 
County. County of Houston, Georgia or Houston County, Georgia. 
Dead animals. Animals or portions thereof that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or killed for commercial or human use. 
Disposal site. A refuse depository including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills, construction/demolition landfills, transfer stations, incinerators, and waste processing/separation centers licensed, permitted or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction and requiring such licenses, permits, or approvals to receive for processing or final disposal of refuse and dead animals. The disposal site is the Houston County MSW Landfill or Houston County Construction/Demolition Landfill near Kathleen, Georgia. All waste shall be disposed of at this facility by the contractor. 
Garbage or putrescible waste. Any and all dead animals of less than 20 lbs. in weight, except those slaughtered for human consumption; every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable, and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains, or other animal or vegetable matter (including, but not by way of limitation, used tin cans, and other food containers; and all putrescible or easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents); except (in all cases) any matter included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, rubbish, yard waste, or stable matter. 
Hazardous waste. Waste, in any amount, which is defined, characterized or listed as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal or state law, or waste, in any amount, which is regulated under federal or state law. The term "hazardous waste" shall also include lead acid batteries, acid, fertilizer, bulk insecticides, motor oil, gasoline, and liquid paint. 
Producer. An occupant of a residential unit who generates refuse. 
Recyclable material(s). Newsprint; aluminum and bi-metal cans; HDPE clear plastic milk jugs, and PET plastic soft drink containers. 
Refuse or residential refuse. This term shall refer to residential refuse, rubbish, and bulky waste, construction debris and stable matter generated at a residential unit unless the context otherwise required. 
Residential unit. A dwelling within the unincorporated area of Houston County occupied by a person or group of persons comprising not more than four families. A residential unit may be deemed occupied by the county when either water or domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether of single or multi-level construction, consisting of four or less contiguous or separate single-family dwelling units, shall be treated as a residential unit, except that each single-family dwelling within any such residential unit shall be billed separately as a residential unit. 
Rubbish. All waste wood, wood products, chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials not included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, garbage, hazardous waste or stable matter. 
Stable matter. All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal, livestock, or poultry enclosure, and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry, or livestock. 
Yard waste. Yard waste means leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silva cultural operations. Yard waste may be bundled, stacked, or bagged. The maximum size on yard waste will be limbs less than eight inches in diameter and five feet long. This item does not include land clearing debris. 
White goods. White goods (freezers, dishwashers, trash compactors, refrigerator, stoves, water tanks, water heaters, washers, dryers, and similar items). 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-38. - Findings. 
The board of commissioners hereby finds that the public health of the citizens of district described in section 54-4 would be adversely affected should individual citizens be allowed to dispose of solid waste upon their own private property. The board of commissioners finds that it would be in the public interest for the board to pass an ordinance further regulating garbage and solid waste collection and disposal in the district. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-39. - Boundaries, qualified private company. 
The boundaries of the district shall be all of the property situate, lying and being in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-40. - Use of receipts. 
All fees imposed herein below within the district shall be used and appropriated to pay the cost of collection, storage an/or disposal service within the district, and the necessary related expenses associated therewith by the county, franchisee, contractor collector, or county's designee, including, but not limited to, the purchase of solid waste collection, storage, and/or disposal vehicles, trailers and other equipment; the construction and operation of solid waste collection, storage, and/or disposal collection and/or transfer stations; transportation costs to the disposal site and/or transfer site; tipping fees and disposal charges; and such other costs and expenses as may be deemed needed from time to time by the board of commissioners in order to collect, store and/or dispose of solid waste generated within the district. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-41. - Preparation and storage generally. 
It shall be the duty of both the occupant and owner of every residential unit located in the district to keep all solid waste generated by each such residential unit, pending collection and disposal by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee, as follows: 
(1)  Solid waste shall be free from excessive liquid and placed in plastic bags, containers, or bundles or roll-out solid waste container. One 90—100 gallon roll-out solid waste container shall be provided to each residential unit by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee for use by that residential unit only, for solid waste storage and disposal purposes. 
(2)  Solid waste shall be placed in the roll-out solid waste container, bags, bundles, or other container. Such containers must be kept clean by the residential unit. All materials other than the roll-out solid waste container shall be placed alongside that container. Bulky waste to be disposed of shall also be placed neatly alongside the wheeled container. Yard waste must be segregated and also be placed alongside the roll-out solid waste container. Yard Waste consisting of leaves and grass clippings shall be placed in bags for collection and disposal. Solid waste in containers, bags, and bundles, along with bulky waste must be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on regular collection days or on the next collection day, if the regular collection day falls on a holiday. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-42. - Collection of refuse generally. 
(a)  The county shall have the exclusive right to collect and dispose of all residential solid waste within the district either through employees of the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee issued to a person engaged in the business of residential solid waste collection and disposal. No person shall collect or dispose of any residential solid waste within the district except as provided for herein and except with the express permission of the county. Any waste carried directly to the Houston County Landfill must be tarped or otherwise covered to prevent litter and debris from leaving the vehicle. 
(b)  The county, franchisee, contractor collector, or county's designee will collect solid waste within the district under the following conditions: 
(1)  Garbage, yard waste, and bulky waste will be collected once each week from residential unit. Recyclable materials shall be collected from each residential unit two times per month on regularly scheduled days. 
(2)  The county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee may decline to collect: 
a.  Garbage and rubbish contained in containers larger than 100 gallons; 
b.  Any containers that contain excessive liquid; or 
c.  Any garbage or rubbish not properly placed on the collection day. 
(3)  The county shall not be responsible for collection of: 
a.  Construction debris; or 
b.  Commercial solid waste. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-43. - Fees generally. 
(a)  The fees for collection of residential solid waste levied pursuant to the terms of this article, and all late charges accruing thereon are hereby levied severally against the owner and occupant of each residential unit, including all residential units located in mobile home courts and/or trailer courts. 
(b)  The fees and late charges, prescribed in this section shall constitute a continuing lien against the real property upon which each residential unit is located; on the personal property composing a residential unit, and upon the personal property of the occupant of each residential unit, until paid. 
(c)  The fees and late charges, prescribed in this section shall be billed in the following manner: (i) each residential unit or premises having service from the Houston County Water System shall be billed for the sanitation services hereunder on the aforesaid county water bill. Failure to pay the fees and late charges, for sanitation services shall result in the termination of both services. This shall be in addition to other remedies available to the county, including legal remedies. (ii) each residential unit or premises not having service from the Houston County Water System shall be billed by separate bill. Failure to pay the aforesaid sanitation services shall result in the collection of the aforesaid fees by any and all legal remedies available to the county. 
(d)  The monthly fees for solid waste collection hereby levied shall be due and payable as instructed on the bills, and if the same are not paid by the due date, there is hereby levied a late charge equal to ten percent of the amount due or $2.00, whichever is greater. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-44. - Fee rates. 
The fees for the collection and disposal of residential solid waste within the district shall be established from time to time by action of the board of commissioners. The initial fee shall be $11.00 per month per residential unit. Additional rollout containers at each residential unit shall be $6.00 per month. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-45. - Fee exemptions. 
(a)  Senior citizen exemption. Any senior citizen, age 65 or older, who is the head of the household and, who can provide proof they can dispose of their garbage in a neighbor's or family member's roll-out solid waste container will be exempted from the county's solid waste collection fee in its entirety. 
(b)  Special exemption. Any person with a condition that constitutes a hardship, in the sole opinion of the board of commissioners, may petition the Board for an exemption of all or a portion of the county's solid waste collection fee. 
(c)  [Requirements]. Each petitioner shall be required to provide adequate information on forms provided by the county to assist the county commissioners in making a determination as to the exemption. All exemption requests approved by the county commissioners shall be effective for a 12-month period of time following the granting of the exemption. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-46. - Payment. 
The county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee shall prepare and mail to each residential unit in the district, a bill showing the amounts of the monthly installments due for residential solid waste collection services. These statements shall be prepared monthly in advance and each monthly payment shall be paid in advance by the owner or occupant of each residential unit. A late payment penalty shall be imposed upon each account for which payment is not made within the time limits prescribed thereon. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-47. - Non-liability. 
(a)  Whenever the owner or occupant of a residential unit from which solid waste is collected by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee authorizes or permits the use of private driveways or other portions of private property for such collection, such authorization or permission, whether express or implied, shall be deemed to constitute a waiver on the part of the owner or occupant of the residential unit of any claim for damages against the county, its officers, agent, employees, franchisees, and contractors which result from the use of such private property in the collection process. 
(b)  The county or any person or entity acting as its franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee pursuant to franchise or contract shall be deemed to have been invited and authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collection of solid waste in those cases where other than curbside collection has been requested by the owner or occupant of a residential unit and approved by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-48. - Use of facilities required. 
The owner and occupant of each residential unit, including residential units located in mobile home courts and trailer courts, shall dispose of solid waste only by means of a collection and disposal service provided by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-49. - Termination of service. 
Whenever a residential unit becomes vacant, destroyed by fire or other casualty, or is demolished or for some other similar reason no longer generates solid waste, it is incumbent severally upon the owner and former occupant of such residential unit to notify the county of the same. The county may cause such investigation of the report as it deems appropriate and if the county finds the same to be consistent with the provisions hereof, the residential unit in question shall be removed from the solid waste collection list and the fee charge shall thereupon cease. Until such notice shall have been received by the county, however, the fee shall continue to be charged and shall continue to be collectible, notwithstanding the fact that service is not in fact rendered to the residential unit. Similarly, if service has been discontinued pursuant to a notice as provided in this section, but is thereafter resumed, or if land which previously vacant has been improved with a residential unit and begins to receive service, it shall be incumbent on the owner and occupant, severally, to notify the county of such commencement of or resumption of service. The fee prescribed in this article shall be payable for such property from and after the date of resumption of service, whether or not notice has been received. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-50. - Resumption of service. 
The county may charge a fee for resumption of service to the owner and/or occupant of a residential unit where service has been previously discontinued. The amount of such fee shall be that as set from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-51. - Unlawful disposal of refuse, garbage, or rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or bury or cause to be dumped or buried any garbage, refuse, solid waste, or rubbish anywhere in the area of the district not previously approved by the appropriate state authorities. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-52. - Violations of article generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and intentionally violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully and with intent to defraud the county, to evade or defeat or attempt to evade or defraud any fee, penalty, or interest due the county or the payment thereof, imposed by this article. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-53. - Unlawful burning. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or attempt to burn or cause to be burned any material of any nature in any container belonging to or used by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee for residential solid waste collection purposes. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-54. - Penalty for violations. 
Each violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-11 of the County Code Ordinances. Violations may be tried upon citations with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-6, et seq. Citations shall be issued by the sheriff's department or its designee. Service upon corporations, partnerships, or other entities and organizations shall be affected by serving any managing agent located in the county, or by serving the registered agent, or any officer or partner of the corporation, partnership, organization or entity. The provisions of this article may also be enforced through the use of other remedies, such as injunctive relief, provided by the laws of this state. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-55. - Violations by entities. 
Whenever a corporation, partnership, organization or other entity shall violate any of the provisions of this article such violations shall be deemed to be also that of the individual directors, officers, or agents of such corporation, partnership, organization or other artificial entity who shall have authorized, ordered or done any of the acts constituting in whole or in part such violation. In such cases, service shall also be made upon the individual director, officer, or other agent accused of authorizing, ordering, or doing acts constituting in whole or in part violations of this article. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-56. - Placement. 
The owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of each residential unit shall, no later than 7:00 a.m. on the normal pickup days designated by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee, place the containers at the location established by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee for pickup. Containers shall be removed from the location to the premises of the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of each such residential unit no later than 24 hours on the normal day of pickup, subject only to the exceptions enumerated in section 50-57. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-57. - Same—Exceptions. 
The following are excepted from section 50-56. 
(1)  Any person with documented disabilities, because of age or physical condition, living in a residential unit where there is no resident or occupant thereof physically capable of placing the container at the designated pickup location shall notify the county and if the county shall find that there is no one in or upon the residential unit on a regular basis physically capable of placing the container at the designated pickup location, then the county may arrange for the solid waste to be picked up at the place on the premises of the residential unit where the container is maintained by the occupant. 
(2)  The county may establish exceptions for designated residential unit which are determined to be unsuitable for curbside pickup, taking into consideration the terrain, features or other physical impediments, and at such premises, pickup service shall be provided to residential units as determined by the county; or in the alternative, the occupant may be instructed to place only plastic; securely tied bags at a designated location on a scheduled pickup days. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-58. - Removal from premises. 
The roll-out solid waste container furnished by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee shall not be removed from the premises of the residential unit to which they are delivered and it shall be the duty of the occupant of the residential unit, if the dwelling is to be vacated by the occupant, to notify the county seven days prior to the vacancy. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-59. - Replacement. 
If a container previously furnished by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee to any residential unit is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of the residential unit to immediately notify the county and to cooperate with the board of commissioners and the county sheriff in investigating the cause of the damage, destruction, or theft. Further, the owner or occupant shall, if requested to do so, appear in the appropriate court as a witness should a prosecution result from the investigation. A replacement container shall be furnished to the residential unit and such unit may be charged a replacement fee as determined by the county. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-60. - Additional containers. 
Additional containers may be obtained by each residential unit upon payment of an additional monthly fee to the county, as may be set from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Sec. 50-61. - Damaging containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and intentionally damage or destroy or to allow or permit damage to or destruction of any container provided by the county, its franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05) 
Chapter 54 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 68; zoning, ch. 72. 
State Law reference— Power to construct and maintain roads, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; probate court's jurisdiction involving the removal of obstructions from roads, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.1; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; obstructing, encroaching on, or injuring public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1; inspection of and reports on roads and bridges by county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-6; construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Adoption of highway plans. 
The Middle Georgia Regional Highway Plan and the Highway Plan for Houston County are hereby adopted. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1001) 
Sec. 54-2. - Prerequisites for construction of roads, drainage facilities or new subdivisions. 
(a)  Before beginning construction of any road, street or drainage facilities or any new subdivision, property owners shall notify the county engineer three working days prior to beginning work. The county engineer will be instructed not to accept any work done without prior knowledge, and preliminary plans of any new road construction in the county shall be inspected, reviewed and approved by the county engineer prior to approval of the plans by the planning commission. 
(b)  Following the approval of a new road by the board of commissioners and before construction is begun, all deeds to cover the right-of-way shall be made to the county and recorded. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1002) 
Secs. 54-3—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRIVEWAY PIPE INSTALLATIONS 

Sec. 54-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driveway includes any new ingress or egress to private or public property from a county road right-of-way, and shall include a permit for ingress or egress for temporary or permanent use. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1007(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-32. - Penalty for violation of article. 
A civil penalty of not less than $100.00 per day and not to exceed $500.00 per day shall be applicable to any person violating any provision of this article. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1007(i)(7)) 
Sec. 54-33. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for driveway installation shall subject the property owner or contractor to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of business and associated work activities. 
(b)  Upon notice from the issuing authority, work on any project being done contrary to the provisions of this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property or his authorized agent or the person in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
(c)  In the case of unauthorized installations, the contractor or owner shall be given written notice of the violation. If not corrected within ten days, county forces shall be authorized to correct the problem by removal at the expense of the person failing to carry out the rules set out in this article. 
(d)  Final inspection of the driveway may be required as a part of new building completion or other use inspection. Driveway pipe installation shall be finalized as part of the final inspection on all residential, commercial or other types of use. 
(e)  The county reserves the right to have any temporary nonpermitted ingress or egress fronting on a county road removed at the property owner's expense, if unsatisfactory by county standards. 
(f)  Performance bonds may be forfeited when applicable. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1007(i)(1)—(6)) 
Sec. 54-34. - Permit required. 
It shall be required that application for driveway pipe installation be made and that a permit be issued prior to the commencement of installation. This requirement shall be applicable to all driveways, county roads and streets located in the county, whether they be for residential, commercial, temporary use or utility purposes. Access driveways are not excluded from the scope of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1007(b)) 
Sec. 54-35. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Application for a permit for driveway installation shall be made with the county building official's office or the public works department. 
(b)  The application shall include the name and telephone number of the applicant, and the exact address of the location to be piped, or a description adequate for the public works director or county inspector to locate the proposed installation site. 
(c)  The applicant shall be advised that the proposed location must be inspected for purposes of determining the size of the pipe and the installation procedures required. 
(d)  Two consecutive working days shall be allowed for piping specifications to be made, and the applicant shall be notified of the results by phone unless the county is otherwise directed. 
(e)  The applicant shall be advised that one additional inspection will be required during the installation period and that the application fee shall incorporate the fee for the additional inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1007(c)) 
Sec. 54-36. - Encroachment on right-of-way. 
All applicants for a permit under this article shall be required to apply for ingress or egress authorization in order to access the county right-of-way for pipe installation purposes. The encroachment regulations shall cover the following: 
(1)  All driveway or access entrances from any county road or street must have a permit from the county. This includes modifications to existing driveways, headwalls, decorative entrance work, plantings and other like additions. 
(2)  Drainage ditches along county roads shall not be temporarily filled for access to building sites. No debris, excavation, building materials or other such thing shall be placed on the county right-of-way at construction sites. Any grading of construction sites requiring removal or placement of excavation or fill on a county road or street right-of-way shall not be performed without a plan submitted to and approved by the county engineer or the roads and bridges superintendent. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, encroach upon, solicit the sale of any merchandise on, or injure materially any part of any county road, and any person who unlawfully obstructs, encroaches upon, or injures said county road shall be responsible for reimbursing Houston County for the cost of removal of said obstructions or encroachments and the cost or repairs to the county road, included any costs associated with traffic management; provided, however, that such costs shall be limited to those costs which are directly incurred from such damages. Costs incurred for traffic management may include, but not be limited to, costs incurred for flagging, signing, or provision of detours, provided that these activities are directly caused by the obstruction, encroachment, or injury to the county road system. 
(4)  No mail box or newspaper delivery box (here in after referred to as mail box) shall be installed on any arterial road (as defined by Sec. 65.2 of the Comprehensive Land Development Regulations for Houston County) if it interferes with the safety of the traveling public or the function, maintenance, or operation of the county road system. All mailbox installation on arterial roads shall be approved by the building inspection department prior to installation and shall conform to the rules and regulations of the U.S. Postal Service as well as to standards established by Houston County for the location and construction of mailboxes. Houston County standards for location and construction of mailboxes are available from the building inspection office of Houston County. 
(5)  No basketball goals shall be allowed to be placed on any county right-of-way. 
(6)  Upon written notification to the property owner by certified mail to remove the obstruction as defined herein the following procedures shall be used: 
a.  If the property owner has not removed the obstruction within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice, the county shall remove the obstruction from the right-of-way. 
b.  Costs for removal shall be the responsibility of the property owner and constitute a lien against the property. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1007(d); Ord. of 1-22-02) 
Sec. 54-37. - Permit conditions; permit fee. 
A permit shall be issued under this article subject to the following terms: 
(1)  The contractor or owner shall make the installation at his own expense. 
(2)  The contractor or owner acknowledges upon the signing of his application that he will remove and relocate the facilities, at his own expense, pursuant to lawful request to do so. 
(3)  Any and all damage to pipes, rights-of-way or roads caused by the contractor or owner shall be the responsibility of the contractor or owner and under no circumstances a liability of the county. 
(4)  The applicant and owner will be responsible for any and all damage done by them to private property. 
(5)  The applicant and owner shall be responsible for all present and future maintenance. 
(6)  The contractor shall have a copy of the permit on the site at all times and shall present it upon the request of any authorized county official. 
(7)  The cost of obtaining a permit under this article shall be $25.00, which shall cover the expense of the two inspection phases required by this article, which are as follows: 
a.  Site investigation and pipe size determination. 
b.  Final inspection prior to pouring or laying the permanent driveway surface. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1007(e)) 
Sec. 54-38. - Specifications for pipe installation. 
Pipe installation under this article shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  All pipe shall be either class 3 reinforced concrete or corrugated metal. The public works department will determine which type pipe is to be installed on the initial inspection. 
(2)  Concrete pipe shall be class 3 reinforced pipe with a minimum joint length of four feet. Concrete pipe shall be full joint grouted inside and outside. 
(3)  Metal driveway pipe shall be a minimum of 14-gauge asphalt-coated corrugated pipe or a minimum of 12-gauge galvanized corrugated pipe. Drainage ditch pipe shall be a minimum of 16-gauge galvanized corrugated pipe with no traffic or weight load traveling over or placed on the pipe. 
(4)  Those driveways which service heavy equipment or truck traffic shall have the metal pipe option changed to 12-gauge asphalt-coated pipe, especially in the case of business and commercial sites. 
(5)  The diameter of the pipe is to be determined upon the required initial site inspection by a representative from the public works department. 
(6)  Pipe culverts for residential driveways must be a minimum of 24 feet in length, plus any additional length requirement due to special conditions such as ditches over two feet in depth, high fills or other safety considerations. 
(7)  Pipe culverts for commercial driveways shall be determined individually to suit conditions, use and safety. 
(8)  All piping shall have a minimum of one foot of earth cover or a special construction to achieve the same standard. The cover material shall be required to be a good grade of sandy clay or its equal, and shall be free from particles over two inches in size. All cover material shall be well compacted. 
(9)  Pipe shall be laid on a well-compacted true-to-line grade with a uniform bearing throughout the line. The line must have a minimum of one-tenth foot of fall per ten feet. 
(10)  All pipe shall be furnished by suppliers having state department of transportation approval. 
(11)  Special installations of pipe culverts for purposes other than driveways shall follow in general the guidelines stated in this section, with any changes to be approved by the county engineer or road superintendent. 
(12)  Arch pipe will be required when the depth of the ditch is not sufficient to handle standard round pipe. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1007(f)) 
Sec. 54-39. - Headwalls. 
(a)  Unless otherwise determined by the county public works and engineering office, all driveway pipes will require headwalls. The type and materials for such headwalls shall be determined by authorized officials of these departments. 
(b)  Driveways for commercial entrances will require concrete construction headwalls as approved by the county. Other driveways must be constructed using materials such as brick, concrete block, poured concrete or flared-end sections, particularly as pertains to residential driveways. Special types may be allowed by permission of the authorized county offices only. Any masonry or concrete headwalls shall have a footing at least eight inches deep under the end of the pipe. 
(c)  Any required junction boxes, drop inlets or special structures shall be of concrete block with filled centers, or poured concrete. Flared-end sections may be used where conditions are favorable. 
(d)  Headwalls must be a minimum of five feet from the edge of the road pavement. 
(e)  Headwalls must be in place for final inspection on all residential, commercial or other types of use. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1007(h)) 
Sec. 54-40. - Incorporation of the Access Management and Encroachment Control Manual. 
The Access Management and Encroachment Control Manual is hereby incorporated herein in its entirety in order to supplement and replace portions of this article II, driveway pipe installations. 
(Amd. of 5-16-17) 
Secs. 54-41—54-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERING 

Sec. 54-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
North Houston County means that portion of the county lying northward of a line drawn between the southern boundaries of land lot 91 of the tenth district and land lot 117 of the 11th district. North Houston County may be referred to in this article as "the area." 
(Code 1976, § 6-2001(b)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-67. - Administration and enforcement of article; official maps. 
(a)  Building and property numbering and naming of streets shall be controlled by the county engineer to prevent duplication and ensure an orderly address system for the area. The county engineer shall maintain a plat book of all streets, avenues and public ways within North Houston County showing the proper numbers of all houses or other buildings fronting upon all streets, avenues or other public ways. These plats shall be open to inspection by all persons during the office hours of the department. The county engineer shall inform any party applying therefor of the number assigned to or embraced within the limits of any lot or property as provided by this article. In case of conflict as to the proper number to be assigned any building, the county engineer shall determine the proper number. 
(b)  Whenever any house, building or other structure shall be erected or located in North Houston County, the owner shall procure the correct number as designated by the county engineer for the property and fasten the number so assigned upon the building as provided by this article. No building permit shall be issued for any house, building or other structure until the owner has procured from the county engineer the official number of the premises. Final approval of any structure erected, repaired, altered or modified shall be withheld by the county until permanent and proper numbers have been affixed to the structure. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2006) 
Sec. 54-68. - Uniform system established. 
There is hereby established a uniform system for designating street names and numbering property and buildings on all streets, avenues and other public ways in North Houston County, and all houses and other buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2001(a)) 
Sec. 54-69. - Baselines. 
(a)  There are hereby established baselines which shall divide North Houston County into northern and southern parts and into eastern and western parts. The baselines shall be indicated on the official map of the county and so identified. 
(b)  Watson Boulevard shall constitute the baseline dividing the area into northern and southern parts. All streets north of this baseline and running in a generally north-south direction shall be considered "North" streets, and all streets south of this baseline and running generally in a north-south direction shall be considered "South" streets. 
(c)  Georgia Highway 247 shall constitute the baseline dividing the area into eastern and western parts. All streets east of this baseline and running generally in an east-west direction shall be considered "East" streets, and all streets west of this baseline and running generally in an east-west direction shall be considered "West" streets. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2002) 
Sec. 54-70. - Numbering and address system. 
(a)  Each building or property north of the north-south baseline established in this article and facing a street running in a northerly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location north of the baseline. 
(b)  Each building or property south of the north-south baseline established in this article and facing a street running in a southerly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location south of the baseline. 
(c)  Each building or property east of the east-west baseline established in this article and facing a street running in an easterly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location east of the baseline. 
(d)  Each building or property west of the east-west baseline established in this article and facing a street running in a westerly direction shall carry a number reflecting its location west of the baseline; however, no explicit mention of the word "West" shall be required in its address. 
(e)  Each building or property facing a diagonal street shall be numbered the same as if facing on northerly and southerly streets if the diagonal runs more from the north to the south. Each building or property facing a diagonal street shall be numbered the same as if facing on easterly and westerly streets if the diagonal runs more from the east to the west. 
(f)  The numbering of buildings on each street shall begin at the baseline. All buildings or property facing streets not extending through to the baseline shall be assigned the same relative numbers as if the street did extend to the baseline. All numbers shall be assigned as follows: 
(1)  In single-family residential areas, numbers shall be assigned on the basis of one number for each 50 feet of frontage along the street. 
(2)  In all other areas, numbers shall be assigned on the basis of one number for each 25 feet of frontage along the street. 
(3)  Both sides of a street shall be numbered with the same interval, although the interval may change along the length of the street. 
(4)  Grid lines, as shown on the property numbering map, shall indicate the point along a street at which all numbers shall change from 100 to the next higher hundred. 
(5)  All buildings or property on the south side of east-west streets and on the east side of north-south streets shall bear even numbers. All buildings or property on the north side of east-west streets and on the west side of north-south streets shall bear odd numbers. 
(6)  A building shall be assigned the number of the numbering interval in which the main entrance of a building falls. If the main entrance of a building falls exactly upon the line which divides one interval from the next higher interval, the number of either interval may be assigned to that entrance. 
(7)  Any building fronting on a dedicated street which has more than one entrance shall have a separate number assigned to each entrance serving a separate occupant. Each separate structure or dwelling fronting on the access driveway or alley shall be assigned a letter designation, such as A, B or C, in addition to the number assigned to the access driveway or alley. A multiple-family dwelling having only one main entrance shall be assigned only one number. The separate apartments in the building will carry a letter designation, such as A, B or C, in addition to the number assigned to the main entrance of the building. 
(8)  A duplex house having two front entrances shall be assigned a separate number for each entrance. If both entrances fall within the same numbering interval, either the preceding number or the next higher number will be used for one entrance, while the interval number in which the entrances fall shall be used for the other entrance. 
(9)  [ Reserved. ] 
(Code 1976, § 6-2003; Min. of 6-17-97; Amd. of 2-20-08) 
Sec. 54-71. - Street naming. 
(a)  All streets, avenues or other public ways within North Houston County are hereby given the following directional designations. This designation shall constitute a part of the name of a particular street as a prefix thereto. 
(1)  All streets north of the north-south baseline and running in a north-south direction shall bear the prefix "North." 
(2)  All streets south of the north-south baseline and running in a south-north direction shall bear the prefix "South." 
(3)  All streets, if any, east of the east-west baseline and running easterly shall bear the prefix "East." 
(4)  No prefix shall be required for any street west of the east-west baseline and running westerly. 
(b)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, all new streets and all existing streets undergoing a change of name shall be identified on the following basis: All north-south streets shall bear the designation "Street" in their title and all east-west streets shall bear the designation "Avenue" in their title; provided, however, that: 
(1)  Any street that is basically curvilinear and is longer than 1,000 feet in length shall bear the designation "Drive." 
(2)  Any street longer than 1,000 feet and running generally on an angle of approximately 45 degrees to the east-west baseline shall bear the designation "Road." 
(3)  Any street that is a major thoroughfare of four lanes or more shall bear the designation "Boulevard." 
(4)  Any street less than 1,000 feet in length, any street that is a cul-de-sac, or any street that begins and ends on the same street without being crossed by any other street shall bear the designation "Court," "Circle," "Way," "Place," "Terrace" or "Lane." 
(c)  All north-south streets longer than 1,000 feet shall be numbered consecutively outward from the north-south baseline. Numbers will be reserved for undeveloped areas to provide for streets which may be constructed at a later date. 
(d)  All streets other than north-south streets which are longer than 1,000 feet shall be named. Existing names shall be changed only where it is necessary to prevent duplication or similarity of street names in the area. Where changes in street names are necessary, the agency or developer which assigned the original name, if the agency or developer is known and reasonably available, shall be requested to submit new names to the county engineer for approval by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2004) 
Sec. 54-72. - Assignment and placement of numbers. 
(a)  There shall be assigned to each house on any new street in North Houston County and on any street undergoing a change of name, and to other residential or commercial buildings and vacant property located on that street, avenue or other public way, their respective numbers under the uniform system provided for in this article. Existing numbers shall be changed where it is necessary to maintain the order and uniformity sought by this article. 
(b)  Written notification of the proper address of each building shall be given to the owner, occupant or agent of each building in all instances where a new number is assigned under the terms of this article. 
(c)  When a house or other building has been assigned its respective number, the owner, occupant or agent shall place or cause to be placed upon the building the number assigned under the uniform system as provided in this article. 
(d)  These numbers shall be placed on existing buildings within 21 days after the date of notification. The numbers shall not be less than three inches in height, and shall be durable and clearly visible. 
(e)  The numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side of the proper door of each building so that the number can be seen plainly from the street; provided, however, that the numbers may be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to the building upon a gatepost, fence, tree, post or other appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the sidewalk. Whenever any building is situated more than 50 feet from the street line, the numbers shall be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to the building upon a gatepost, fence, tree, post or other appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the sidewalk. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2005) 
Secs. 54-73—54-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GUIDELINES FOR DRIVEWAY ACCESS FROM CONTIGUOUS PROPERTY ONTO STATE HIGHWAYS AND ONTO ARTERIAL AND COLLECTOR ROADS 

Sec. 54-86. - Established. 
In order to protect the safety, lives and property of the general public who travel upon the state highways of Georgia and arterial and collector roads of Houston County, Georgia, to maintain the capacity and operating efficiency of these state highways and county roads and to provide reasonable access to these state highways and county roads from those contiguous properties for which access control in not vested in the department or county, the following guidelines and requirements on the permitting of driveway access are established. All references to department shall mean the state department of transportation. All references to county shall mean Houston County, Georgia. 
(Mo. of 12-17-96) 
Sec. 54-87. - Commercial property driveways. 
(a)  Single business enterprises on a single interior lot: 
(1)  Movements confined primarily to on-site employees totaling no more than 40; one two-way drive. 
(2)  Movements consisting primarily of in and out customer activities where no more than 50 parking spaces are on the site or sites with less than 300 feet of frontage; one two-way drive or two one-way drives. 
(3)  Fast food operations, bank with drive-through service, medical offices and other facilities with more than 50 on-site parking spaces and a minimum of 300 feet of frontage; two two-way drives. 
(4)  Service stations and convenience stores which include gas and oil sales and which have a minimum frontage of 150 feet, two two-way drives. 
(b)  Single businesses on corner lot: 
(1)  One two-way driveway on mainline and one two-way drive on the cross road, totaling two two-way driveways. Driveways are to be located as far as practical from the intersection. Two one-way driveways may be substituted for one two-way drive. 
(c)  Multiple businesses on commercial tracts: 
(1)  Up to 300 linear feet of frontage; one two-way drive or two one-way drives. 
(2)  Frontages between 300 and 1,000 linear feet; two two-way drives. 
(3)  Frontages from 1,000 linear feet to 2,000 linear feet; three two-way drives. 
(4)  Frontages from 2,000 linear feet to 3,000 linear feet; three two-way driveways or two one-way driveways and one multi-lane driveway. 
(5)  Frontages of over 3,000 linear feet; driveways as determined on a case-by-case basis. 
(d)  Acceleration/deceleration lane requirements: Commercial driveways, except those permitted under item (a)(1), will normally include appropriate acceleration/deceleration lanes. Such lanes shall be constructed by the developer at no cost to the department or the county. 
The right-of-way for such lanes shall be dedicated to the department or the county by the developer. The pavement sections for acceleration/deceleration lanes shall match that of the mainline. Acceleration/deceleration lanes may be required under item (a)(1), if they are considered necessary. 
(e)  Left turn lanes at commercial driveways for mainline sections without a divided median: The department or county may require the construction of left turn lanes at commercial driveways for roadways of two, four or six lane sections and no divided median. The requirement will be based upon analyses of the capacity constraints imposed upon the roadway by left turns out of through traffic lanes giving consideration to current and 20-year projected traffic volumes. 
(f)  Access conveyance: Once the number and configuration of driveways has been established, the developer of commercial property will be required to deed access control rights along his frontage to the department or county. For this purpose, commercial property includes residential subdivisions discussed under item 54-88(d). 
(g)  Right-of-way conveyance: Developers of commercial property and residential property, as discussed under item 54-88(d) will be requested to deed right-of-way for future widening of the mainline highway where such is included in the department's or county's construction work program. 
(Mo. of 12-17-96) 
Sec. 54-88. - Residential subdivisions. 
(a)  In no event will the state highway or county arterial or collector road be used as a subdivision street with individual lot driveways. 
(b)  For definition of subdivision and the provisions and requirements for review of subdivision plats by the department and the responsibilities of local planning commissions and individuals to submit subdivision plats to the department for review and comment, refer to O.C.G.A. §§ 32-6-150, 32-6-151, 32-6-152, 32-6-153 and 32-6-154. 
(c)  Those not requiring review by the department: Driveway permits shall be issued by the district, on state highways. This authority may be delegated to the area engineer. County collector and arterial roads permits shall be issued by the building inspectors office in conjunction with the county engineer. 
(d)  Those requiring review by the department or county: The district, with guidance from the state transportation traffic and safety engineer, as to state highways, and the building inspector with guidance from the county engineer, shall review and comment upon the subdivision plat. Comments shall address access to the state highway or county arterial or collector road. Possible solutions shall consider one, two or three connections (depending upon frontage) to an interior road system upon which the residential lots front, a frontage road parallel and adjacent to the state highway or county arterial or collector road upon which the lots will front which will also have connections to the state highway system or county arterial or collector road, or in extreme cases, a pairing of two lots per driveway. This latter circumstance is not desirable and should be a last resort settlement limited to frontage less than 100 feet. 
Where a small number of large frontage lots are involved, individual driveways may be allowed at 250 feet on center. However, the county does not encourage curb cuts or driveways on arterial or collector roads. 
(e)  Subdivision of property to accommodate the residential needs of family members of the owner of the tract shall be handled as private residences. 
(Mo. of 12-17-96) 
Sec. 54-89. - Guidelines—Number of connections only. 
These guidelines address only the number of connections to be allowed to the state highway system or county arterial or collector roads. Our current permit requirements with respect to engineering are unchanged. 
(Mo. of 12-17-96) 
Sec. 54-90. - Incorporation of the Access Management and Encroachment Control Manual. 
The Access Management and Encroachment Control Manual is hereby incorporated herein in its entirety in order to supplement and replace portions of this article IV, guidelines for driveway access from contiguous property onto state highways and onto arterial and collector roads. 
(Amd. of 5-16-17) 
Chapter 58 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; zoning, ch. 72. 
Related laws reference— Tax commissioner, § 4.1 et seq. 
State Law reference— County taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Service district. 
In accordance with authority granted by article 11, section 3, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of the state, there is hereby created a district, to include all unincorporated areas of the county, except those areas presently being served by municipal utilities, for the purpose of providing the following services: 
(1)  Police and fire protection. 
(2)  Garbage and solid waste collection and disposal. 
(3)  Development, storage, treatment, purification and distribution of water. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5001) 
Sec. 58-2. - Collection of taxes for municipalities. 
The county shall bill and collect taxes for all municipalities in the county for the actual cost to the county. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5007) 
Sec. 58-3. - When taxes due. 
The remittance of ad valorem taxes on all types of property returned in Houston County shall be due and payable on December 20th effective for the year 2006 and each year thereafter until changed or amended by the Board of Commissioners of Houston County. 
(Res. of 9-20-05; Res. of 6-6-06) 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted June 6, 2006, was not specifically amendatory of the Code but at the county's request has been treated as superseding the former provisions of § 58-3. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 58-4—58-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Amendment of April 21, 2015(1), repealed § 5-4 in its entirety. Former § 5-4 pertained to conservation use assessment and derived from Resolution of Aug. 17, 2010. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX REFUNDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Refunds of taxes by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 

Sec. 58-36. - General policy. 
In recognition of the general rule that taxes voluntarily paid are not to be recovered by the payor, applications for refunds of taxes paid to the county are not favored. Since the law of the state authorizes the making of refunds of taxes under certain circumstances, and in view of the obvious equity in favor of a taxpayer which may exist in certain cases, applications for tax refunds may be granted upon the terms and conditions set out in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5002) 
Sec. 58-37. - Monetary limitation. 
If a tax refund is granted, the amount to be refunded shall not exceed the actual amount paid by the taxpayer, without interest thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5003) 
Sec. 58-38. - Surrender of documents or reconveyance. 
If an applicant for a tax refund is the transferee of tax fi. fa. or has acquired the property by tax deed, it shall be a condition precedent to the payment of any refund which may be approved that the taxpayer retransfer the tax fi. fa. to the county or quit-claim the property to the county, as may be appropriate. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5004) 
Sec. 58-39. - Time limit. 
No claim for tax refunds shall be approved where the taxes alleged to have been erroneously paid were paid more than two years prior to the filing of the application for refund with the board of commissioners, nor shall any refund be granted with respect to any taxes for any tax year, regardless of date of payment, which is more than seven years prior to date of filing of the application for refund. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5005) 
Sec. 58-40. - Board of tax assessors to approve tax refunds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-5-241 and 48-5-380, the Houston County Board of Commissioners hereby authorizes the board of tax assessors to respond to all inquiries regarding tax credits and/or refunds resulting from digest errors or illegal assessments in accordance with the procedures established below: 
Investigation. Any claim for a refund should be in writing and based upon an error or an illegal assessment. The claim shall be investigated by the chief appraiser. 
Findings of investigation. The chief appraiser shall report their findings in writing to the board of tax assessors. 
Board of tax assessors decision. The board of tax assessors shall vote on the approval or denial of a credit or refund request. 
Notify tax commissioner. The tax commissioner shall be notified by the board of tax assessors in writing about the correction of an error or illegal assessment as soon as practical. 
Tax commissioner reviews credit and/or refund. The tax commissioner shall review the board of tax assessors decision and notify the board of tax assessors in writing if there is any disagreement with the board of tax assessors decision. 
Quarterly report to the board of commissioners. Once every quarter, the board of tax assessors shall prepare a report to the board of commissioners summarizing any credit and/or refunds pursuant to this procedure. The report shall include the property owner's name, the property address, the reason for its removal, and the amount of credit and/or refund. 
(Res. of 9-2-08) 
Editor's note— Resolution of Sept. 2, 2008, amended § 58-40 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 58-40 pertained to right of board of commissioners to consider other factors and derived from the Code of 1876, § 2-5005. 
Sec. 58-41. - Board of tax assessors to correct digest errors. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-5-241 and 48-5-380, the Houston County Board of Commissioners hereby authorizes the board of tax assessors to respond to all inquiries regarding the removal of property from the tax digest and to correct clerical errors and physical errors discovered on the tax digest in accordance with the procedures established below: 
Investigation. Any claim for removal of property from the tax digest should be based upon a clerical error or physical error and shall be investigated by the chief appraiser. 
Findings of investigation. The chief appraiser shall report their findings in writing to the board of tax assessors. 
Board of tax assessors decision. The board of tax assessors shall vote to approve or to deny the removal of property from the tax digest. 
Notify tax commissioner. Tax commissioner shall be notified by the board of tax assessors in writing about the removal of property from the tax digest as soon as practical. 
Quarterly report to the board of commissioners. Once every quarter, the board of tax assessors shall prepare a report to the board of commissioners summarizing property removed from the tax digest pursuant to this procedure. The report shall include the property owner's name, the property address, the reason for its removal, and the amount of value removed from the tax digest. The report may include additions to the tax digest. 
(Res. of 9-2-08) 
Secs. 58-42—58-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX 

Sec. 58-66. - Levy. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. For purposes of this section, the term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The term "depository financial institutions" shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1144(a)) 
Sec. 58-67. - Minimum tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1144(b)) 
Sec. 58-68. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to the tax imposed by this article shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. The return shall be made in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). Each depository financial institution shall assess and remit to the board of commissioners the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1144(c)) 
Sec. 58-69. - Distribution of regulations. 
The county clerk is hereby directed to forward a copy of the ordinance from which this article is derived to each depository financial institution in the county, and to the home office of each such depository financial institution if located outside the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1144(e)) 
Secs. 58-70—58-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL IN REM TAX LIEN FORECLOSURE 

Sec. 58-81. - Definitions. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(2)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-3-9. 
(3)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records maintained by the tax commissioner, clerk of court, or other records maintained in the courthouse. 
"Interested party" shall not include the older of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected. 
Redemption amount means the full amount of the delinquent ad valorem taxes, accrued interest at the rate specified in O.C.G.A. 48-2-40, penalties as determined in accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-2-44, and costs incurred by the county in collecting such taxes including without limitation the cost of title examination and publication of notice. 
(Ord. of 8-1-95, § I) 
Sec. 58-82. - Petition. 
(a)  After an ad valorem tax lien based upon an approved digest has been delinquent for 12 months, the tax commissioner/collector may commence tax foreclosure in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The tax commissioner/collector may commence tax foreclosure by filing a petition in the superior court. Such petition must include: 
(1)  The identity of the petitioner and the name and address of the individual responsible for collecting the delinquent taxes. 
(2)  The property address. 
(3)  A description of the property. 
(4)  The tax identification number of the property. 
(5)  The calendar year(s) for which the taxes are delinquent. 
(6)  The principal amount of the delinquent taxes together with interest and penalties. 
(7)  The names and addresses of parties to whom copies of the petition are to be sent to in accordance with subsection (d). 
(c)  The petitioner shall mail copies of the petition by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the petition shall be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants, if any, and shall be posted on the property. 
(d)  Simultaneous with the filing of the petition, the petitioner shall file a lis pendens notice at the office of the clerk of superior court. 
(e)  Within 30 days of the filing of the petition, a notice shall be published twice in the official organ. Such notice shall specify: 
(1)  The identity of the petitioner and the name and address of the individual responsible for collecting the delinquent taxes. 
(2)  The property address. 
(3)  A description of the property. 
(4)  The tax identification number of the property. 
(5)  The applicable period of tax delinquency. 
(6)  The principal amount of the delinquent taxed together with interest and penalties. 
(7)  The date and place of the filing of the petition. 
(Ord. of 8-1-95, § II) 
Sec. 58-83. - Hearing. 
(a)  The petitioner shall request a judicial hearing not earlier than 30 days after the filing of the petition. At such hearing any interested party has the right to be heard and to contest the delinquency of the taxes or the adequacy of the proceedings. If the superior court determines that the information set forth in the petition is accurate, the court may render its judgment and issue an order finding and ordering as follows: 
(1)  The taxes are delinquent. 
(2)  Proper notice has been given to all interested parties. 
(3)  The property as described in the petitioner be sold in accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-4-75 et seq.; 
(4)  The property shall be sold free and clear of all liens, claims and encumbrances other than: 
a.  Rights of redemption provided under federal law; 
b.  Tax liens held by state governmental entities other than the petitioner which are superior to the ad valorem taxes identified in the petition by virtue of O.C.G.A. 48-2-56; 
c.  The holders of easements and rights-of-way described in O.C.G.A. 48-4-77(1)(c); and 
d.  The holders of the benefits or burdens of any real covenants filed of record as of the date of the filing of the petition. 
(5)  The sale shall become final and binding 60 days after the date of the sale in accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-4-81. 
(b)  If, upon production of evidence, the court determines that any interested party died within a six-month period of time immediately preceding the filing of the petition, the court may postpone the hearing for a period up to six months, to allow the administrator or executor adequate time to close the estate. 
(Ord of 8-1-95, § III) 
Sec. 58-84. - Sale. 
(a)  At any time prior to sale, any interested party may redeem the property by payment of the redemption amount to the petitioner, whereupon the petitioner shall dismiss the proceedings. 
(b)  Following the hearing and order of the court in accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-4-79, a sale of the property shall be advertised and conducted on the date, time, place and manner which are required by law of sheriff's sales. Such sales shall not occur earlier than 45 days following the date of the order. 
(c)  Except as otherwise authorized by law, the minimum bid price shall be the redemption amount. In the absence of a higher bid, the petitioner may but is not obligated, to tender its own bid in an amount equal to the minimum bid price and thereby become the purchaser. 
(d)  From and after the moment of the sale and tender of the successful bid price, the sale shall be final and binding, subject only to the right of the owner of the property to redeem the property upon payment into the superior court the full amount of the minimum bid price. Such right of redemption of the owner shall exist for a period of 60 days from and after the date of the sale and shall be in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Redemption by an owner shall result in a dismissal of the proceedings, and the petitioner shall refund to the purchaser the full amount paid by the purchaser at the sale; 
(2)  For purposes of redemption, "owner" shall mean the owner of record of fee simple interest in the property as of the date of filing of the petition, together with such owner's successors in interest by death or operation of law. This right of redemption shall not otherwise be transferable; and 
(3)  This right of redemption shall automatically terminate and expire upon failure to redeem within the 60-day period after the sale. 
(e)  If the property is not redeemed, then within 90 days after the sale, the petitioner shall cause to be executed and delivered to the purchaser a tax deed, together with a real estate transfer tax form. 
(f)  Within 90 days after the sale, the petitioner shall file a report of the sale with the court, stating whether a sale took place, the sale price, and the identity of the purchaser. 
(g)  If the sale price exceeds the minimum bid amount, the petitioner shall deposit the surplus into the registry of the court. Such surplus shall be distributed by the court to the interested parties, including the owner, as their interests appear and in the priority in which their interests exists. 
(Ord. of 8-1-95, § IV) 
Chapter 62 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; courts, ch. 22; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; zoning, ch. 72. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395 of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county, with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11, unless otherwise provided by state law. 
Sec. 62-2. - Unattended vehicles prohibited on right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle continuously on any street in the unincorporated areas of the county for longer than a four-hour period. 
(Res. of 5-20-97) 
Editor's note— A resolution of May 20, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of the substantive provisions of such resolution as § 62-2 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 62-3. - Pedestrians prohibited on Echeconnee Creek bridge; fishing from bridge or right-of-way. 
(a)  Pedestrians are prohibited on the bridge on State Route 247 across Echeconnee Creek. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any individual to fish in any public or private waterway in the county while standing on a bridge or right-of-way. 
(c)  Conviction for either of the offenses specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $35.00 and not more than $100.00. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1002) 
Sec. 62-4. - Parking prohibited on bridge at Houston Lake Dam and on Lake Joy Dam on Lake Joy Road. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to park a vehicle of any kind along the shoulders of State Route 127 within 200 yards of either end of the bridge located at Houston Lake Dam in Houston County, Georgia. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to park a vehicle of any kind at any point on Lake Joy Dam within the right-of-way of Lake Joy road in Houston County, Georgia. 
(c)  Conviction of a violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $35.00 and not more than $100.00. 
(Min. of 7-19-94) 
Sec. 62-5. - Parking prohibited along Moody Road at Moody Lake. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any individual to park a vehicle of any kind at any point along the right-of-way of Moody Road at Lake Moody. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any individual to fish in any public or private waterway in the county while standing on a bridge or public right-of-way. 
(c)  Conviction of either of these offenses specified in subsections (a) or (b) of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $35.00 and not more than $100.00. 
(Res. of 8-2-05) 
Sec. 62-6. - Truck traffic prohibited on Napier Avenue. 
In order to help ensure the safety and protect the property of the individuals living on Napier Avenue and the inadequacy of the road to support heavy truck traffic, no trucks over three axles shall be allowed to travel on Napier Avenue. 
(Amd. of 3-7-17) 
Secs. 62-7—62-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED LIMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The county compiles and publishes separately a traffic schedule which includes a list of street and road locations where maximum speed limits have been established as provided by state law. An official copy of such traffic schedule is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. The ordinances and resolutions from which such traffic schedule derives are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect. 

Sec. 62-36. - Generally. 
(a)  Residential areas. 
(1)  Unless otherwise approved by the board of commissioners, there shall be a standard speed limit of 30 miles per hour or the designed speed, whichever is lower, established for the streets of all residential neighborhoods that are developed after November 28, 1989. 
(2)  The responsibility for posting speed zones in residential area developments shall be determined by the public works department of the county. 
(3)  Those signs used for the posting of residential speed zones shall have a white background and black lettering. 
(4)  Any request made for a variance from the standard speed zone shall be heard and determined based upon the recommendations of the sheriff's department and approval by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Nonresidential and unincorporated areas. Unless otherwise approved by the board of commissioners, there shall be a standard speed limit of 45 miles per hour established for the nonresidential and unincorporated areas of the county. Variances from the standard speed zone are to be determined by the board of commissioners based upon the recommendations of the public works department. 
(c)  Continuation of existing speed limits. All deviations from subsections (a) and (b) of this section established prior to November 28, 1989, shall remain in effect as authorized by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-1006—7-1008; Amend. of 10-6-09) 
Chapter 68 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Water rates and fees, application fees, permit fees, utility deposits and connection fees and other utility service charges referred to in this chapter are listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; personnel, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; zoning, ch. 72. 
State Law reference— Power of city or county to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; city's authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 68-1—68-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 68-36. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Violation of the provisions of this article may be punishable, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1013) 
Sec. 68-37. - Enforcement of article. 
The provisions of this article, including all amendments thereto, may be enforced by the county sheriff's department, the county marshal, the county water department, the county fire department, the county health department and the county attorney. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1013) 
Sec. 68-38. - Application for service; deposit required. 
Each new water consumer shall make application for water service in person at the county water department at 200 Carl Vinson Parkway, and shall pay such fees in an amount established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-1002, 5-1003.1; Min. of 5-15-01) 
Sec. 68-39. - Connection fee. 
Each new consumer subscribing to use the water system of the county shall pay a connection fee in the amount established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1003) 
Sec. 68-40. - Rate schedule. 
(a)  County residents. The water rate schedule for residents of the county shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(b)  Fire protection systems. Consumers using the water system in connection with fire protection systems shall pay a charge as established by the board of commissioners from time to time for those services. 
(c)  Oversize meters. The water rate schedule for all meters larger than residential meters shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(d)  Nonresidents of county. The water rate schedule for nonresidents of the county shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(e)  Bulk water rates. A permit may be obtained from the water department to obtain bulk water from approved sites in the county at the rate established by the board of commissioners from time to time. The permit shall expire one year from the date of purchase. Bulk water may only be obtained from existing standpipe sites located in the county. Each site shall be appropriately designated as such. No water shall be obtained from these sites without a current permit. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the county fire department, the county water department or the county emergency management association, to obtain water from a county fire hydrant. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to prosecution as set out in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1001) 
Sec. 68-41. - Water meters required; master meters. 
(a)  No customer shall be connected to the water system of the county, or served thereby, without a proper meter furnished by the water department having first been installed. Each fee simple (non-rental) house, building, lot or structure using county water shall have a separate water meter installed by the county. All such meters shall be the property of the county. 
(b)  A master meter shall be required to serve non-fee simple (rental) mobile home parks, apartment complexes, duplexes, or other similar developments where multiple lots and/or dwelling units are owned by a single person or corporation. The owner shall be responsible for payment of the consumption of water through the master meter. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1004; Amend. of 10-6-09) 
Editor's note— Amend. adopted Oct. 6, 2009 changed the title of § 68-41 from minimum charge for trailer parks, apartment complexes, etc. to water meters required; master meters. 
Sec. 68-42. - Bulk water use. 
(a)  Permit required. A current water permit must be obtained from the county water department to obtain bulk water from approved sites in the county. Permits shall be made available upon compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Permit fee; renewal of permit. Bulk water permit fees are to be assessed in accordance with the rate schedule established by the board of commissioners from time to time, and permits are to be renewed in January of every year. The new permits will remain valid through December of the year purchased. Water permits obtained after January will be assessed the same fee, and the permit's validity will continue to be good through December of the year purchased. Permits obtained after January are required to be renewed in January of the next year. It is a requirement that each project valued at over $100,000.00 have a separate permit. 
(c)  Backflow prevention. Backflow preventers are required on any and all connections before any hose may be attached to a fireplug. 
(d)  Connection to fireplugs. If a county standpipe is within a five-mile radius of the work site, attaching any hose to a fireplug is strictly prohibited. Backflow preventers are to be furnished at the user's expense. 
(e)  Violations. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to prosecution as set out in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1014) 
Sec. 68-43. - Installation of service. 
(a)  Service line; meter size. The water system shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line in cases where the distribution line runs or is being constructed to run immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. The connection fee will entitle the user to service for connection for a meter of not more than one inch in size, and there will be a proportionately greater charge for connection of a meter of larger dimensions. 
(b)  Extension of distribution lines. The county may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extension of its distribution lines as may be required to render those services. 
(c)  Location of meter. The county may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the county's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)  Backflow prevention. The county reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1005(a)—(d); Min. of 5-15-01) 
Sec. 68-44. - Notification of interruption of service. 
Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1005(e)) 
Sec. 68-45. - Responsibilities of consumer. 
(a)  Use of water. Water furnished by the county shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of the consumer's household and household employees only. County water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection or other purposes except when water is available in sufficient quantities to avoid interference with the normal domestic consumption in the areas served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Access to meter. Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, which shall be unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  Cutoff valve. The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  Installation and maintenance of consumer's piping. The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer, at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the county and state health departments. 
(e)  Cross connections with private wells. In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the county water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the county water system. All applicants, by becoming consumers of the county water system, covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the county water system they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the county's water system. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1006) 
Sec. 68-46. - Access to premises. 
Duly authorized agents of the county shall have access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing county property, inspecting piping, or reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1007(a)) 
Sec. 68-47. - Extensions to system. 
Extensions to the water system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey or shall cause to be granted or conveyed to the county permanent easements as necessary for right-of-way across any property traversed by the water lines and pay any reasonable costs as required. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1007(b)) 
Sec. 68-48. - Billing and payment of charges; failure to pay charges. 
(a)  Bills to consumers for water service shall be mailed out on such days of each month as may be determined by the county. Bills shall be paid at the County Water Department at 200 Carl Vinson Parkway in Warner Robins. A failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent these bills from becoming delinquent or relieve the consumer from payment thereof. The failure of water users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment within 15 days from the original billing date will subject the user to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. 
(2)  Nonpayment within 21 days from the billing date (7 days after due date) will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 60 days after the original billing date will allow the county, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate the agreement, and in such event the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the county obligated to supply, any water under this agreement. 
(b)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the county is made, and a service charge in an amount established by the board of commissioners from time to time is paid for each meter reconnected. 
(c)  No partial payment of water bills shall be accepted. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1009) 
Sec. 68-49. - Adjustment of bill; testing of meter. 
(a)  If a water consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the county water department at 200 Carl Vinson Parkway in Warner Robins before the bill becomes delinquent. The claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as provided in this article. The consumer may pay the bill under protest, and the payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  The county will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee in the amount established by the board of commissioners from time to time; however, if the special reading discloses that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made. 
(c)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the county of the actual costs of making the test; however, if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(d)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the county's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills or from other proper data. 
(e)  The county shall credit the water consumer's account by the minimum monthly billing amount for any billing errors or termination of service errors that negatively affects the consumer. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1011; Min. of 5-15-01) 
Sec. 68-50. - Change of occupancy or request for discontinuance of service. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given in person or in writing by a consumer to the county in order to discontinue water service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises, and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. A reconnection fee in an amount established by the board of commissioners from time to time shall be charged for each new customer where the prior service has been disconnected and the existing meter has been locked or removed by the county water department. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1008) 
Sec. 68-51. - Refund of deposit. 
Water deposits paid on accounts prior to July 1, 2001 shall be returned to the customer upon discontinuance of water service. The county reserves the right to deduct any outstanding water bill from the deposit and refund the balance thereof to the customer. However, any balance of $5.00 or less shall be considered a service charge and retained by the county. 
(Amd. of 9-21-10) 
Sec. 68-52. - Right of county to discontinue service without notice. 
The county reserves a right to discontinue its water service without notice for the following reasons, in addition to any other reason stated in this article: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Willful disregard by the consumer of the county's rules; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the county's control; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; or 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood and unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1010(c)) 
Sec. 68-53. - Liability of county. 
The county shall not be liable for any damage to the property of any customer of its water service due to failure to supply water, interruption of water services or any other cause related to water service outside the direct control of the county. 
(Mo. of 6-1-93) 
Secs. 68-54—68-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSTALLATION OF MAINS, HYDRANTS AND SERVICE LINES 

Sec. 68-76. - Generally. 
Developers, contractors or property owners shall provide all service line materials for water main taps in accordance with the specifications set out in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1127) 
Sec. 68-77. - Main and hydrant construction. 
(a)  Developers are required to install all water mains and hydrants at their expense, with a one-year warranty, according to county specifications. The warranty period begins when development has been accepted, and shall continue for a one-year warranty period. All water lines become the property of the county water system after the warranty period. 
(b)  All water mains from three to 12 inches in size shall require SDR 21—200 psi, and schedule 40 PVC pipe shall be required for two-inch water mains. 
(c)  Water lines shall have the necessary depth to have a 36-inch cover from subgrade. Fire hydrant and valve placements shall also be covered. 
(d)  All valve boxes are required to be of cast iron material. 
(e)  All fittings are required to be mechanical joint fittings. 
(f)  No glue joint pipe will be permitted for sizes larger than two-inch mains or caps. MJ caps will be required for mains larger than two inches. 
(g)  Magnetic tape is required to be placed in the water line ditch on top of the water main. 
(h)  No cable or other utilities are permitted in the same ditch as the water main. They must be at least two feet from the water main. 
(i)  All fire hydrants must be three-way traffic model hydrants with 5¼-inch valve openings. M&H and Mueller hydrants are preferred. 
(j)  Fire hydrant valves shall be in front of the hydrant close to the main and rodded to the water main. Where hydrants are placed at intersections, they must be on the project side. 
(k)  Fire hydrants shall be placed conveniently for fire protection. In no case shall they be placed more than 1,000 feet apart. Plans shall be approved by the fire department for hydrant placement. 
(l)  All water mains are required to be a minimum of three feet from the edge of the pavement. 
(m)  Service lines are required to be equal to one-inch copper tube size and must be polybutylene or polyethylene tubing class 200 or 250. 
(n)  Two-inch lines are required on the outside edge of culs-de-sac. 
(o)  All developers or contractors are required to notify the county water system to have an authorized representative inspect the water lines prior to covering up water lines. 
(p)  No water mains are permitted under pavement, except at steel casing bores or intersections as permitted by the county. 
(q)  All water mains must be sterilized with 50 parts per million chlorine. 
(r)  All valve boxes on two-inch valves must be installed in such a manner as to protect the valve and main from damage due to traffic over the valve box. 
(s)  A developer must furnish an as-built set of plans, showing the location of service stub-outs and measurements from permanent structures to the valves, with at least two measurements per valve. Permanent structures are headwalls, cross drain pipes, hydrants, etc., and not trees or property stakes. 
(t)  Developers are required to have roads bored where necessary. The county will provide the wet tap, with all the necessary parts to be furnished by the developer. The tap may be made by the developer with authorization from the water department. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1127(1)) 
Sec. 68-78. - Service line construction. 
(a)  Developers are required to provide saddles, corporations, curbstops, tubing, plastic inserts and bell holes for the county personnel to make the taps and install water service lines to the property line. All material must meet county specifications. 
(b)  Developers are required to install service lines with casing of 1¼-inch PVC or larger for each of the service lines under the road. Service lines are to be one-inch copper tube size and must be polybutylene or polyethylene tubing class 200 psi or 250 psi. Casing must extend two feet from the road or curb on both sides. 
(c)  Developers, contractors or property owners shall pay contractor user fees in an amount established by the board of commissioners from time to time and a tap fee at the time of obtaining the building permit. 
(d)  No meter or meter box will be installed until all landscaping is completed and the building official has completed final inspection. The deposit must be made prior to installing the meter and meter box. 
(e)  Only water department personnel will be permitted to remove or change the location of the meter box once it has been installed. 
(f)  Water services are required to be placed in the center of the lots. 
(g)  Additional specifications are as follows: 
(1)  Saddles shall be double strap CC thread saddles or Dresser 194 CC thread saddles or an approved equivalent. 
(2)  Corporation stops shall be one-inch Ford F-1000 or an approved equivalent. 
(3)  Curb stops shall be Ford B41-344W only, with no substitutes. 
(4)  Tubing inserts shall be plastic and one-inch long, for the copper tubing size. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1127(2)) 
Secs. 68-79—68-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 68-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. In addition, the definitions found in the Georgia Plumbing Code, latest edition, for backflow, cross connections and backflow prevention devices shall apply for purposes of this division. 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
Cross connection control by containment means the installation of an approved backflow prevention device at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water system, or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention device on the service line leading to any line supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross connection. 
Cross connection, controlled means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
Director of the county water system means the director in charge of the county water system, who is invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program of containment and for the enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
Hazard, degree of. This term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
(1)  Health hazard means any condition, device or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgment of the director may create, a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
(2)  Plumbing hazard means a plumbing type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by an approved air gap or approved backflow prevention device. 
(3)  Pollutional hazard means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
(4)  System hazard means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include but shall not be limited to polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulating cooling water connected to an open cooling tower or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions; and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes. 
Water service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. The term "service connection" shall also include a water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
Water, used means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1032) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 68-102. - Purpose of division. 
The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Protect the public potable water supply of the county from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system or the customer's private water system contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water system; 
(2)  Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the customer's in-plant potable water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and 
(3)  Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1031(a)) 
Sec. 68-103. - Responsibilities of customer. 
The water customer shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If an approved backflow prevention device is required at the customer's water service connection for the safety of the water system, the director or his designated agent shall give notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at a specific location on his premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved device, at his own expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain such device shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. Turn-off and turn-on fees must be paid by the customer prior to restoration of service for services that are disconnected due to failure to comply with this division. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1031(b)) 
Sec. 68-104. - Adoption of cross connection control and backflow prevention manual. 
The Cross Connection Control and Backflow Prevention Manual, prepared by Tribble and Richardson, Inc., dated February 1984, is hereby adopted, and shall be enforced by the authorities referenced in section 68-37. Violators of these provisions shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1012) 
Sec. 68-105. - Water system components. 
(a)  The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts, the utility system and the customer system. 
(b)  The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer's system begins. 
(c)  The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system. 
(d)  The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. 
(e)  The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system which are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1033) 
Sec. 68-106. - Prerequisites for water service connection. 
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations and this division. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention device required by this division and state law is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. Applicable requirements for backflow prevention will be complied with prior to service connection. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1034) 
Sec. 68-107. - Right of entry; disconnection of water service. 
The water customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the county water department and county health department to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this division, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the director shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition in conformance with state and county statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1035) 
Sec. 68-108. - Required backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served, but in all cases before the first branch line leading off the service line, wherever the following conditions exist: 
(1)  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the director, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
(2)  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
(3)  In the case of premises having internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or intricate plumbing and piping arrangements, or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention device in the service line. 
(b)  The type of protective device required under subsection (a) of this section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists, as follows: 
(1)  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection (a)(1) of this section and it is not subject to any of the rules set out in subsections (b)(2) through (5) of this section, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
(2)  In the case of any premises where there is water or any substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double checkvalve assembly. 
(3)  In the case of any premises where there is any material danger to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
(4)  In the case of any premises where there are uncontrolled cross connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
(5)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device on each service to the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1036) 
Sec. 68-109. - Approved backflow prevention devices. 
Any backflow prevention device required in this division shall be a model and of a size approved by the director. For purposes of this division, the term "approved backflow prevention device" shall mean a device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established in the Georgia State Plumbing Code, latest edition. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1037) 
Sec. 68-110. - Inspections and operational tests; maintenance of backflow prevention devices. 
It shall be the duty of the water customer or user at any premises where backflow prevention devices are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the director deems the hazard to be great enough, he may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by a certified tester approved by the director. It shall be the duty of the customer to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The customer or user shall notify the director in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that his representative may witness the tests if so desired. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer or user whenever the devices are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls shall be kept and made available to the director. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1038) 
Sec. 68-111. - Replacement of existing devices. 
All presently installed backflow prevention devices which do not meet the requirements of this division, but which were approved devices for the purposes described in this division at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under section 68-110, be excluded from the requirements of this division so long as the director is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the director finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1039) 
Secs. 68-112—68-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN 

Sec. 68-136. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(a)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(b)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(c)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(d)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(e)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(f)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(g)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(h)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(i)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(j)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(k)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(l)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(m)  Hydro-seeding. 
(Mo. of 5-18-99; Ord. of 12-7-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. of Dec. 7, 2010 changed the title of § 68-136 from restrictions to restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Sec. 68-137. - Enforcement actions. 
The following enforcement actions shall be taken on those users not complying with this article in the following manner: 
(1)  Duly authorized officers or water department personnel bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Any persons found violating provisions of this article shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and shall be issued a warning for this violation. 
(3)  On second violation, water service shall be terminated and a reconnect fee of $50.00 will be charged. 
(4)  Any such subsequent violations will be charged a reconnection fee of $100.00 for each violation. 
(Mo. of 5-18-99; Min. of 6-20-00) 
Secs. 68-138—68-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAMPERING AND THEFT OF UTILITY SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An Ordinance of Dec. 7, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion. Hence, to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been codified as Art. II, § 68-150. 

Sec. 68-150. - Theft of utilities. 
(a)  The following practices or acts are hereby declared to be illegal and are prohibited by the county board of commissioners. 
(1)  The cutting, removing or in any manner making ineffective any seal, locking band or lock on an electrical, natural gas meter, water meter, telephone or cable television connection. 
(2)  Restoration of service by any means after service has been terminated for nonpayment, or obtaining electricity, natural gas, water, telephone or cable television services without making the proper deposit with a utility company or receiving proper authorization from the respective utility company. 
(3)  Obtaining electricity, natural gas, water, telephone or cable television by use of jumper wires, or by any other means which bypass a metering device either partially or completely. 
(4)  Damaging or tampering in any manner with any part of a metering device belonging to a utility company. 
(5)  Changing or altering the normal installed position of a metering device in any fashion which causes the normal accurate recording of utility service received to be altered and inaccurate. 
(6)  Obtaining electricity, natural gas, water, telephone or television cable by use of a metering device which is not authorized by a utility company. 
(7)  Interfering with the automatic registration, recording and transmission of electricity, natural gas or water consumption when readings are recorded and/or transmitted electronically. 
(8)  Fraudulently obtaining, or attempting to obtain service from a utility company by using a false name or identification. 
(9)  Fraudulently obtaining, or attempting to obtain service from a utility company by placing the account in the name of someone else after the service has been disconnected for nonpayment or theft of service while the person in whose name the service was in when disconnected is still living at the location of the service; the utility company may refuse or discontinue service to an applicant in this case. 
(10)  Any other reception of electrical power, natural gas, water, telephone or television cable service without proper authorization from the respective utility company. 
(b)  Alleged violations of this section shall be tried in the county magistrate court. Any person found guilty of violating any section or part of this section shall be fined a sum not less than $250.00, nor more than $1,000.00 on each count. Each day that the violation continues is a separate count. 
(c)  Any person found violating any section or part of this section will be required to make full restitution to the utility company for the cost of the services obtained in violation of the section, for damage to equipment of a utility company and for all associated costs of the investigation. In calculating the amount of restitution to be paid, the court is authorized to consider the following evidence. 
(1)  The cost of the service received as a result of violating this section shall be computed by the utility company. 
(2)  The cost of any damage to utility equipment shall be based on the actual costs. Costs may be computed and updated annually. 
(3)  Investigative and any associated costs will be computed and updated annually by the utility company. 
(d)  Any person in possession of any premises as owner, occupant, or tenant who is found to have an electric or natural gas meter which has been tampered with or altered in violation of this section or found to be receiving electricity, natural gas, water, telephone or television cable, as a result of any of the methods described above shall be presumed to have knowingly violated the terms of this section. Such receipt of electricity, natural gas, water, telephone service or cable television service, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of intent to defraud or deprive the utility company of recovering proper charges for payment for such service. 
(e)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of said conflict. 
(f)  The provisions of this section are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, phrase or provision shall be declared or held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remainder of the sections, phrases or provisions. 
(g)  The county board of commissioners finds that there is a continuing problem by individuals' illegally obtaining electricity, natural gas, water, telephone or cable television service by various means and that this results in a loss of revenue to utility companies, increased costs to other consumers and creates a dangerous situation that can result in the loss of life or property. 
(h)  This section shall be cumulative to O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25, and is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25(c) which states: 
O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25 Damaging, injuring, or interfering with property of public utility companies, municipalities, or political subdivisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful or any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, or other apparatus belonging to a company, municipality, or political subdivision engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, or other public services; intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; in any way to interfere with the proper action of such company, municipality, or political subdivision; intentionally to divert any services of such company, municipality, or political subdivision; or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the company, municipality, or political subdivision, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the company, municipality, or political subdivision. 
(b)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth in subsection (a) of this Code section and the person who with knowledge of such violation receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of the improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering or diversion. 
(c)  This Code section shall be cumulative to and shall not prohibit the enactment of any other general and local laws, rules, and regulations of state or local authorities or agencies and local ordinances prohibiting such activities which are more restrictive than this Code section. 
(d)  Any person who violates this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ga. L. 1897, p. 69, 1; Penal Code 1910, 783; Ga. L. 1916, p. 153, 1; Code 1933, 26-3801, 26-3802; Ga. L. 1957, p. 490, 1-5; Code 1933, 26-1507, enacted by Ga. L. 1976, p. 773, 1; Ga. L. 1978, p. 1658, 1.) 
(i)  For purposes of this section solely, the term utility company shall be defined as: Any company, electrical membership corporation, municipality, or political subdivision engaged in the manufacturer or sale of electricity or provision of natural gas service. 
(Ord. of 12-7-10) 
Chapter 72 - ZONING [1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 68. 
Related laws reference— Houston County Development Authority, § 3.1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 4; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

Sec. 72-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The comprehensive land development regulations for the unincorporated area of the county adopted as an ordinance on March 22, 1971, and referred to in section 8-3021 of the 1976 Code, in addition to sections 8-3022 and 8-3023 of the 1976 Code relating to the notice and charges for rezoning hearings, are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Sec. 72-2. - Board of zoning appeals. 
The county board of zoning appeals is hereby created. This board shall have five members, who shall serve for overlapping four-year terms. 
(Code 1976, § 8-3001; Min. of 7-20-93(1), § 12) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1976 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1976 Code, as updated through March 1991, which are included herein. Sections of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES, MOTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances, motions and resolutions adopted since the 1976 Code, as updated through March 1991, which are included herein. Ordinances, motions and resolutions adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1976 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances, motions and resolutions adopted since March 1991, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 