THE CODE OF THE CITY OF MILLEN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2013 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
Adopted: July 2, 2013 
Effective: July 2, 2013 
____________ 

____________ 
A. King Rocker 
Mayor 
____________ 
Darrell E. Clifton 
James Ford 
Jane D. Johnson 
Robin Scott 
Walter Thomas, Jr. 
City Council 
____________ 
H. Lamar Faircloth 
City Manager 
____________ 
R. H. Reeves, III 
City Attorney 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Millen, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1992 Code, as updated by ordinances subsequently adopted by the Mayor and City Council through August 2, 2011. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1992 Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Ramona Connors, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. H. Lamar Faircloth, City Manager, Ms. Lottie M. Kaigler, City Clerk, and Mr. Hubert Reeves, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Millen, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Millen, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Millen, Georgia. 2013. 
ORDINANCE ADOPTING NEW CODE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CODE OF THE CITY OF MILLEN, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Millen, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 38, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 7, 2013, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1000 or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 90 days, or any one or all of these punishments subject to all limitations contained in the charter of the city. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 2, 2011, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. 
Passed and adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Millen, Georgia, this 2nd day of July, 2013. 

ATTEST: 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council, held on the 2nd day of July, 2013. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's Charter as adopted and set forth in 1988 Ga. Laws, page 3712. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - INCORPORATION, POWERS, BOUNDARIES 

Section 1-101. - Incorporation; name. 
The City of Millen, Georgia, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Millen (hereinafter at times referred to as the "city"). The city shall be the legal continuation and successor to the city as heretofore incorporated; shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the city; and shall have perpetual succession. 
Section 1-102. - General powers. 
The city shall have all the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and immunities vested in the city now or hereafter granted to municipal corporations by the Constitution, by the General Laws of the State of Georgia, and by this charter. This city shall exercise and enjoy all powers of self-government not specifically prohibited by the Constitution, the General Laws of the State of Georgia, or by this charter, including all powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, and general powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted as fully and completely as if these powers were fully enumerated herein. In addition, the city may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold any property, real and personal as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell or dispose of any of its property, including but not limited to the abandonment of any easement when deemed desirable by the city; and may have a common seal and alter it at will. 
Section 1-103. - Special powers. 
The city may acquire, construct and maintain, by condemnation or otherwise, inside or outside the city limits, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment or waterworks systems, electrical or gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, flood control, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, areas and facilities, and any other public improvements. The city, by ordinance, may establish and enforce rules and regulations necessary to preserve order, peace, and dignity on any property or facilities so acquired. 
Section 1-104. - Construction of powers. 
The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. 
Section 1-105. - Boundaries; official map. 
(a)  The corporate limits and boundaries of this city shall be those existing immediately prior to the effective date of this section with any alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, incorporated herein, to be retained permanently in the office of the city administrator and to be designated, as the case may be; "Official Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Millen, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of the map or description certified by the city administrator shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city shall provide for the redrawing of the official map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(c)  In addition to the corporate limits of the city as described in subsection (a) of this section, the corporate limits of the City of Millen shall also include the right-of-way of the following highways: 
(1)  State Route 23 from the north city limits as they existed on February 1, 1993, (ML 13.71) .243 miles north of Grimm Avenue (City Street # 585); and 
(2)  State Route 121 (U.S. 25) from the north city limits as they existed on February 1, 1993, (ML 15.80) 0.01 miles north of Turner Road (County Road # 16). 
(1993 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 132), p. 4359) 
Section 1-106. - Annexation of territory; elections. 
Additional territory may be annexed into the corporate limits of the city by any means provided by the Laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE 2. - THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 2-101. - Creation; composition; term of office. 
There shall be a mayor and council composed of the mayor and five (5) council members elected as provided in Article 3 of this Charter, which shall act as the legislative body of the city. The mayor and council shall serve for terms of four (4) years, except as provided herein in section 3-104 relating to transitional terms, or until a successor is elected and qualified. 
Section 2-102. - Qualifications. 
To be eligible for election or appointment to the mayor and council, a person, at the time of election or appointment, must: 
(1)  Have attained the age of 21 years; 
(2)  Have resided in the city for one (1) year and continue in such residence during the term of office; 
(3)  Be a qualified elector of the city; and 
(4)  Meet any other requirements as may be established by general state law. 
Section 2-103. - Compensation. 
The mayor and council members shall receive, as compensation for their services, an amount fixed by ordinance as provided by general state law. In addition, the mayor and council members shall receive their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties in the manner provided by ordinance. 
CHAPTER 2. - POWERS OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL 

Section 2-201. - General powers. 
Except as is otherwise provided by this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in the mayor and council. 
Section 2-202. - Execution of powers. 
The mayor and council shall provide for the execution of all powers, functions, rights, privileges, duties and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees granted by this charter or general law unless otherwise authorized by state law or this charter. 
Section 2-203. - Specific powers, duties, and limitations. 
Without otherwise limiting the general powers of the mayor and council, it shall: 
(1)  Adopt all annual appropriations for the city and any supplements or amendments the mayor and council deems necessary from time to time during the fiscal year; 
(2)  Adopt a fiscal year for the city and each of its departments, boards or other agencies and any other ordinances for the regulation and management of the financial affairs of the city it deems necessary. 
(3)  Adopt ordinances providing for all governmental reorganizations including the establishment, alteration, or abolishment of any and all non-elective offices, including, but not limited to the appointment or removal of a City Administrator, positions, departments and agencies of the city unless otherwise established or provided by this charter; 
(4)  Adopt ordinances establishing any personnel policies it deems necessary for an adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs; 
(5)  Appoint or remove, by motion, a city attorney, municipal court judge, and members of any board, commission or authority of the city unless otherwise provided by general state law or this charter; 
(6)  Remove or reinstate, within thirty (30) days, any appointed city officer suspended by the city administrator; 
(7)  Adopt any ordinance which prescribes the amount and terms of surety bonds conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of office of any officer or employee of the city; provided the city pays any premiums on such bonds; 
(8)  Adopt any resolution or motion expressing the mayor and council's opinion on any subject or, where authorized by ordinance, approve by motion the issuance of any license or permit of the city; 
(9)  Establish and appoint, by resolution, any committee of citizens to advise the mayor and council as it deems necessary; provided, however, that the term of such committee shall automatically expire within one (1) year of its creation, it not earlier abolished by the mayor and council; and 
(10)  Adopt any other ordinance or abatement to this charter as is not denied now or hereafter under general state law or this charter and exercise any other power as may be provided now or hereafter under state law or this charter. 
Section 2-204. - Independent audits. 
The mayor and council shall provide, by resolution, for an independent annual audit of all city accounts and may similarly provide for more frequent or continuing audits as it deems necessary. Audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm or certified public accounts who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its officers. The mayor and council may, without requiring competitive bids, designate by resolution the accountant or firm annually or for a period not exceeding three (3) years provided that the designation for any particular fiscal year shall be made no later than ninety (90) days after the beginning of the fiscal year. The mayor and council may also provide by resolution for special independent audits of any office, department, board, commission, or other agency of the city. 
Section 2-205. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The mayor and council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or agency of the city or any joint city/county or independent commission, board or authority of the city. For this purpose, the mayor and council may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence in the same manner as the Superior Court of Jenkins County. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of this power by the mayor and council may be held in contempt by a majority vote of all council members and punished as provided in this charter for contempt of the Municipal Court. Appeal to the Superior Court of Jenkins County from a council contempt conviction is allowed as for any such conviction in the Municipal Court. 
CHAPTER 3. - MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEM 

Section 2-301. - Mayor. 
(a)  The Mayor, as chief legislative officer of the city, shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the mayor and council; 
(2)  Appoint or abolish any council committees and appoint members thereof; 
(3)  Convene special meetings of the mayor and council as provided in this charter; and, 
(4)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits. 
(b)  The mayor shall perform any other duties and exercise any other powers required by state or federal law or authorized by ordinance not in conflict with this charter. 
(c)  Otherwise, the mayor shall have all the same powers and duties of other council members. 
Section 2-302. - Mayor pro tem. 
The mayor and council shall appoint, by a majority vote from among its members other than the mayor, a mayor pro tem who shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor in the mayor's absences or disability, but otherwise shall have all the same powers and duties as other council members. Such an absence or disability may be declared by the mayor or by a motion to that effect adopted by a majority of all the council members other than the mayor. The mayor pro tem shall serve in that office for a term of one year or for the remainder of the term if he is appointed for less than one year, or unless he should be unable or unwilling to serve, whereupon a new mayor pro tem shall be appointed as herein provided. 
Section 2-303. - Interpretation of terms. 
All references to members of council, unless specifically provided otherwise, shall mean and include the mayor and mayor pro tem. 
CHAPTER 4. - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE 

Section 2-401. - Organizational meeting. 
(a)  The mayor and council members shall meet for organization and swearing-in ceremonies on the first Tuesday in January following each regular municipal election, or if that date is a legal holiday, on the next following day not a legal holiday. 
(b)  At this meeting, the newly elected or re-elected mayor and council members shall each qualify to take office by taking the following oath of office to be administered by the Judge of the Probate Court of Jenkins County, Georgia: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will truly perform to the best of my abilities the duties of (mayor or council members as the case may be) by adopting such measures as in my judgment shall be best calculated to promote the general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Millen and the common interest thereof." 
(c)  At this meeting, the newly reorganized mayor and council shall make any appointments and selections as may be required by this charter or ordinance. 
(d)  A special meeting may be called to install any member elected by a special election or otherwise appointed to the council. 
Section 2-402. - Rules of procedure; journal of minutes. 
(a)  The mayor and council, by motion approved by a majority vote of all members, may adopt any rules of procedure and order of business or amendments thereto that are consistent with this charter and ordinances of the city, provided that: 
(1)  A proposed ordinance or amendment thereto may be introduced by any council member; 
(2)  A quorum for all mayor and council meetings shall be a majority of all council members and no business shall be transacted by the mayor and council in the absence of a quorum except to adjourn from time to time; 
(3)  All actions of mayor and council shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the council members present unless otherwise required by this charter, and; 
(4)  All amendments to ordinances shall be by ordinance and no motion or resolution shall affect the operation of an ordinance unless that ordinance so provides. 
(b)  A journal of minutes shall be maintained and every official action of the mayor and council shall be recorded therein and the journal shall be a public record. Minutes shall also be recorded for executive sessions of the mayor and council but shall not be a public record. Any council member shall be able to require the recording of "yeas" and "nays" of each member in the journal for any votes taken by the mayor and council. 
Section 2-403. - Meetings; regular and special. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall fix the date and time of regular meetings of the mayor and council by ordinance and there shall be at least one (1) regular meeting each month. 
(b)  Special meetings of the mayor and council may be held on call of the mayor or a majority of all council members other than the mayor. Notice of a special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, or otherwise notified as fully as is reasonably possible twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting. This notice to council members shall not be required if all council members are present when the special meeting is called. This notice of a special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in the council member's presence or with his or her prior knowledge. Any business may be transacted at a special meeting which could be transacted at a regular meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the council shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting. 
Section 2-404. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The mayor and council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing the adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally. 
(b)  Any requirements for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance. 
(c)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city administrator pursuant to Section 2-405. 
(d)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city administrator for distribution or for purchase by the public at a reasonable price. 
Section 2-405. - Authenticating ordinances; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The city administrator shall authenticate by signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose, all ordinances adopted by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the mayor and council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto, any codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the mayor and council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Millen, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price. 
(d)  Following publication of the first code under this charter, and at all times thereafter, any ordinances and charter amendments thereafter adopted shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code then currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The mayor and council shall make any further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
ARTICLE 3. - ELECTION AND REMOVAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

CHAPTER 1. - CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS 

Section 3-101. - Application of general laws. 
All municipal general or special elections and primaries shall be held and conducted in accordance with [state law]. 
Section 3-102. - Election by majority. 
The candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Section 3-103. - Vacancies; special elections; appointments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, any vacancy in the office of the mayor or any council member created by death, resignation or for any other cause other than the regular expiration of a term of office, shall be filled by special election. There shall be a "Call" for such special election within fifteen (15) days after such vacancy occurs. The special election shall then be held not less than thirty (30) days and not more than 60 days after such "Call" and, in such event, the mayor or council member, as the case may be, after taking oath, shall take office immediately. 
(b)  If, however, any such vacancy in the council should occur within one (1) year of the regular expiration of the term of office, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment of a duly qualified person by the mayor and remaining members of the council. 
(c)  If any such vacancy in the office of mayor should occur within one (1) year of the regular expiration of the term of office, such vacancy shall be filled by the mayor pro tem for the remainder of the term of office, and the vacancy in the council shall be filled by appointment of a duly qualified person by the new mayor and remaining members of the council. 
Section 3-104. - Removal from office; suspension. 
(a)  The mayor, council members, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office and the office shall be vacant upon the occurrence of any one or more of the following causes or as set out by state law: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished as provided by applicable state statute, or by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the affirmative vote of not less than four (4) council members after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten (10) days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Jenkins County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from probate court. 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Jenkins County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Millen. 
Section 3-105. - Transitional Elections and terms. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of [state law], and for the purpose of providing for the orderly transition of municipal elections in the city so as to ultimately conform with the provisions of the [state law], elections for seats held by the mayor and council holding office as of the effective date of this Charter shall be as follows: 
(1)  The election for the council seats expiring in 1989, shall be held on the first Thursday in January 1989, and the terms of the two council members so elected shall expire on December, 1993. 
(2)  The election for mayor and the remaining council seats shall be held on the first Thursday in January, 1990, and the terms of the Mayor and council so elected shall expire on December 31, 1995. 
(b)  The dates of all subsequent general municipal elections and all terms of office shall conform to the provisions of [state law]. 
Section 3-106. - Establishment of Election Districts. 
(a)  In order to reapportion the election districts of the City of Millen to comply with the one person-one vote requirements of the United States Constitution, and in keeping with the population demographics revealed by the United States decennial census of 2010; and, further, pursuant to the provisions of [state law], the City of Millen is divided into three election districts for the purpose of the election of members of the City Council. Two members of the Council shall be elected from Districts 001 and 002 and one member of the Council shall be elected from District 003. The districts shall be and correspond to those three numbered districts described in that document attached to and made a part of this ordinance and further identified as Plan Name: Millen Plan 2 Plan Type: Local Date: May 17, 2011. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2011, § 1) 
Editor's note— The descriptions of the council districts contained in the attachment referred to as "Plan Name: Millen Plan 2 Plan Type: Local Date: May 17, 2011," in the Ordinance adopted August 2, 2011, are available for public examination in the city clerk's office and were not included in this printing of the charter at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER 1. - CITY MANAGER 

Section 4-101. - Appointment and qualifications. 
There shall be a city manager hired by the mayor and council by motion or resolution, pursuant to such contract or agreement as may be adopted and made a part of such motion or resolution. The city manager shall be selected on the basis of executive, administrative, and managerial ability and qualifications. 
Section 4-102. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The city manager shall be the chief executive officer of the city and shall be in charge of and responsible for the administrative branch of the city government. 
(b)  The city manager shall exercise supervision and control over all departments and agencies of the city unless otherwise provided by general statute or this charter. 
(c)  The city manager shall be a full-time employee of the city and shall be responsible for the efficient administration of the affairs of the city. In this capacity, the city manager shall have the authority and responsibility to: 
(1)  Ensure that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(2)  Appoint, suspend or terminate all city employees and department heads who shall be directly responsible to him unless otherwise provided by general state law or this charter; provided that such actions may be superseded by affirmative action of the mayor and council within thirty (30) days; 
(3)  Negotiate, authorize, and execute all lawful city contracts as is provided by state law, this charter or ordinance; 
(4)  Keep the mayor and council fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city and have prepared and presented each month a summary of the city's financial condition; 
(5)  Recommend to the mayor and council the adoption of such measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient in the administration or management of city affairs; and 
(6)  Keep, or cause the same to be done, all official records of the city, including, but not limited to, minutes of the meetings of the mayor and council and Code of Ordinances. He or she shall be the keeper of the City Seal and shall perform such other duties as may be provided by this charter or by ordinance. 
(d)  The city manager, before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, shall give bond in the penal sum to be fixed and approved by the mayor and council. The premium shall be paid by the city and the bond shall be made payable to the City of Millen, and its successors, for the benefit of the city, and for the use and benefit of the public, to secure and indemnify the city and any of the public, by reason of the city manager's default, misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in the performance of his or her duties. 
CHAPTER 2. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Section 4-201. - Appointment and qualifications. 
There shall be a city attorney who shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year or at the pleasure of the mayor and council. He or she shall be an active member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing. 
Section 4-202. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The city attorney shall be legal counsel to the city and perform any other duties as may be provided by ordinance. 
Section 4-203. - Compensation. 
The compensation of the city attorney shall be by contract, agreement or resolution of the mayor and council. 
CHAPTER 3. - CITY ORGANIZATION 

Section 4-301. - City departments and agencies. 
The departments and agencies of the city shall be created and established by ordinance, and the departments shall be responsible for the performance of the functions and services enumerated therein and as prescribed by administrative regulations of the city manager and approved by the mayor and council consistent therewith. The operations and responsibilities of these departments and agencies may be distributed among any divisions, or bureaus, and shall consist of any officers and employees as may be provided by ordinance or administrative regulations consistent therewith. 
Section 4-302. - Administrative reorganization. 
The mayor and council may, by ordinance, organize, combine, consolidate, or discontinue any departments, agencies, or divisions of the city government as it may from time to time deem desirable, consistent with this charter. 
CHAPTER 4. - PERSONNEL 

Section 4-401. - Personnel system. 
(a)  Upon recommendation of the city manager, the mayor and council shall establish, by ordinance, a personnel system for part of or all city employees and officials as it deems necessary consistent with this charter. 
(b)  The personnel system shall provide for classification of positions, the manner and method of publicizing vacancies, employing and appointing personnel, the qualifications of employees, employee evaluations and performance, salaries, hours of employment, vacations, sick leave, special workmen's compensation leave, job security, promotion, demotion, disciplinary procedures, transfer, layoff, removal, welfare of employees, retirement policy, payment of premiums for employee insurance benefits, grievance procedures, service awards, training leave and any other measures that promote the hiring and retaining of capable, diligent and honest career employees. 
CHAPTER 5. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Section 4-501. - Authority to create. 
The mayor and council may, by ordinance, unless otherwise provided by general state law, create commissions and boards which may perform the duties prescribed, including, but not limited to, making studies, conducting research and investigations, holding hearings and preparing recommendations as to needed ordinances and resolutions and for any other purposes authorized. 
Section 4-502. - Composition; appointment; removal; bylaws. 
(a)  The mayor and council may provide by ordinance, unless otherwise provided by general state law, for the manner of appointment make-up and composition of commissions and boards, their periods of existence, and for the compensation of their members and employees, in whole or in part. The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for reimbursement of the actual and necessary expenses incurred by the members of boards and commissions in the performance of their official duties. The mayor and council shall have the authority to annually appropriate money derived from taxation, contributions, or otherwise for and to these commissions and boards to provide for their operation, either in whole or in part. 
(b)  Any vacancy in the office of any member of a board or commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment. 
(c)  Any member of a board or commission may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of all the council members. 
(d)  Each board and commission may establish bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances, or applicable state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for its internal organization, election of officers, and for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the city manager and approved by the mayor and council prior to their being effective. 
CHAPTER 6. - REGULATION OF CONDUCT 

Section 4-601. - Declaration of policy. 
Elected and appointed officers and employees shall demonstrate by their example the highest standards of ethical conduct, to the end that the public may justifiably have trust and confidence in the integrity of government. They, as agents of public purpose, shall hold their offices or positions for the benefit of the public, shall recognize that the public interest is of primary concern, and shall faithfully discharge the duties of their offices regardless of personal considerations. 
Section 4-602. - Conflict of interest. 
No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(a)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct of indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or which would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(b)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when the employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or would tend to impair the independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(c)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he or she is engaged or is a member of without proper legal authorization, or use that information to advance the financial or other private interest of that person or others; 
(d)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm or corporation which to the person's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body he or she is a member of or by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any campaign; 
(e)  Represent private interests, other than his or her own, in any action or proceeding against the city or any portion of its government; 
(f)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has substantial financial interest unless such contract is issued pursuant to sealed competitive bids. 
Section 4-603. - Disclosure of interest. 
Any elected or appointed officer or employee who possesses or who acquires any financial interest as might reasonably tend to create a conflict with the public interest shall make disclosure in writing to the mayor and council at the time a conflict becomes apparent. The disclosure statement shall be made a matter of public record and filed with the city manager. The disclosure shall be made a matter of public record prior to the taking of any vote on the proposal. 
Section 4-604. - Fair and equal treatment. 
No elected or appointed officer or employee shall use that official position to secure or grant special consideration, treatment, advantage, privilege or exemption to any person beyond that which is available to every other person. 
Section 4-605. - Future employment. 
No person who has served as an elected or appointed officer or employee of the city shall, within a period of six (6) months after termination of that service or employment, appear for compensation before any agency of the city, or receive compensation for any services rendered in behalf of any private interests in relation to any case, proceeding or application with respect to which the person was directly concerned, or which was under the person's active consideration, or with respect to which knowledge or information was made available to the person during the period of service of employment. 
Section 4-606. - Use of public property. 
No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by the city for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the mayor and council or the governing body of the agency or entity. 
Section 4-607. - Contracts voidable and rescindable. 
Any violation of this charter or state law which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale shall render the contract or sale involved voidable and rescindable as to that party, at the option of the mayor and council expressed by a motion adopted to that effect. 
Section 4-608. - Ineligibility of elected officials. 
Except where authorized by law, neither mayor nor any other council member shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by the city or any agency thereof during the term for which he or she was elected. No former mayor and no other former council member shall hold employment or compensated appointive office in the city until six (6) months after the expiration of the term for which the official was elected. 
Section 4-609. - Political activities of certain officers and employees. 
No appointive officer or employee of the city shall continue in that employment or service upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any elective office within the City of Millen or Jenkins County. 
Section 4-610. - Participation in elections. 
No appointed officer or employee of the city shall in any manner contribute to any candidate for election to a municipal office of the city or participate in any election, primary or political contests for a municipal office of the city other than by exercising the right to vote, privately expressing political views, or by serving as election officials. 
Section 4-611. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly violates any lawful requirement of this charter shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be punished as provided in Section 6-103, infra. 
(b)  Any officer or employee of the city who violates (a) above, shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of at least three (3) years thereafter. 
(c)  The appointing authority may reprimand, put on probation, demote, suspend or discharge an employee or appointed officer found to have violated the standards of conduct established by this chapter. 
ARTICLE 5. - FINANCIAL AND FISCAL 
CHAPTER 1. - TAXATION AND OTHER REVENUE 

Section 5-101. - Property tax. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government; providing governmental services; for the repayment of the principal and interests on general obligations; and for any other lawful public purpose as determined by the mayor and council in its discretion. 
Section 5-102. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
(a)  The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, which shall not exceed 20 mills on the assessed value of the property except for such millage as may be necessary to pay lawful bonded indebtedness of the city; a due date; and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. 
(b)  The mayor and council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one (1) lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due and provide for interest on late installments. 
Section 5-103. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy any occupation or business taxes as are not denied by general state law. These taxes may be levied on both individuals, partnerships and corporations who transact business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent the persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to the city to be so taxed. These taxes may be levied and imposed on a fixed rate, gross receipts basis, any other basis not constitutionally disapproved, or any combination thereof. The mayor and council may classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of these taxes in any manner as is reasonable and payment of these taxes may be compelled as provided in Section 5-108 of this chapter. 
Section 5-104. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for these activities from the city and to pay a reasonable fee for the license or permit where the activities are not now regulated by general state law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. These fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and if unpaid shall be collected as provided in Section 5-108. The mayor and council, by ordinance, may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates; including, but not limited to, denial or revocation for any violation of federal or state law or city ordinances involving the operation of the licensed business. 
Section 5-105. - Service charges. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges and tolls for water, sewer, sanitary and health services, or any other services rendered within or without the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, these charges or fees shall be collected as provided in Section 5-108. 
Section 5-106. - Special assessment. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, drainage structures or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under any terms and conditions as are reasonable. Further, impact fees for the development of residential subdivisions and industrial parks may also be assessed upon developers and owners. If unpaid, these charges shall be collected as provided in Section 5-108. 
Section 5-107. - Interpretation; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax as may be authorized now or hereafter by state law and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this chapter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 5-108. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue due the city under this charter or general state law by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes, fees or other revenues are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fa's.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes, fees and other revenues, personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes, fees or other revenues imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes, fees or other assignment or transfer of executions and collection of transferred executions; providing for the billing and collecting of principal, interest, and costs of delinquent executions as an addition to and a part of the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
CHAPTER 2. - BORROWING AND INDEBTEDNESS 

Section 5-201. - General obligation bonds. 
The mayor and council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. This bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time the issue is undertaken. 
Section 5-202. - Determination of millage necessary to retire proposed bonded indebtedness. 
At a regular meeting of the mayor and council held at least fifteen (15) and not more than forty-five (45) days prior to any election within the city in which there shall be submitted to the electors of the city the question of whether the city shall incur additional bonded indebtedness, the mayor and council shall determine what millage is necessary to retire the bonded indebtedness proposed to be incurred by the city. Such action of the mayor and council shall be recorded upon the minutes of the meeting. 
Section 5-203. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the mayor and council as state law now or hereafter provides. These bonds are to be paid out of any revenues produced by the project, program or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 5-204. - Refunding revenue bonds. 
(a)  The City of Millen acting through its governing body may exercise all powers granted to municipalities under the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761), as amended, and is hereby further authorized to refund any outstanding revenue bonds by the issuance of revenue refunding bonds in an amount not greater than the aggregate of principal and interest to the date of redemption and redemption premiums on the revenue bonds to be refunded. Said revenue refunding bonds may be issued at any time not more than fifteen (15) years prior to the date that the refunded bonds are to be retired, either at maturity or pursuant to a call for redemption or both. Pending the retirement of the revenue bonds being refunded, the city shall deposit a sufficient portion of the proceeds of such revenue bonds, together with any other legally available funds, in escrow to pay principal, interest and redemption premiums on the revenue bonds to be refunded, and some or all money so deposited may be invested in direct obligations of the United States of America or any of its agencies or in obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States of America. In determining the sufficiency of such deposit, the city may include interest to be received on such investments. 
(b)  The city shall, upon depositing in escrow the proceeds of any revenue refunding bonds hereunder, enter into an agreement with the bank holding such deposit and said agreement shall require said bank, among other things, to hold investments and liquidate the same without further instructions from the city when necessary to pay principal, interest and redemption premiums on the revenue bonds refunded and may require such bank to publish on behalf of the city, one (1) or more notices of redemption of the revenue bonds to be refunded. 
(c)  The validity of revenue refunding bonds issued hereunder may be determined by proceedings in the Superior Court of Jenkins County, Georgia, or as may otherwise be provided by state statute for industrial development bonds. Such proceedings shall be brought and conducted, and may be intervened in and may be appealed from in the same manner, and shall have the same effect, as is provided in the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761), as amended. If the aforementioned agreement governing the deposit of revenue refunding bond proceeds is attached as an exhibit to the resolution authorizing said revenue refunding bonds, the court upon validation shall determine the validity of said agreement as well as the validity of said revenue refunding bonds. 
(d)  Such revenue refunding bonds shall constitute investment securities under the Uniform Commercial Code but no financing statement nor continuation statement need to be filed to protect or perfect the interest of the holders of said revenue refunding bonds in the revenues pledged to their payment. Such revenue refunding bonds may be secured by pledge of all or any portion of the revenues to be derived from the operation of one or more revenue-producing facilities of the city after payment of the reasonable and necessary expenses of the operation and maintenance, and such revenues need not be limited to revenues pledged to the revenue bonds refunded. Revenue refunding bonds shall not be payable from or charged upon any funds other than the revenues pledged to the payment thereof, nor shall the city be subject to any pecuniary liability thereon. No holder or holders of any such revenue refunding bonds shall ever have the right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of the city to pay any such revenue refunding bonds or the interest thereof, nor to enforce payment thereof against any property of the city; nor shall any bonds constitute a lien upon any property of the city. Each bond issued under this section shall contain a recital setting forth the substance of the preceding two (2) sentences. 
(e)  Revenue refunding bonds issued hereunder or the resolution provided for their issuance may contain such provisions for the security of said revenue refunding bonds as the governing body may determine, including such covenants and rights to a receiver upon default as are provided for the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761), and may be issued in one (1) or more series, may be sold in such manner, may bear such date or dates, may mature at such time or times, not exceeding forty (40) years from their respective date; may bear interest at such rate or rates, not exceeding nine (9) percent per annum, payable at such time or times; may be payable in such medium of payment at such place or places; may be in such denomination or denominations; may be in such form either coupon or registered; may carry such registration, conversion, and exchangeability privileges may be subject to such terms of redemption with or without premium; may be declared or become due before the maturity date thereof; may be executed in such manner; and may contain such terms, covenants, assignments and conditions as the resolution or resolutions authorizing the issuance of such bonds may provide. All bonds issued under this section bearing the signature of officers in office on the date of the signing thereof shall be valid and binding notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof, and payment therefor, such officers whose signatures appear thereon shall have ceased to be officers of the municipality issuing the same. Pending the preparation of the definitive bonds, interim receipts, in such form and with such provision as the governing body may determine, may be issued to the purchaser or purchasers of bonds to be issued under this section. Said bonds shall be and are hereby declared to be nontaxable for any and all purposes. 
(f)  This section shall be deemed cumulative and not in lieu of all other laws granting bond authority to the city and shall provide an additional, but nonexclusive means of refunding revenue bonds of the city, regardless of the law under which the revenue bonds shall have been issued. 
Section 5-205. - Short term notes. 
The city may issue short term notes as now or hereafter provided by general state law. 
CHAPTER 3. - FISCAL CONTROL 

Section 5-301. - Fiscal year; municipal budget. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall establish a fiscal year for the city and all its agencies by ordinance unless otherwise provided by state of federal law. 
(b)  The city manager shall submit to the council at least six (6) weeks prior to the start of the municipal fiscal year a budget report, accompanied by a draft of the recommended municipal appropriations ordinance, in a form and manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, which shall provide for the appropriation of the funds necessary to operate all the various departments, to meet capital improvement requirements, and to meet the current expenses of the city for the next fiscal year. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall annually appropriate by ordinance, the funds necessary to operate all the various agencies and departments, funds necessary [for] capital improvements, and to meet the current expenses of the city for the next fiscal year. 
Section 5-302. - Municipal appropriations ordinance. 
(a)  Each municipal appropriations ordinance, now in force or hereafter adopted, with all amendments as are adopted from time to time, shall continue in force and effect for the next fiscal year after adoption and it shall then expire except for any mandatory appropriations required to meet contractual obligations or the continued appropriations and authorization of state or federal grants. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall not appropriate funds for any given fiscal year, which, in aggregate, exceed a sum equal to the amount of unappropriated surplus expected to have accrued in the city treasury at the beginning of the fiscal year, together with an amount not greater than the total municipal receipts from existing revenue sources anticipated to be collected in the fiscal year, less refunds as estimated in the budget report and amendments thereto. 
(c)  All appropriated funds, except for the mandatory appropriations required by law and those required to meet contractual obligations, or the continued appropriation and authorization of state or federal grants, remaining unexpended and not contractually obligated at the expiration of the municipal appropriations ordinance, shall lapse. 
(d)  All state or federal funds received by the city are hereby continually appropriated in the exact amounts and for the purposes authorized and directed by the state or federal government in making the grant. 
Section 5-303. - Supplementary appropriations. 
(a)  In addition to the appropriations made by the municipal appropriations ordinance and amendments thereto, the mayor and council may make additional appropriations in the same manner as herein provided. No supplementary appropriation shall be made unless there is an unappropriated surplus in the city treasury or the revenue necessary to pay the appropriation has been collected in the general fund of the city treasury as provided by law. 
(b)  In no event shall a supplementary appropriations ordinance continue in force and effect beyond the expiration of the municipal appropriations ordinance in the effect when the supplementary appropriations ordinance was adopted and approved. 
Section 5-304. - Appropriation for specific sums. 
(a)  The appropriation for each department, office, bureau, board, commission, function or line item for which appropriation is made shall be for a specific amount of money and no appropriation shall allocate to any object the proceeds of any particular tax or a part or percentage thereof. All appropriations by function or line item shall be lump sum by function or line item. 
(b)  Any appropriation made in conflict with the foregoing provisions shall be void. 
CHAPTER 4. - PURCHASING, CONTRACTING AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY 

Section 5-401. - Contracting procedures. 
(a)  Contracts for the purchase or sale of realty, personalty, or services shall be negotiated, authorized and executed by the city manager pursuant to authority granted by the mayor and council by resolution or ordinance, or by the state or federal governments by statute, as appropriate. 
(b)  The original of all contracts shall be maintained on file in the office of the city manager. 
(c)  No contract shall bind the city other than as provided in this charter. 
Section 5-402. - Purchasing procedures. 
The mayor and council shall prescribe by ordinance the procedures for all purchases of real and personal property by the city. Prior to the making of purchases and contracts, the availability of adequate funds shall be certified as provided by ordinance. 
Section 5-403. - Sale or disposal of property. 
The mayor and council shall prescribe by ordinance the procedures for all sales and other disposition of real and personal property by the city. 
ARTICLE 6. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Section 6-101. - Creation; jurisdiction. 
There shall be a court of the city, to be known as "The Municipal Court of Millen, Georgia," which shall be vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the city generally granted to mayor's, recorder's or police courts and particularly as to the abatement of nuisances, prosecution of traffic violations and violation of other ordinances of the city. 
Section 6-102. - Chief judge; associate judges; appointment; compensation; oath. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a judge appointed for a term of one (1) year or at the pleasure of mayor and council. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge of the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. Such judge shall be appointed or removed by a majority vote of all council members. 
(c)  Compensation of the judge shall be fixed by contract, resolution, or ordinance by the mayor and council. 
(d)  Before entering on the duties of the office, the judge shall take an oath given by the mayor, that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the council. 
Section 6-103. - Convening; rules of procedure; powers; punishments. 
(a)  The municipal court shall convene at times and dates as may be provided by resolution, but the court shall convene at least once a month. 
(b)  The municipal court shall follow such rules and procedures as the judge may establish unless otherwise provided by ordinance, this charter, or general state law, which rules and regulations shall be reduced to writing and be made available upon request. 
(c)  The mayor and council, by ordinance, may provide for the powers of the municipal court over bail and appearance bonds. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer oaths as are necessary. 
(e)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoena and warrants which may be served and executed by any officer as authorized by ordinance or by general state law. Further, the judge of the municipal court may issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any city ordinance and shall have the power and authority as is provided by the state for magistrates to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and the mayor and council, by ordinance, shall establish and be entitled to reimbursement for the cost of the meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. These costs shall be collected by the court in which the case is tried or triable in the same manner as other costs are collected by such court and shall be paid over to the city. 
(g)  Unless a lesser penalty is provided by ordinance, the judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to impose upon the violator of any law or ordinance, for each violation thereof, the following punishments, or any punishment provided for such offense by state statute, whichever is greater: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed $1000.00; 
(2)  Imprisonment for a period of not more than six months; or 
(3)  Any one (1) or all of these punishments when the facts of the case justify such punishments; 
(4)  Provided, however, that each contempt of municipal court shall be punishable either by imposition of a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days or both. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2017(1), §§ 2, 3) 
Section 6-104. - Appeals. 
The right of appeal from decisions and judgments of municipal court to the superior court of Jenkins County, and the establishment of any bond required to secure the costs of appeal, shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds by state law for appeals from magistrate's courts to superior courts. 
ARTICLE 7. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 7-101. - Ordinances and regulations. 
Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city and its agencies now lawfully in effect not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall remain effective until they have been repealed, modified or amended. 
Section 7-102. - Contracts and obligations; proceedings. 
(a)  All contracts, orders, leases, bonds and other obligations or instruments entered into by the city or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this charter shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof, as obligations and rights of the city. 
(b)  No action or proceeding of any nature whether civil or criminal, judicial or administrative, or otherwise, pending at the effective date of this charter by or against the city or its departments and agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this charter. 
(c)  The existing agency and departmental organization of the city shall continue in effect upon the effective date of this charter until such organization is changed or reorganized as provided by ordinance of the mayor and council and administrative regulations consistent therewith. 
Section 7-103. - Governing body defined. 
For the purpose of all laws requiring action of the governing body of the City of Millen, such action shall be accomplished by ordinance or resolution unless specifically provided otherwise by the particular law involved. 
Section 7-104. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Section 7-105. - General repealer. 
All laws and clauses of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed. 
Section 7-107. - Specific repealer. 
All laws or portions of laws creating, re-enacting or amending any and all charters of the City of Millen are hereby repealed including, but not limited to, Ga. L. 1939, p. 1163; 1949, p. 1198; 1967, p. 2572; 1976, p. 3275. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Millen, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Millen City Code" or the "City Code." 
(Code 1992, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction; definitions. 
In the construction of this Code and all ordinances, the following rules and definitions shall be observed, unless this construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council. 
(1)  In general, all words, terms and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. Unless otherwise stated herein: 
City. The terms "city," "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Millen" followed them. 
City council, council. The term "city council" or "the council" means the city council of the City of Millen, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of the City of Millen, Georgia. 
Computation of time. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day or the last; except that if the last day shall fall on a Sunday or a legal holiday, another day shall be added to the computation. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Jenkins County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the municipal court of the city. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Gender—singular and plural. Every word in any ordinance importing the masculine gender shall extend to and be applied to females as well as males; and every word importing the singular number only shall extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person or thing; and every word importing the plural number only shall extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the mayor and city council of the City of Millen, Georgia. 
Jail. The term "jail" means the detention facility or correctional institution with whom the city council has contracted for the housing of persons detained or incarcerated by the city. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving this authority to a majority of these persons or officers, or to a quorum. 
Judge or recorder. The term "judge" or "recorder" means the judge of the municipal court of the City of Millen, Georgia. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Land. The terms "land" and "real estate" include rights and easements of the incorporated nature. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the City of Millen, Georgia. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Name or title of officer, board, commission or agency. The name or title of any officer, board, commission or agency, when appearing alone herein, shall be construed as if the words "of Millen, Georgia" followed it. 
Number. The singular or plural each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a person having conscientious scruples against taking the oath. An affirmation shall have the same force and effect as an oath. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the latest edition of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," if the sense requires it. 
Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Owner. The term "owner" applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream, unless the context indicates otherwise. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time. In all cases where any ordinance shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property. 
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. The terms "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. Whenever the term "street" is used in this Code, it shall be construed to include a public highway, road, avenue, court, way, lane or alley; and it shall also be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless this construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense includes the future when applicable. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean seven days; but publication in a newspaper of any notice or other matter indicated to be for a stated number of weeks shall be construed to mean one insertion in each week, unless specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one day in each week; and all publications heretofore made in accordance with the terms of this definition are hereby validated. 
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(2)  The rules of construction set forth herein shall not be applied to any ordinance which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or when the subject matter or context of such ordinance may be repugnant thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 13-3(5). 
Sec. 1-3. - Ordinance to take effect; when. 
All ordinances passed by the city council, except when otherwise specifically provided, shall take effect and be in force from and after their publication. 
(Code 1992, § 1-1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, this unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, the intention being that they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1992, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of these sections nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1992, § 1-1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Unless a higher penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city, any act that is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of that provision of this Code or that ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the jail for not more than 180 days, or any one or all of these punishments subject to all limitations contained in the charter of the city. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of the other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the city's charter or this Code. 
(e)  Violations of this Code may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(f)  There shall be imposed by the Municipal Court of the City of Millen, Georgia, a technology surcharge in the amount of $25.00 per offense for all offenses against the Ordinances of the City of Millen, Georgia or the State of Georgia. The technology surcharge shall be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by the Municipal Court. The revenue derived from the technology surcharge shall be used by the city solely to provide technical support for public safety and municipal court functions. 
(Code 1992, § 1-1-6; Ord. of 4-5-2009, § 2; Ord. of 4-4-2017(2), § 2; Ord. of 6-5-2018(1), § 2) 
Sec. 1-7. - Judgments and sentences to run consecutively. 
All judgments and sentences imposed and ordered by the municipal court of the city shall run consecutively unless otherwise specifically provided by the judge of municipal court in these judgments and sentences. 
(Code 1992, § 1-1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances or Code sections. 
(a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When any ordinance repealing a former code section, ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
(Code 1992, § 1-1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. Repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances until such time that the Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending these provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in the following language: "Section ____________ of The Code of the City of Millen, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Millen, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All section, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1992, § 1-1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner except by ordinance or other official act of the mayor and council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 1-1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Interpretation of Code. 
In all interpretations of this Code, and ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to state laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-12. - Substantive compliance with Code. 
A substantial compliance with any requirement of the Code, or ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment. 
Sec. 1-13. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or section thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Rates, charges, and fees established. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the city council, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the city council by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
Sec. 1-15. - Certain ordinances not repealed or affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures; 
(6)  Any right of franchise granted by the city to any person, firm, or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, widening, paving, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a board of zoning appeals or planning commission, including joint commissions; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; 
(14)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city or annexing property to the city; 
(15)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(16)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(17)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; and 
(19)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)  Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE BODY 

Sec. 2-19. - Salaries of mayor and councilmembers; allowance. 
The salaries and allowances of mayor and councilmembers shall be as established by resolution, from time to time, by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 2-1-1) 
Sec. 2-20. - Rules of procedure adopted. 
Robert's Rules of Order are hereby adopted to govern procedures in meetings of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 2-1-2) 
Sec. 2-21. - Meetings. 
Regular meetings of the mayor and council shall be held on the first Tuesday of each month, providing, however, such meetings may be rescheduled by the mayor or the majority of the council. The time of the regular meeting shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Code 1992, § 2-1-3) 
Secs. 2-22—2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-46. - Rules governing elections. 
All matters relating to elections within the city shall be governed by the city charter and state law. 
(Code 1992, § 2-2-1) 
Sec. 2-47. - Employment by candidate prohibited. 
No officer or full-time employee of the city shall continue in the employment of the city after becoming a candidate for nomination or election to any elective office of the city or county. 
(Code 1992, § 2-2-2) 
Sec. 2-48. - Voting machines. 
The use of voting machines for recording and computing the votes at all elections held in the city is hereby authorized and directed. 
(Code 1992, § 2-2-3) 
Secs. 2-49—2-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 2-70. - Sessions of court. 
Municipal court shall convene on the third Tuesday of each month at such times as may be set by the judge and may be convened at such other times and dates as the judge deems necessary. 
(Code 1992, § 2-3-1) 
Sec. 2-71. - Compensation of judge. 
The compensation of the judge shall be as set forth in the annual budget. Additional compensation may be set by resolution for that purpose. 
(Code 1992, § 2-3-2) 
Sec. 2-72. - Clerk of municipal court; powers, duties, ministerial officers. 
The city manager shall designate an employee of the city who shall attend all sessions of the municipal court and act as clerk thereof in addition to his other duties. The clerk of the municipal court shall sign and issue all processes, summons and all attachments and executions for fines and other writs issuing out of the court, all of which bear test in the name of the judge. He shall keep all records of the court, receive all fines imposed by the court and account therefor as directed by the mayor and council. The ministerial officers of the court shall be the chief of police and the members of the police department of the city, any of whom may execute the mandates of the court, and to whom in the alternative, all means and final processes thereof shall be directed. The chief of police or a member of the police department shall attend each session of the court for the purpose of executing the necessary orders thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 2-3-3) 
Sec. 2-73. - Bonds. 
(a)  The chief of police may take bond with security or bond without security at his discretion, payable to the city, for appearance of any person accused or suspected of being guilty of a violation of any law or ordinance of the city to stand to and abide his trial before municipal court; and also witnesses to testify in any case pending or about to be commenced in the court. Provided, however, the chief of police shall not accept bonds from a surety as to whom a written order has been signed by the judge removing him from the list of acceptable sureties. 
(b)  If any party or witness shall fail or refuse to give bond and security or bond as required of him, such persons so failing or refusing may be confined in the jail or any jail used by the city or kept under guard so as to be present, to abide the trial or to testify, as the case may be. 
(Code 1992, § 2-3-4) 
Sec. 2-74. - Judgment on violator's bond. 
In the event the principal in any bond or recognizance given by a person charged with a violation of an ordinance of the city, or any provision thereof, or who is charged with a violation of the criminal laws of the state, should fail to appear before the municipal court when his case is called to trial, the municipal court may proceed at once to forfeit the bond or recognizance after one week and notice to the surety; and if no sufficient cause is shown the municipal court shall enter judgment against the principal and surety for the full amount of the bond or recognizance and costs and the treasury of the city shall issue execution for the amount of the judgment and the marshal of the city shall collect the same by levy and sale as in tax executions. In addition, the municipal court judge may pass an order prohibiting acceptance of bonds signed by the surety if the execution is not paid within one week after its issue date. 
(Code 1992, § 2-3-5) 
Sec. 2-75. - Cash bonds. 
The judge is hereby designated as the person authorized to specify by written order what offenses for which a cash bond may be accepted and who may set and accept cash bonds. A driver's license may be accepted as cash bond as provided by state law. 
(Code 1992, § 2-3-6) 
Sec. 2-76. - Judgment on witness' bond. 
In the event any person who has been subpoenaed as a witness shall fail to appear before the court in the case in which he has been subpoenaed, the judge may proceed at once to forfeit the bond or recognizance after one week and notice to the surety; if no sufficient cause is shown, the judge shall enter judgment against the bond and surety for the full amount of the bond or recognizance with security; if a person shall fail to appear and testify before the judge, as required, the judge may proceed at once to forfeit the cash bond or collateral, and an entry by the judge upon the docket of the court shall be sufficient judgment to vest the title to the fund in the city. 
(Code 1992, § 2-3-7) 
Sec. 2-77. - Service of summons. 
Any person charged with violating any city ordinance shall receive notice by service of a summons as herein provided. Such summons may be issued by the clerk of the municipal court, the chief of police, any animal control officer, the building inspector, or any police officer of the city. The summons shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, and the day, hour, and place of the trial, requiring the accused to appear before the judge of the municipal court to answer to the charge described in the said summons. Service of the summons shall be made by a police officer of the city either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his most notorious place of abode, except that in the case of a summons issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons may be directed to an unknown person as owner of an automobile designated in the summons and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. 
(Code 1992, § 2-3-8) 
Secs. 2-78—2-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RECORDS AND EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 2-98. - Procedure for inspection of city records. 
Any citizen demanding to see any of the public records of the city shall comply with the following procedure: A written statement outlining the specific information requested, addressed to the mayor and council, shall be submitted by the applicant. The requested records will be made available within a reasonable time in keeping with the other duties and responsibilities of the city's personnel. 
(Code 1992, § 2-4-1) 
Sec. 2-99. - Designation of city equipment; vehicles. 
All city equipment shall be lettered "City of Millen," and a vehicle number, large enough in size for identification of the vehicle, shall be affixed thereto or painted thereon. 
(Code 1992, § 2-4-2) 
Sec. 2-100. - Use of city equipment, vehicles. 
The city's equipment and vehicles shall not be loaned to anyone for any purpose, unless they are used for the benefit of the city, and then they shall be operated only by city employed personnel. 
(Code 1992, § 2-4-3) 
Secs. 2-101—2-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FISCAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum budget, accounting, and auditing requirements for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-129. - City manager designated city treasurer; signing checks; bond; fi. fas. 
(a)  The city manager is also designated as the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall have the right to sign all checks, except as otherwise provided in this article and shall be bonded in the amount of $25,000.00. All checks shall be countersigned by either the mayor, mayor pro tem, or any councilmember. 
(b)  All fi. fas. shall be signed by the city manager and may be issued whenever the money is sought to be collected or past due. 
(Code 1992, § 2-5-1) 
Sec. 2-130. - Expenditure from contingency fund; approval required. 
All money spent from the contingency fund shall be approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 2-5-2) 
Sec. 2-131. - Fiscal year. 
(a)  The fiscal year for all departments of the city shall begin on July 1, and expire on June 30 each successive year. 
(b)  The city manager shall prepare and submit to the mayor and council a proposed annual budget for the city by no later than May 1, of each year, which budget, an amended form thereof, or a substitute budget, shall be considered and adopted by the mayor and council prior to the beginning of the new fiscal year. 
(Code 1992, § 2-5-3) 
State Law reference— Establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-132. - Annual audit. 
An annual audit of all city accounts will be conducted each year. 
(Code 1992, § 2-5-4) 
Secs. 2-133—2-162. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-163. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Millen, Georgia. 
City purchasing agent or agent means the purchasing agent of the city. 
Contractual services. 
(1)  The term "contractual services" means and includes all telephone, gas, water, electric light and power service; towel and cleaning service; insurance; leases for all grounds, buildings, office or other space required by the using agencies; and the rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery and other city-owned personal property. 
(2)  The term "contractual services" shall not include professional and other contractual services, which are in their nature unique and not subject to competition. 
Supplies means and includes all supplies, materials and equipment. 
Using agency means any department, agency, commission, bureau or other unit in the city government using supplies or procuring contractual services as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-1) 
Sec. 2-164. - City purchasing agent. 
There is hereby created the position of city purchasing agent for the city which position shall be held by the city manager. The agent shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this article. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-2) 
Sec. 2-165. - Scope of purchasing authority. 
The agent shall have the power and it shall be his duty: 
(1)  Purchase or contract. To purchase or contract for all supplies and contractual services needed by any using agency which derives its support wholly or in part from the city, in accordance with purchasing procedures as prescribed by this article and such rules and regulations as the agent shall adopt for the internal management and operation of his responsibilities as purchasing agent and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council, provided, however, that purchases above $2,500.00 shall be specifically approved by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Unauthorized purchases. Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any city officer, or officers, or agents to order the purchase of any supplies or make any contract within the purview of this article other than through the city purchasing agent, and any purchase ordered or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved by the city officials, and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
(3)  Other powers and duties. In addition to the purchasing authority conferred in this section, and in addition to any other powers and duties conferred by this article, the agent shall: 
a.  Minimum expenditure. Act to procure for the city the highest quality in supplies and contractual services at the least expense to the city. 
b.  Encourage competition. Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales. 
c.  Rules and regulations. Establish, and amend when necessary, all rules and regulations authorized by this article and any others necessary to its operation. 
d.  Purchasing analysis. Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products, and secure for the city the benefits or research done in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national technical societies, trade associations having national recognition, and by private businesses and organizations. 
e.  Forms. Prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find reasonably necessary to the operation of this article. 
f.  Bulk purchases. Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to take full advantage of discounts. 
g.  Federal tax exemptions. Act so as to procure for the city all federal tax exemptions to which it is entitled. 
h.  Disqualification of bidders. Have the authority to declare vendors who default on their quotations irresponsible bidders and to disqualify them from receiving any business from the municipality for a stated period of time. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-3) 
Sec. 2-166. - Requisitions and estimates. 
All using agencies, either by or with the authorization of the head of the department under which the using agency operates, shall file with the agent detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in supplies and contractual services in such manner, at such times, and for such future periods as the agent shall prescribe. 
(1)  Unforeseen requirements. A using agency shall not be prevented from filing, in the same manner, with the agent at any time, a requisition or estimate for any supplies and contractual services, the need for which was not foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed. 
(2)  Revisory power in agent. The agent shall examine each requisition or estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality, or estimated cost. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-4) 
Sec. 2-167. - Encumbrance of funds. 
Except in cases of emergency, the agent shall not issue any order for delivery on a contract or open market purchase until he shall have determined that there is to the credit of the using agency concerned a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-5) 
Sec. 2-168. - Prohibition of interest. 
(a)  Employee interest. Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this article in which the agent, or any officer or employee of the city is financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void, except that before the execution of a purchase order or contract the council shall have the authority to waive compliance with this section when it finds such action to be in the best interests of the city. 
(b)  Gifts and rebates. The agent and every officer and employee of the city are expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person, company, firm or corporation to which any purchase order or contract is, or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money, or anything of value whatsoever, except where given for the use and benefit of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-6) 
Sec. 2-169. - Competitive bidding required. 
All purchases of, and contracts for supplies and contractual services, and all sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable shall, except as specifically provided herein, be based wherever possible on competitive bids. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-7) 
Sec. 2-170. - Formal contract procedure. 
All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed $10,000.00 shall be purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder, after approval by the council and due notice inviting proposals. All sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable, when the estimated value shall exceed $10,000.00, shall be sold by formal written contract to the highest responsible bidder, after approval by the council and due notice inviting proposals. 
(1)  Notice inviting bids. 
a.  Newspaper. Notice inviting bids shall be published once in The Millen News, and such other publications as the agent deems appropriate, and at least five days preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals. The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. 
b.  Bidders' list. The agent shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a bidders' list which the agent shall maintain, by sending them a copy of such newspaper notice or such other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. In any case, invitations sent to the vendors on the bidders' list shall be limited to commodities that are similar in character and ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the invitations are sent. 
c.  Bulletin board. The agent shall also advertise all pending purchases or sales by a notice posted on the public bulletin board in the city hall. 
(2)  Bid Deposits. When deemed necessary by the agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of surety where the agent has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required by the agent upon failure on his part to enter a contract within ten days after the award. 
(3)  Bid opening procedure. 
a.  Sealed. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the agent and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. 
b.  Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
c.  Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for public inspection. 
(4)  Rejection of bids. The agent shall have the authority to reject all bids or parts of all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(5)  Bidders in default to city. The agent shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other monies due the city. 
(6)  Award of contract. 
a.  Authority in agent. The agent shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this article. 
b.  Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in addition to price, the agent shall consider: 
1.  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
2.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
3.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
4.  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
5.  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
6.  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
7.  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required; 
8.  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
9.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
c.  Award to other than lowest bidder. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the agent and filed with the other papers relating to the transaction. 
d.  Tie bids. If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. Otherwise, the agent shall award the contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
e.  Performance bonds. The agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond, before entering a contract; in such amount as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. 
(7)  Prohibition against subdivision. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-8) 
Sec. 2-171. - Open market procedure. 
All purchases of supplies and contractual services, and all sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable, of less than the estimated value of $10,000.00, shall be made in the open market, without newspaper advertisement, and without observing the procedure prescribed by section 2-170 for the award of formal contracts. 
(1)  Minimum number of bids. All open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three competitive bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with the standards set forth in section 2-170(6)b. 
(2)  Notice inviting bids. The agent shall solicit bids by: 
a.  Direct mail request to prospective vendors; 
b.  By telephone; and 
c.  By public notice posted on the bulletin board of the city hall. 
(3)  Recording. The agent shall keep a record of all open market orders and the bids submitted in competition thereon, and such records shall be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-9) 
Sec. 2-172. - Emergency purchases. 
In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services, the council shall be empowered to authorize the agent to secure by open market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any supplies or contractual services regardless of the amount of the expenditure. A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be filed by the agent with the council and shall be entered in the minutes of the council and shall be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-11) 
Sec. 2-173. - Competitive purchasing. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans as that the best interests of the city shall be served thereby. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-12) 
Sec. 2-174. - Leasing through GMA. 
(a)  The city finds that the leasing of certain equipment, machinery or other personal property pursuant to a master lease (the "master lease") with the Georgia Municipal Association is essential to operation of the governmental functions of the city. It is the intent of this article to authorize and direct the execution of such documents as may be necessary to effectuate these purposes. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby authorized and directed in the name of, and on behalf of, the city to execute and deliver the master lease in substantially the form presented to the meeting at which it was originally adopted, or in such other forms as may be subsequently presented and adopted by resolution, with such changes and additions as shall be approved by the officer who executes the same, and such other documents as shall be deemed by such officer to be necessary or desirable to effect the purposes of this article; and such execution shall constitute conclusive evidence that the executed document has been authorized and approved by this article. The aforesaid officer is further authorized to do all things necessary or appropriate to effectuate the purposes hereof. 
(c)  The leases contemplated by the master lease are hereby designated "qualified tax-exempt obligations" within the meaning of section 265(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-13) 
Sec. 2-175. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable as provided in section 1-6. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Code 1992, § 2-6-14) 
Secs. 2-176—2-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-206. - General purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2011, § 1(2-9-1)) 
Sec. 2-207. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the charter. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2011, § 1(2-9-2)) 
Sec. 2-208. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees, but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote, or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed: 
a.  $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services; or 
b.  Ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2011, § 1(2-9-3)) 
Sec. 2-209. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager or chief of police). 
(3)  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly, or indirectly, make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefor. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the municipal court of the city nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the city on any matter pending before the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2011, § 1(2-9-4)) 
Sec. 2-210. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2011, § 1(2-9-5)) 
Sec. 2-211. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  The board of ethics shall consist of three residents of the city, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the council, and the third appointed by the two named board members and approved by a majority of the city council. The third member of the board of ethics shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(b)  All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. 
(c)  All members of the board of ethics shall serve a five-year term. 
(d)  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. 
(e)  Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city, or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. 
(f)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(g)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. 
(h)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the city. 
(i)  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. 
(j)  Members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of the city governing authority. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2011, § 1(2-9-6)) 
Sec. 2-212. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the city manager (or, in the event the complaint is against the city manager, then to the mayor) who shall give the complaint to the board of ethics, who may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city council or the board of ethics. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the chair of the board of ethics shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. 
(b)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(e)  The board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)  The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(g)  Findings of the board of ethics shall be submitted to the city council for action. 
(h)  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2011, § 1(2-9-7)) 
Sec. 2-213. - Service of complaint. 
The city manager, mayor, or board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross examination of available witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right, but not the obligation, of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of the deadlines in this section shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2011, § 1(2-9-8)) 
Sec. 2-214. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2011, § 1(2-9-10)) 
Sec. 2-215. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)  Public reprimand or censure by the city council; or 
(2)  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2011, § 1(2-9-11)) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDING CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Adoption of technical and construction code by reference. 
Unless otherwise provided for by subsequent ordinance or another provision of this Code, the technical building and construction codes are adopted by reference and incorporated into this Code as if set out fully herein, including the administration and appendix chapters also contained in those codes as well as the state minimum codes enumerated under O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20, as now or hereafter revised or modified pursuant to state law. 
(Code 1992, § 6-1-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Provisions for enforcement. 
The mayor and council of the city shall, by resolution establish provisions for the enforcement of the state minimum codes herein adopted as the City of Millen Minimum Codes, including procedural requirements, provisions for hearings, provisions for appeals from decisions of local inspectors, and any other provisions or procedures necessary to the proper administration and enforcement of the requirements of said codes. 
(Code 1992, § 6-1-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalties. 
Unless other penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 6-1-3) 
Sec. 6-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official or building inspector means the qualified building official or qualified building inspector as designated by the city. 
Sec. 6-5. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The building official is hereby authorized to enforce within the city the provisions of this chapter and the state minimum codes adopted herein. 
(b)  The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of this Code and the adopted state codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the force and effect of law and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code or in the adopted state codes. 
Sec. 6-6. - References to officials in adopted technical codes. 
Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this chapter, then that official of the city as designated by the city manager who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code, shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
Secs. 6-7—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER CONSERVATION—NEW CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial building means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Plumbing fixtures means a device that receives water, waste, or both and discharges the water, waste, or both into a drainage system. The term includes a kitchen sink, utility sink, lavatory, bidet, bathtub, shower, urinal, toilet, water closet, or drinking water fountain. 
Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3 ("High-efficiency plumbing fixtures"), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3 
Sec. 6-32. - Enforcement. 
The city manager shall be responsible for establishing procedures for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 6-2-2) 
Sec. 6-33. - Standards for fixtures. 
(a)  No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in this article. 
(b)  The standards are as follows: 
(1)  A water closet or toilet that: 
a.  Is a dual flush water closet that meets the following standards: 
1.  The average flush volume of two reduced flushes and one full flush may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
2.  The toilet meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the following standards, as applicable: 
(i)  American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2-2008; and 
(ii)  American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.14-2006 Six-Liter Water Closets Equipped with a Dual Flushing Device"; 
3.  Is listed to the WaterSenseTM Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; or 
b.  Is a single flush water closet, including gravity, pressure assisted, and electro hydraulic tank types that meets the following standards: 
1.  The average flush volume may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
2.  The toilet must meet the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.192/CSA B45.1 or A112.19.14; and 
3.  The toilet must be listed to the WaterSenseTM Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification. 
(2)  A shower head that allows a flow of no more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  A urinal and associated flush valve that: 
a.  Uses no more than 0.5 gallons of water per flush; 
b.  Meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2/CSA B45.1; 
c.  For flushing urinals, meets all WaterSenseTM specifications for flushing urinals; and 
d.  Where nonwater urinals are employed, complies with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.3/CSA B45.4 or American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.19/CSA B45.4. Nonwater urinals shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions after installation. Where nonwater urinals are installed they shall have a water distribution line roughed-in to the urinal location at a minimum height of 56 inches (1,422 mm) to allow for the installation of an approved backflow prevention device in the event of a retrofit. Such water distribution lines shall be installed with shutoff valves located as close as possible to the distributing main to prevent the creation of dead ends. Where nonwater urinals are installed, a minimum of one water supplied fixture rated at a minimum of one water supply fixture unit shall be installed upstream on the same drain line to facilitate drain line flow and rinsing. 
(4)  A lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 1.5 gallons of water per minute at a pressure of 60 pounds per square inch in accordance with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.18.1/CSA B.125.1 and listed to the WaterSenseTM High-Efficiency Lavatory Faucet Specification. 
(5)  A kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute. 
Sec. 6-34. - Exemptions. 
Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the building official. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building may be exempt from the standards of this article for the following: 
(1)  When the repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets, or shower heads within such existing building; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets, or shower heads required by this part were installed; 
(3)  When such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  When units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
Chapter 8 - CEMETERIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Applicability of chapter; additional regulations. 
All property owners at the time this chapter is adopted and all visitors within both the Millen Cemetery and the Westside Cemetery (herein, either or both, the "cemetery"), and all lots hereafter to be sold therein, are and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set out in this chapter as formulated and adopted by the mayor and council, and subject further to such other and additional rules and regulations, amendments or alterations as shall be adopted by the city for the cemetery, both of which are public cemeteries owned and operated by the city. Reference to such rules and regulations in instruments or deeds conveying the ownership of lots and the right of interment shall have the same force and effect as if such rules and regulations were set forth therein. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 8-2. - Authority of city as to maintenance and improvements. 
All grading, landscape work and improvements of any kind, and care of cemetery lots, shall be done, and all trees and shrubs shall be moved, and herbage of any kind shall be planted, trimmed, cut or removed, only by the city. Permanent planting of grasses, shrubs, flowers, etc., shall be made by the city, and further plantings may be permitted only at the discretion of the proper committee of the city. The whole cemetery is to be landscaped, and to keep it uniform all plantings shall be under the control of the city, as shall removal of rubbish when necessary, raking and cutting of grass, trimming of trees and shrubbery and other care that the city may deem necessary. The ownership of rights of interment in lots shall not convey any right to do planting or the like without express approval of the proper officials of the city. The city retains control and supervision of all lots that are sold in the sections subject to this chapter, and retains the right to have its city engineer enter upon any lot and prohibit, modify or remove any structure, object, improvement or adornment on such lot which may have been placed thereon and which may be considered objectionable or injurious to the lot, adjoining lots or the cemetery in general. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 8-3. - Rights reserved by city. 
The right to enlarge, reduce, replan or change the boundaries or grading of the cemetery, or of the sections, from time to time, including the right to modify and change the locations of or remove or regrade the roads, drives and walks, or any part thereof, is hereby expressly reserved to the city. The right to lay, maintain, operate or alter or change pipelines and gutters for sprinkling systems, drainage, etc., is also expressly reserved, as well as the right to use the land for cemetery purposes. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 8-4. - Liability of city for loss or damage. 
The city shall not be liable for loss or damage to property or rights of cemetery lot owners arising from causes beyond its control, and especially from damage caused by the elements, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots or order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage be direct or collateral. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 8-5. - Request for grave opening. 
An order or request in writing made to the city manager or his or her designee is required of the lot owner or authorized mortician or funeral director before a grave in the cemetery is to be opened, giving the name, age, sex and date of decease, and the location of the grave in reference to the lot. Permission must be granted in writing. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 8-6. - Sale and resale of lots. 
Only two cemetery lots shall be sold to any one person at any one time. If all of the original two lots are used, the owner many then apply to acquire additional lots. In the event of the sale by an owner of either lot before the lot is used, it must first be offered to the city at a price not exceeding the original purchase price. Only the city may hereafter execute a deed for a lot or lots in the cemetery. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 8-7. - Price of lots. 
The price of burial plots in the cemetery shall be fixed and determined by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 8-8. - Use of lots. 
(a)  Family memorials. Only one central or family memorial shall be allowed on a family cemetery lot, which memorial shall be placed on the rear of the lot facing the drive, with one foot of clearance between the base of the memorial and the back of the property line of the lot. 
(b)  Horizontal markers. If a horizontal marker is used on a grave, only material consisting of stone, marble or bronze may be used, and the top of the marker shall be placed flush with the finished grade of the surrounding ground. 
(c)  Depth of vaults. The top of any vault or container holding a body shall be placed at least 12 inches below the finished grade of the surrounding ground, provided, however, that the vault top may be used as the grave slab and be raised even with the finished grade of the surrounding grave if the slab is constructed of properly reinforced concrete of not less than four inches thick and is aesthetically appropriate in appearance, considering the surrounding cemetery lots. 
(d)  Borders, enclosures and walks. Beginning on May 1, 2015, no fencing, grave mounds, or enclosures of any kind shall be allowed around any lot, and no walks of brick, cinders, tile, stone, marble or terracotta, sand, cement, gravel or wood shall be allowed on any lot. The city shall have the right to remove such fencing, mounds, enclosures and walks if so erected or placed. 
(e)  Liability of city. While the city shall exercise all possible care to protect raised lettering, carving or ornaments on any memorial or other structure on any lot, it shall not be liable for any damage or injury thereto. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2; Ord. of 8-1-2017(1), § 2) 
Sec. 8-9. - Removal of dead plants or flowers. 
The city shall reserve the right to remove all cut flowers and pot plants in the cemetery that may be dead or otherwise objectionable, and will hold the plants or the containers for two weeks after their removal, using ordinary care and diligence for their protection and safety, but shall assume no further liability in connection therewith. Owners shall call for the plants or containers within the specified time. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 8-10. - Injuring or disturbing trees or plants; disturbing bird or animal life. 
All persons are prohibited from gathering flowers, either wild or cultivated, or breaking trees, shrubbery or plants or disturbing bird or other animal life in the cemetery. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 8-11. - Posting signs or advertisements. 
No signs or notices or advertisements of any kind shall be allowed in the cemetery unless placed by the city or pursuant to its authority. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 8-12. - Unauthorized persons prohibited on grounds at night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be present in any city cemetery at any time between sunset and sunrise for any purpose without consent of the city administrator. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 8-13. - Violations. 
Violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015, § 2) 
Chapter 10 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cities are authorized to exercise power over parking facilities and traffic control devices, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4) and (11); power of local authorities with respect to uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted; penalties. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 40, ch. 6, the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, the "uniform rules of the road," (O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, as amended), are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, and imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both this fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1992, § 9-1-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades or other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police may make temporary rules regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them, shall be liable therefor. 
(Code 1992, § 9-1-2) 
Secs. 10-3—10-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-23. - Speed restrictions. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183, and based upon the required engineering and traffic studies, the mayor and council may establish maximum speed limits on any street or portion of a street within the city in accord with the provisions of state law, and shall post traffic signs as required by state law on those particular streets or portions of a street giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit. 
(b)  The maximum safe speed, and therefore the speed limit, for streets in the city which are part of the state highway system has been determined to be, and the speed limit shall be, 35 miles per hour. 
(c)  The speed limit on all other streets in the city shall be 35 miles per hour, except as may be marked with a speed limit sign for a different speed by action of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 9-2-1) 
Sec. 10-24. - Traffic signs, signals and markings. 
(a)  Upon approval by the mayor and council, the police department is authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate traffic control signs, signals and devices, including speed breakers, marks and lines erected at intersections or upon the surface of roadways, crosswalks and intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at other such places as deemed necessary; 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as deemed necessary for the protection of pedestrians; and 
(3)  To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as authorized by the mayor and council. 
(b)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the manual on uniform traffic control devices adopted by the state department of transportation. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this article shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 9-2-2) 
Sec. 10-25. - One-way streets and alleys. 
Upon those streets and alleys and parts of streets and alleys which are designated as one-way streets or alleys by signs giving notice thereof, vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated. Upon approval of the mayor and council, signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is indicated. All such signs now in place are ratified by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 9-2-3) 
Sec. 10-26. - U-turns prohibited. 
No operator of any vehicle shall make a U-turn on any of the streets of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 9-2-4) 
Sec. 10-27. - Regulation of stopping, standing and parking. 
(a)  The police department shall regulate the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles by signing or yellow painting on any of the public streets and alleys within the corporate limits, provided any such signs and markings shall be approved by the mayor and council. 
(b)  No vehicle shall remain parked on any street within the city for a longer period than 12 hours. This shall not conflict with time limits or parking in restricted zones, as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 9-2-5) 
Sec. 10-28. - Regulation of trucks and tractor-trailer rigs. 
No person shall park a tractor-trailer rig on any street, lane, alley or easement in the city and no person shall operate or drive a tractor-trailer rig or any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds on any street, lane, alley or easement in the city, other than streets that are part of the State Highway System and the following: Gray Street South of Winthrope Avenue. 
Any person may apply for a single use permit to operate a tractor-trailer rig or vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds on a restricted street as described above which permit may be granted by the city manager in writing if, in his or her sole discretion, such use is necessary and the applicant has executed an agreement to make repairs to the street in the event of damage due to such use, and the applicant has demonstrated sufficient financial resources to make such repairs. 
(Code 1992, § 9-2-6; Ord. of 12-7-2010, § 2; Ord. of 1-8-2013, § 2; Ord. of 3-4-2014(1), § 2; Ord. of 6-6-2017(1), §§ 2—4) 
Sec. 10-29. - Penalties. 
Violations of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor offense punishable as provided in section 1-6 or as provided by state law. 
(Code 1992, § 9-2-7) 
Secs. 10-30—10-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATION OF TRAINS 

Sec. 10-47. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Railroad Regulation Ordinance of the City of Millen, Georgia." 
(Code 1992, § 9-3-1) 
Sec. 10-48. - Crossing signals. 
The use of whistles and horns by locomotives, railroad trains, or other vehicles operated upon the tracks of any railroad company, at blowposts and crossings within the corporate limits of the city shall be limited to the minimum necessary to warn vehicular traffic of the approach of the train, except in cases of extreme emergency. In lieu thereof, the engineer or person responsible for each such locomotive, railroad train or other vehicle may signal, or cause the same to be done, the approach of his engine, train, or vehicle to such crossing by constantly tolling a bell. 
(Code 1992, § 9-3-2) 
Sec. 10-49. - Blocking crossings. 
Street crossings shall be kept clear of all railroad traffic except as is reasonably necessary for passage through the city, the switching of engines and cars, and the make up of trains, but in no event shall unattended cars or engines be left at a crossing in such a manner as to impede motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1992, § 9-3-3) 
Sec. 10-50. - Penalties. 
Violations of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor offense punishable as provided in section 1-6. Each day that a violation of the provisions of this article occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 9-3-4) 
Secs. 10-51—10-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF PERSONAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES AND MOTORIZED CARTS 

Sec. 10-74. - Registration of personal transportation vehicles and motorized carts. 
Prior to the use of any personal transportation vehicle or motorized cart, as those terms are defined by state law, the owner must register the vehicle with the city and pay a registration fee to cover the cost of processing such registration. Registration must be renewed and an additional fee paid if the address at which the vehicle is housed changes. The registration shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council, from time to time. 
(Code 1992, § 9-4-1; Ord. of 4-3-2012) 
Sec. 10-75. - Requirements for license of operator. 
The person in physical control of any personal transportation vehicle or motorized cart on the streets or other public property of the city shall comply with all licensing requirements for the operation of motor vehicles on the highways of the state. 
(Code 1992, § 9-4-2; Ord. of 4-3-2012) 
Sec. 10-76. - Compliance with state regulations for equipment and operation. 
The owner of a personal transportation vehicle or motorized cart operated on the streets or public property of the city shall comply with all requirements established by the state for the equipment required and the manner of operation of such vehicles. 
(Code 1992, § 9-4-3; Ord. of 4-3-2012) 
Sec. 10-77. - Limitation on places of operation. 
Personal transportation vehicles or motorized carts may not be operated on any street in the city which is also part of the state highway system and may cross state highways only at crossings marked for that purpose by the Georgia department of transportation. 
(Code 1992, § 9-4-5; Ord. of 4-3-2012) 
Sec. 10-78. - Liability of owner for illegal operation. 
The owner of a personal transportation vehicle or motorized cart is personally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article by any person operating his or her vehicle and the violation of any provision of this article by an operator of the vehicle shall also constitute a violation by the owner. 
(Code 1992, § 9-4-6; Ord. of 4-3-2012) 
Sec. 10-79. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be penalized as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 9-4-7; Ord. of 4-3-2012) 
Chapter 14 - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule powers of municipality to regulate and provide sewage collection and disposal systems, stormwater systems, and water treatment systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, III(a)(6), (7); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); municipalities authorized to acquire, construct, operate and maintain water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Composition of utility department. 
The utility department of the city shall consist of a utility director, a water superintendent, a sewer superintendent, a gas superintendent, and other such supervisors and employees as shall be determined by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 5-1-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Duties of the utility director. 
The utility director is responsible for the development of plans for the water, sewer, and gas systems of the city, and the discipline, orderly, efficient care and management of the personnel and equipment of the utility department. 
(Code 1992, § 5-1-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Duties of the water, sewer, and gas superintendent. 
The water, sewer, and gas superintendents will have the responsibility for all the activities of their respective departments including the construction and maintenance of their respective systems under the direct supervision of the utility director. In the absence of the utility director, each respective superintendent will have full responsibility over his respective department. 
(Code 1992, § 5-1-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Function of the utility department. 
The utility department is responsible for the development of plans and the efficient maintenance of the existing water, sewer, and natural gas systems and any other systems that may be acquired by the city under the authority and policies adopted by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 5-1-4) 
Secs. 14-5—14-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND DISCHARGE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 3, 2014, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 14-27—14-29, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 5-2-1—5-2-3 of the 1992 Code. 

Sec. 14-27. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Commercial user or contributor means premises or a person who discharges industrial wastes which are similar to domestic wastes in nature, and do not exceed those parameters which define normal sewage except as to volume, in which case it shall be defined as an industrial user. 
Industrial user or contributor means an industry which discharges wastewaters having the characteristics of industrial wastes, as distinct from commercial wastes or domestic wastes, and having a BOD of 200 mg/l or greater and/or a total suspended solids of 200 mg/l or greater, or having a total discharge volume in excess of 24,000 gallons per month regardless of whether the waste concentration is less than these limits or not. 
Properly shredded garbage means the waste from the preparation of cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority. 
Residential domestic user or contributor means premises or a person who discharges wastewaters to the city or county sewers, which closely match normal sewer as to strength; and volume does not exceed 24,000 gallons per month, and further for billing purposes, is defined as a dwelling place of residence. If the volume discharged exceeds 24,000 gallons per month, it shall be defined as an industrial user. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewer surcharge means a charge for sewer service and treatment service for wastes having characteristics different from sanitary wastes and for which additional charges must be assessed in order for the waste to be processed properly and to compensate the city for additional expenses incurred. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer that 24-hour concentration proposed during normal operation. 
Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, 20 th edition, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. 
Storm drain, sometimes termed storm sewer, means a sewer which carries storm water and surface water and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Street means streets, avenues, drives, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and viaducts, and all other public highways in the sanitary area. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Total solids means the sum of suspended matter, settleable matter and dissolved matter, both volatile and nonvolatile. 
Watercourse means a channel in which flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(b)  All other words shall be construed as having the meanings defined in Glossary, Water and Sewage Control Engineering, published by the Water Pollution Control Federation, Washington, D.C., or by their general usage if undefined. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 2) 
Sec. 14-28. - Use of public sewer required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for disposal of sewage where public sewers are available. 
(d)  The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer of the city is required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 2) 
Sec. 14-29. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available in keeping with the provisions of section 14-28(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private disposal system other than a septic tank, privy, privy vault or cesspool for a single-family dwelling, if the same is otherwise permitted pursuant to the terms of this article, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city manager or his or her designee. The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city which the applicant shall supplement with plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the city manager. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application for permit is filed in an amount prescribed in the schedule of fees and charges as may be adopted by mayor and council from time to time. 
(c)  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city manager. The city's authorized representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction; and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. 
(d)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all of the requirements of this article. 
(e)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification of such provisions, the materials and procedures set forth in the appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(f)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement or first floor. No building sewer shall be made parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from live loads (automobiles, etc.), which may be superimposed. The building sewer shall be made at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. The building sewer shall be constructed to that point as directed by the city manager. 
(g)  No person shall maintain or make a connection of roof downspouts exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(h)  Before any underground portions are covered, the applicant of the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made to the public sewer by an authorized representative of the city, or an approved contractor, and only after inspection. 
(i)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the utility director. 
(j)  The utility director shall keep a permanent and accurate record of the location, depth and direction of all new sewer connections, including any landmarks as may be necessary to make an adequate description. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 2) 
Sec. 14-30. - Use of the public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage into any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids of gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process; to constitute a hazard to humans or animals; to create a public nuisance; or to create any hazard in receiving waters in the sewage treatment plant; 
(3)  Any water or wastes having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 9.0 or containing heavy concentrations of salts or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewer works; or 
(4)  Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction in the flow of sewage or other interference to the proper operation of the sewer works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the utility director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment having adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city manager shall give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows, velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewer treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The types of substances prohibited include the following: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 65 degrees Celsius. 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils whether emulsified or not in excess of 50 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit or between zero and 65 degrees Celsius. 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of ¾ horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any water or wastes containing heavy metals in excess of the following: 
a.  Chromium ..... 1.0 mg/l 
b.  Lead ..... 2.0 mg/l 
c.  Tin ..... 2.0 mg/l 
d.  Copper ..... 0.5 mg/l 
e.  Nickel ..... 1.0 mg/l 
f.  Cyanide ..... 1.0 mg/l 
g.  Cadmium ..... 3.0 mg/l 
(6)  A combination of the metals in subsection (c)(5) of this section shall not exceed six mg/l in the effluent, or which when blended with the waste in the interceptor will have a combined concentration in excess of two mg/l when it reaches the treatment plant, subsection (c)(7) of this section notwithstanding, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such material received in composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city manager for such materials. 
(7)  Notwithstanding the upper limits in subsection (c)(5) of this section, the city may require pretreatment of such waste discharges in accordance with subsection (d) of this section to the lowest practical and reasonable levels to comply with appropriate state or federal regulatory agency requirements, either for the treatment facility influent or effluent, or if otherwise found necessary to provide satisfactory and acceptable treatment of all wastewater. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances in concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city manager as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage to meet requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies with jurisdiction over such discharge to receiving waters. 
(9)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes having a pH outside of the range of 6.0—9.0. 
(11)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids; such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate; 
b.  Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
c.  An unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs; or 
d.  The admission into the public sewers of any water or having: 
1.  A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 200 mg/l; 
2.  Containing more than 200 mg/l of suspended solids; or 
3.  Having an average daily flow greater than five percent of the average daily sewage flow to the plant; 
Shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager. 
(12)  Where necessary in the opinion of the city manager, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
a.  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 200 mg/l and the suspended solids to 200 mg/l; 
b.  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided; and 
c.  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or wastes. 
(13)  Plans and specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the city manager and in construction of such facilities shall be commenced until the approval is obtained in writing. 
(14)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of state or federal agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(d)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (c) of this section which in the judgment of the city manager may have a deleterious act upon the sewer works, processes, equipment or receiving water; or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city manager may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition with discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges; or 
(5)  Any or all of the above. 
(e)  If the city manager permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city administration, subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(f)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city manager and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be supplied and properly maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(g)  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(h)  The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole. When deemed necessary, the city manager may require additional meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste. 
(i)  The manhole shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city manager. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(j)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the examination of water and wastewater and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewer works and to determine the existence of hazards of life, limb and property. 
(k)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment by the industrial concern under section 14-28. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 2) 
Sec. 14-31. - Removal, transportation and disposition of scavenger wastes. 
It is the policy of the city that scavenger wastes are not to be deposited in the public sewer system or waste treatment facility or anywhere within the city 
(Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 2) 
Sec. 14-32. - Powers and authority of inspectors; testing. 
(a)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city manager or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the city manager or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company; and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees. The city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging or sampling operations, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 14-30. 
(c)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewer works lying within the easement. 
(d)  Upon determination by the city manager that it is necessary for the protection of the public sewer system, any person or persons discharging wastewater into the city sewer system shall have their discharge tested by a city-approved independent testing laboratory quarterly at the person's expense. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 2) 
Sec. 14-33. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 14-32 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for its satisfactory correction. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations. Violations of section 14-32 shall be subject to immediate arrest, a cease and desist order, temporary injunction or such other relief as may be provided by law, in addition to citation for violation of this Code. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided in this section shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. Each day in which any violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damages occasioned the city by reason of the violation in addition to any other fine or penalty provided for in this Code. 
(d)  Any person/company discharging waste into the city's waste system resulting in the city being unable to meet EPD's permitted discharge limits shall be responsible and accountable for all fees and/or fines levied against the city. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 2) 
Sec. 14-34. - Grievances and arbitration. 
(a)  Upon formal request by the sewer user the city council may hear any required arbitration of differences or grievances between the sewer user and the city manager on matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If deemed appropriate by the city council, a temporary independent hearing board may be appointed for arbitration purposes. The board shall consist of at least three persons one of whom shall be a lawyer, and the other two shall have a technical knowledge of the provisions of this article. The cost of arbitration shall be equally divided between the city and the sewer user. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 2) 
Sec. 14-35. - Billing and service disconnection. 
Sewer charges shall be billed with water charges, and failure to pay sewer charges shall be treated in the same manner as for failure to pay water charges. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 2) 
Sec. 14-36. - Sewer rates; surcharges; tap fees. 
The sewer rates, surcharges and tap fees for treatment and collection of sewage by the city shall be in an amount prescribed in the schedule of fees and charges established from time to time by resolution adopted by mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 2) 
Secs. 14-37—14-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR WATERING RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 14-47. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Address means the house number (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. "Even numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. "Odd numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. 
(Code 1992, § 5-3-1) 
Sec. 14-48. - Outdoor water use schedule during non-drought periods. 
Outdoor water use other than exempted activities shall occur only as follows: 
(1)  Odd-numbered addresses: Outdoor water use is allowed only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
(2)  Even-numbered addresses: Outdoor water use is allowed only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
(3)  During declared drought conditions, outdoor water use other than activities exempted in section 14-50 shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. 
(Code 1992, § 5-3-2; Ord. of 1-4-2011, § 2(5-3-2)) 
Sec. 14-49. - Outdoor water use schedule during declared drought response levels. 
The city shall enforce drought response levels as declared by the state department of natural resources director of the environmental protection division. 
(1)  Declared drought response level one. Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
a.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
b.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
c.  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing is prohibited. 
d.  Cemetery/graveyard watering shall be allowed on Friday only, within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(2)  Declared drought response level two. Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
a.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
b.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
c.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing is prohibited. 
d.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, and driveways is prohibited, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
e.  Cemetery/graveyard watering shall be allowed on Friday only, within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(3)  Declared drought response level three. Outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
a.  The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday. 
b.  The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday. 
c.  The following uses are prohibited: 
1.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing. 
2.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, butters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
3.  Filling installed swimming pools except when necessary for health care or structural integrity. 
4.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts. Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection. 
5.  Non-commercial fundraisers, such as car washes. 
6.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
(4)  Declared drought response level four. No outdoor water use is allowed, other than for activities exempted in section 14-50 or as the EPD director may order. 
(Code 1992, § 5-3-3) 
Sec. 14-50. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(2)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(3)  The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this article: 
a.  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
b.  Irrigation of personal food gardens. 
c.  Newly installed landscapes (in place less than 30 days) are subject to the following: 
d.  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during drought response level four. 
(b)  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. 
(c)  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the schedules of this article: 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of fairways during times of non-drought and declared drought response level one. 
(3)  Irrigation of tees during times of non-drought and declared drought response levels one, two, and three. 
(4)  Irrigation of greens. 
(d)  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this article: 
(1)  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers. 
(2)  During installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
(3)  Irrigation contractors, during installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
(4)  Sod producers. 
(5)  Ornamental growers. 
(6)  Fruit and vegetable growers. 
(7)  Retail garden centers. 
(8)  Hydro-seeding. 
(9)  Power-washing. 
(10)  Construction sites. 
(11)  Producers of food and fiber. 
(12)  Car washes. 
(13)  Other activities essential to daily business. 
(14)  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. 
(Code 1992, § 5-3-4) 
Sec. 14-51. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any person or entity found to be violating the provisions of this article for the first time shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and shall be issued a warning ticket for the violation. 
(2)  Upon a second violation by any person or entity, water service shall be terminated and a fine of $200.00 shall be imposed. 
(3)  Upon a third violation and all subsequent violations, water service shall be terminated and a current water tapping fee as published by the city water department for each violation shall be imposed. 
(b)  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, all specifications and requirements of the city water department shall apply to any reconnection. 
(Code 1992, § 5-3-5) 
Secs. 14-52—14-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF PRIVATE WELLS 

Sec. 14-76. - Statement of purpose. 
The construction of private wells within the city has increased dramatically over the past several years, threatening the viability of the city water system and creating the potential for indirect polluting of our potable water supply through cross connection. The mayor and council, after considerable investigation and consideration of alternatives, have adopted this article as the best available means of meeting mandatory federal and state water-quality standards and of protecting the system and the health and safety of its users. 
(Code 1992, § 5-4-1) 
Sec. 14-77. - Statement of the problem. 
(a)  The removal of the system's volume consumers from the system weakens the city's ability to maintain the system as a self-sufficient utility at a cost commensurate with the ability of the least able consumer to pay for the service. This problem has now reached critical proportions. 
(b)  The city water system must comply with the Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water and the Federal Safe Water Act. A cross connection control program is essential to this end. 
(c)  Cross connection, in its simplest term, is an inter-connection between two water systems/sources. These connections may be direct connections or indirect connections. An example of a direct connection is one where a customer is not only connected to the public water system, but also has a private well. If these two systems are connected at any point in the plumbing, a cross-connection exists. This connection is most dangerous because if there is a difference in pressure between the two systems, water will flow from the one with the higher pressure to the one with the lower pressure. In general, private systems are not controlled as to water quality. Should the private system be polluted and the public system experience a lower pressure, this polluted water would flow into the potable water, thus reducing its quality, possible to the point of causing serious illness to other customers of the public water supply system. 
(d)  An indirect connection is one in which no permanent connection exists, but may create a flow of water from a polluted source to a potable source. An example of this type would be in a situation where a vat of chemicals was being diluted with water from the public system using a hose. If the hose were below the liquid level and a sudden pressure drop occurred in the public system, the chemical solution could be back-siphoned into the public system. 
(e)  Cross connections have always been a concern to waterworks operators; however only in recent years has the problem received much attention. In recent years the potential for indirect polluting of public water supplies has increased tremendously. Thus, the need for a comprehensive well water and cross connection control ordinance. 
(Code 1992, § 5-4-2) 
Sec. 14-78. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article and in order to carry out the provisions and intentions as set forth herein, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and interpreted as herein defined. 
Air break (drainage system) means a piping arrangement in which a drain from a fixture, appliance or device discharges indirectly into a fixture, receptacle or interceptor at a point below the flood level rim of the receptacle so installed as to prevent backflow or siphonage. 
Air gap (drainage system) means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the outlet of waste pipe and the flood level rim of the receptacle into which it is discharged. 
Air gap (water supply system) means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle. 
Auxiliary intake means any piping connection or other device whereby water may be secured from a source other than the city water system. 
Backflow means a reversal of flow in a pipe from the normal or designated direction of flow. 
Backflow preventer (BFP) means a device to prevent backflow. 
By-pass means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the water may be diverted around any part or portion of a building's water system. 
Contaminant means a toxic substance that, if introduced into the potable water supply system, would create a health hazard. 
Cross connection means any physical connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or back-pressure valves, or any other arrangements. 
Domestic sewage means the waterborne wastes derived from ordinary living processes. 
Industrial wastes means liquid or liquidborne wastes resulting from the processes employed in industrial and commercial establishments. 
Inter-connection means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, or other device which does or may contain sewage or other waste or liquid, which would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
Liquid waste means the discharge from any fixture, appliance, area or appurtenance which does not contain human or animal waste matter. 
Non-potable water means water that is not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use. 
Person means a natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns; and includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns. Singular includes plural; male includes female. 
Pollutant means a non-toxic substance that, if introduced into the potable water supply system, would be objectionable but would not create a health hazard. 
Potable water means conforming to the requirements of the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977. 
Public water supply means the waterworks system furnishing water to the city for general use and which supply is recognized as the public water supply by the state department of natural resources/environmental protection division. 
Sewage means any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution and may include liquids containing chemicals in solution. 
Water supply system means the water service pipe, water-distributing pipes, fixture supply pipes and necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves and all appurtenances in or adjacent to the building or premises. 
(Code 1992, § 5-4-3) 
Sec. 14-79. - Potable water supply. 
The city's public water supply shall provide potable water which meets all state and federal standard for purity and safety, and it is the intent of this article that it become the sole source of potable water for the city, its citizens, and water consumers. 
(1)  Private wells may not be established for potable water purposes, but may be established for other purposes under the guidelines set out herein. 
(2)  Private wells used for potable water and in existence on October 7, 1987, may continue in use provided that there is absolutely no possibility of cross connection with the public water supply and the owner or lessor of the property on which the well is located is not now connected to the public water system. In the event any person currently using water from a private well shall hereafter be connected to the public water supply, or if, in the opinion of the city and its duly authorized agents, the potential for cross connection is significant, use of such private well for potable water shall be prohibited, as is provided herein for all new private wells. All other provisions of this article, consistent with the continued use of existing private wells for potable water, shall apply to such use. 
(Code 1992, § 5-4-4) 
Sec. 14-80. - Regulation of private wells. 
(a)  Private wells may not be constructed or established in the city for any purpose, regardless of the date of application. 
(b)  Any person desiring to construct a private well shall make application to the city for a permit on forms provided by the city and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The name of the applicant; 
(2)  The exact location of the proposed well and its proposed depth; 
(3)  The size of the proposed well; 
(4)  The length of casing to be used in connection with the proposed well; 
(5)  The purpose for which the water from the proposed well is to be used; and 
(6)  The maximum amount of water to be obtained from the proposed well. 
In every instance in which the right to use a private well ceases, the existing well shall be capped and closed as required by law and the applicant shall pay a tap fee and deposit upon connecting to the city water system in accordance with the city's current regulations. 
(c)  Each application hereunder shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00 to be used by the city to defray the costs of verification of the application and inspection of the well construction. The amount of the application fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(d)  The construction of an approved private well shall be subject to inspection by city personnel and a log of drilling operations shall be maintained by the driller and a copy furnished to the city along with a certificate from the driller that the well was constructed in accordance with the specifications contained in the approved application and the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Unless monthly inspection of the well and the quality of the water produced are accomplished by the state or a political subdivision thereof, copies of which reports are provided to the city, the well and water shall be inspected and sampled by the city and the owner shall pay a monthly fee of $15.00 for this service. The amount of the monthly fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(f)  Following construction of the private well, the city, at its option, may meter the flow from the well to determine the amounts of water being diverted from the city's total public water supply. 
(g)  Water from private wells shall not be discharged into the city sewer system. 
(Code 1992, § 5-4-5; Ord. of 8-4-2009, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 14-81. - Cross connection control. 
Private wells used solely for the provision of non-potable water and in existence prior to August 4, 2009, and which neither do nor will adversely affect the public water supply, and which are maintained in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Water Wells Standards Act of 1985 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.), as amended, which legislation is incorporated herein by reference, may continue in use provided there is absolutely no possibility of cross connection with the public water supply. Continued use of such wells shall cease upon determination by the city or its employees that the existence of the well poses a threat to the public water supply. Additionally, should the property owner or occupant of the property request connection to the city's water system, the right to continue use of the existing private well shall cease. In every instance in which the right to use a private well ceases, the existing well shall be capped and closed as required by law and the applicant shall pay a tap fee and deposit upon connection with the city water system in accordance with the city's current regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, § 4) 
Sec. 14-82. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person found to have violated, or to be in violation of, any provision of this article: 
(1)  Which violation shall have occurred after the effective date of the Code or a specific date set out in this article; or 
(2)  Within 10 days after written notice requiring a modification of an existing private well is provided to the owner by certified mail to the address for the property locally; 
shall, upon conviction of such offense, be punished as provided in section 1-6. Each day such violation exists shall be considered a separate violation. 
(b)  Prosecution of violations shall be by citation returnable to the municipal court. 
(Code 1992, § 5-4-7; Ord. of 8-4-2009, § 5) 
Secs. 14-83—14-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 14-108. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Damage includes the substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility, penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective device of an underground utility, and the partial or complete severance of an underground utility. 
Demolish or demolition means any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, rendered, moved or removed by means of any tools, equipment or discharge of explosives. 
Excavate or excavation means an operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock or other materials in or on the ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, and including auguring, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but not including the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes. 
Mechanized equipment means equipment operated by means of mechanical power including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augers, backhoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows and other equipment used for plowing-in or pulling-in cable or pipe. 
Operator means any city or utility commission who owns or operates a utility. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity organized under the laws of any state; any subdivision or instrumentality of a state; any employee, agent, or legal representative thereof. 
Utility means any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting, or distribution communication, electricity, gas petroleum, petroleum products, hazardous liquids, water, steam or sewerage. 
Working day means every day, except Saturday, Sunday and national and legal state holidays. 
(Code 1992, § 5-5-1) 
Sec. 14-109. - Excavation and demolition permits. 
A permit issued pursuant to law authorizing excavation or demolition operations, shall not be deemed to relieve a person from the responsibility for complying with the provision of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 5-5-2) 
Sec. 14-110. - Prohibition. 
Except as provided in section 14-113, no person may excavate in a street, highway, public space, a private easement or an operator, or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer served by such utility, or demolish a building without having first ascertained in the manner prescribed in sections 14-111 and 14-112 the location of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition. Each operator shall maintain a list of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition. Each operator shall maintain a list of all underground utilities and plants or maps showing their location. 
(Code 1992, § 5-5-3) 
Sec. 14-111. - Notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 14-113, before commencing any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 14-110, each person responsible for such excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephonic notice of intent to excavate or demolish at least three, but not more than ten full working days. 
(1)  On each operator (city engineer, superintendent of utilities, or city manager) which has a list required by section 14-110 indicating that it has underground utilities located in the proposed area of excavation or demolition; or 
(2)  Where demolition of a building is proposed, operators shall be given reasonable time to remove or protect their utilities before demolition of the building is commenced. 
(b)  The written or telephonic notice required by subsection (a) of this section must contain the name, address, and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent, and, if different, the person responsible for the excavation or demolition, the starting date, anticipated duration, and type of excavation or demolition operation to be conducted, the location of the proposed excavation or demolition, and whether or not explosives are to be used. 
(c)  If the notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of such notification shall be maintained by the operators (each city may wish to include persons and telephone numbers to be notified) notified to document compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 5-5-4) 
Sec. 14-112. - Response to notice of intent. 
(a)  Each operator or designated representative notified in accordance with section 14-111 shall, not less than two working days in advance of the proposed excavation or demolition (unless a shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or designated representative), supply by use of maps when appropriate, the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition: 
(1)  The approximate location and description of all of its underground utilities which may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition; 
(2)  The location and description of all utility markers indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities; and 
(3)  Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities including, providing adequate temporary markings indicating the approximate location of the underground utility in locations where permanent utility markers do not exist. 
(b)  For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utilities is defined as a strip of land at least three feet wide but not wider than the width of the utility plus 1½ feet on either side of the utility. 
(Code 1992, § 5-5-5) 
Sec. 14-113. - Emergency excavation or demolition. 
Compliance with the notice requirements of section 14-111 is not required of persons responsible for emergency excavations or demolition to ameliorate an imminent danger to life, health or property, provided, however, that such persons give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to each operator having underground utilities located in the area where such excavation or demolition is to be performed and requests emergency assistance from each operator so identified in locating and providing immediate protection to its underground utilities. An imminent danger to life, health or property exists whenever there is a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health or property will result before the procedures under this article can be fully complied with. 
(Code 1992, § 5-5-6) 
Sec. 14-114. - Precautions to avoid damage. 
In addition to the notification requirements of section 14-111, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 14-110 shall: 
(1)  Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to, or minimize interference with, underground utilities in and near the construction area; 
(2)  Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such utility; and 
(3)  Provide such support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such utilities. 
(Code 1992, § 5-5-7) 
Sec. 14-115. - Excavation or demolition damage. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 14-110 that results in any damage to an underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator of such utility of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of such utility. 
(b)  Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition designated in section 14-110 that results in damage to an underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic, or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator, police and fire departments, and take any other action as may be reasonably necessary, to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until arrival of the operator's personnel or police and fire department. 
(Code 1992, § 5-5-8) 
Sec. 14-116. - Civil penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty of not to exceed $1,000.00 for each such violation. Actions to recover the penalty provided for in this section shall be brought by the city attorney at the request of any person in and for the city in which the cause, or some part thereof, arose or in which the defendant has its principal place of business or resides. All penalties recovered in any such actions shall be paid into the general fund of the city. This article does not affect any civil remedies for personal injury or property (including underground utilities) damage except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article. 
(Code 1992, § 5-5-9) 
Secs. 14-117—14-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UTILITY SERVICE 

Sec. 14-146. - Damaging or tampering with facilities or service; unlawful diversion of service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to a company or to any municipality or other political subdivision engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone or other public services, or intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of such company or any municipality or political subdivision, or intentionally to divert any services of such company, municipality or political subdivision or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of such company, municipality or political subdivision, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by such company, municipality or political subdivision. 
(b)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts described in this section and the person who with knowledge of such violation receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of such improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. 
(c)  Violators of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(d)  In addition to fines, forfeiture and imprisonment, any person convicted for violation of this section may be required to reimburse the city for any damage to its equipment at current costs for labor and materials necessary to reestablish service. 
(Code 1992, § 5-6-1) 
Sec. 14-147. - Responsibility for costs of damage to equipment after disconnection of service. 
If utility service provided by the city is disconnected for nonpayment, the meter and other connected utility equipment shall remain in the custody of the utility account holder. Before utility service is reconnected, the account holder or the person applying for reconnection, shall, in addition to payment of reconnection fees, reimburse the city for repair of any damage to its equipment necessary to reestablish service, at current costs for materials and labor. 
(Code 1992, § 5-6-2) 
Sec. 14-148. - Taking water without authority. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install any hydrant, faucet or other device for the purpose of taking water from the city's mains, pipes or supplies without first obtaining a permit therefor from the proper authority. 
(Code 1992, § 5-6-3) 
Sec. 14-149. - Access to utility and hydrants. 
(a)  All utility meters shall be accessible to utility personnel at all times. Failure by the customer to provide such access or obstruction of access shall result in discontinuance of utility service after 30 days' notice to the customer by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  No person using city utilities, nor owner of property on which utility meters or fire hydrants are situated, shall place or maintain any obstruction to access to any meter or hydrant by city personnel. No tree, shrub or other vegetation nor any ornamental structure shall be placed within six feet of any city water or gas meter or fire hydrant. Any tree, shrub or vegetation, shall be trimmed and maintained so that no portion of the growth or vegetation is closer than two feet of any portion of a city gas or water meter or fire hydrant. A violation of this section shall result in a fine not to exceed $100.00. Further, in the event this section is violated, the city may remove, trim or otherwise restrict the obstruction to a point of compliance with this section. The cost of removal of any obstruction of access shall be assessed against the utility consumer and added to the next month's gas or water bill. 
(Code 1992, § 5-6-4) 
Secs. 14-150—14-159. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-160. - Utility service required for building occupancy. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use, as a place of residence or to serve the public, any building, storage unit, shed, barn, manufactured home, or other structure unless that site has (a) a legal connection to the city water system, (b) a connection to the city sanitary sewer system or an approved septic system or sanitary waste disposal system, and (c) a legal connection to a provider of electric power. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2016(1)) 
Sec. 14-161. - Penalties. 
Any person found to be in violation of section 14-160 above, in addition to an immediate order to cease and desist from a prohibited use, shall be subject to criminal penalties as provided in section 1-1-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2016(1)) 
Secs. 14-162—14-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PERMIT FOR UTILITY FACILITY ENCROACHMENT 

Sec. 14-175. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Operator means any city or utility commission who owns or operates a utility. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity organized under the laws of any state, any subdivision or instrumentality of a state; or any employee, agent, or legal representative thereof. 
Utility means any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting, or distributing communication (including, but not limited to fiber optic transmissions), electricity, gas, petroleum products, water, other liquids, steam or sewerage. 
(Ord. of 1-5-2016(1)) 
Sec. 14-176. - Utility facility encroachment permit required. 
Any person desiring to locate a utility on a street, highway, public space, private easement or operator within the city shall make application for the same on the Application and Permit for Utility Facility Encroachment form provided by the city and shall comply with all general and special conditions on such permit as may be subsequently issued by the city. Locating, or attempting to locate, a utility without having first obtained the required permit shall constitute a violation of the Code punishable as provided in section 1-6 herein. 
(Ord. of 1-5-2016(1)) 
Secs. 14-177—14-189. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT 

Sec. 18-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Incite a riot means, but is not limited to, urging or instigating other persons to riot, but shall not be deemed to mean the mere oral or written: 
(1)  Advocacy of ideas; or 
(2)  Expression of belief, not involving advocacy of any act or acts of violence or assertion of the rightness of, or the right to commit, any such act or acts. 
Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas and parks. 
Riot means a public disturbance involving: 
(1)  An act or acts of violence by one or more persons who are part of an assemblage of three or more persons, which act or acts shall constitute a clear and present danger of, or shall result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual; or 
(2)  A threat, or threats, of the commission of an act or acts of violence by one or more persons who are part of an assemblage of three or more persons having, individually or collectively, the ability of immediate execution of such threat or threats, where the performance of the threatened act or acts of violence would constitute a clear and present danger of, or would result in, damage or injury to the property of any person or to the person of any other individual. 
(Code 1992, § 10-1-1) 
Sec. 18-27. - Disorderly conduct prohibited. 
A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, or if his conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if he willfully does any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby that other is placed in danger of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl, or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  Interferes with another's pursuit of lawful occupation by acts of violence; 
(5)  Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by the city police or other lawful authority known to be such; 
(6)  Is in a public place under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or drug in such condition as to be unable to exercise care for his own safety or the safety of others; 
(7)  Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by city police of any other authorized official of the city, when known to be such an official; 
(8)  Incites, attempts to incite, or is involved in attempting to incite a riot; 
(9)  Addresses abusive language or threats to any member of the city police department, any other authorized official of the city who is engaged in the lawful performances of his duties, or any other person when such words have a tendency to cause acts of violence. Words merely causing displeasure, annoyance or resentment are not prohibited; 
(10)  Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive conditions; 
(11)  Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed, or the traveling public is annoyed; 
(12)  Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer, when known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety is imminently threatened; 
(13)  Uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture. 
(Code 1992, § 10-1-2) 
Sec. 18-28. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not be construed to suppress the right of lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking or other lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
(Code 1992, § 10-1-3) 
Sec. 18-29. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be penalized as provided by the provisions of section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 10-1-4) 
Secs. 18-30—18-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOITERING 

Sec. 18-46. - Prohibited. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36(a) and (b) are hereby adopted as an ordinance of the city, and shall be enforced, in the alternative, as a violation of the state statute or City Code, in the discretion of the officer making the arrest or his superiors. 
(Code 1992, § 10-2-1) 
Sec. 18-47. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates this article shall be penalized as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 10-2-2) 
Secs. 18-48—18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CURFEW FOR MINORS 

Sec. 18-61. - Curfew for minors; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person 17 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, shopping centers, or other public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, business establishments, vacant lots or any other place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by their parent or guardian or adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment or recreational activity; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the proscribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel. 
(Code 1992, § 10-3-1) 
Sec. 18-62. - Parental responsibility for enforcement. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any minor 17 years of age or younger to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow, such minor to be in or upon the public streets or any other places listed previously within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 5:00 a.m. the following day, except in circumstances set out in section 18-61(1) through (6). 
(Code 1992, § 10-3-2) 
Sec. 18-63. - Penalties. 
The department of public safety shall adopt rules and operational procedures to track violations and notifications of parents. Upon the first offense of a minor in violation of section 18-49, the parent or guardian will be given a verbal warning by a police officer. This warning shall be documented by the officer. On the second or subsequent offenses, the parent or guardian shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-6 and the minor shall be turned over to the juvenile court intake officer for appropriate action. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 10-3-3) 
Secs. 18-64—18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESISTING ARREST AND INTERFERENCE WITH A POLICE OFFICER 

Sec. 18-81. - Resistance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make resistance to, or in any manner to interfere with, a police officer, or any other officer or employee of the city, in the discharge of his official duty. 
(Code 1992, ch. 10-4) 
Secs. 18-82—18-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRESPASSING 

Sec. 18-101. - Placing property on premises of another. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any property on the premises of another without permission of the person lawfully in possession of the premises. 
(Code 1992, § 10-5-1) 
Sec. 18-102. - Trespass on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without permission granted by the mayor and council, to occupy any city common, reserve, street, park, or any ground, lot or other realty owned by the city, or any portion thereof, except for the specific purposes for which the property is held by the city for public use and at those times designated for public use. 
(Code 1992, § 10-5-2) 
Secs. 18-103—18-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - JUNK CARS 

Sec. 18-123. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative Motor Vehicle Ordinance." 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-1) 
Sec. 18-124. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms, phrases and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Junked motor vehicle is any motor vehicle, as defined by state law which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. The term "inoperative" shall include a motor vehicle that is incapable of locomotion under its own power or a motor vehicle that has not been used as a means of transportation for over 60 days. 
Motor vehicle is any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, campers and trailers. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property means any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-2) 
Sec. 18-125. - Storing, parking or leaving certain motor vehicle prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or partially dismantled condition whether attended or not, upon any public or private property within the city for a period of time in excess of 72 hours. The presence of an abandoned, or partially dismantled, inoperative, rusted or junked vehicle or parts thereof, on public or private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a business properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city, or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways, or any vehicle retained by the owner for antique collection purposes. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-3) 
Sec. 18-126. - Notice to remove. 
Whenever it comes to the attention of the chief of police that any nuisance, as defined in section 18-125 exists in the city, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in the case that there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in this article. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-4) 
Sec. 18-127. - Responsibility for removal. 
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either or all of them shall be responsible for, and shall have 15 days within which to accomplish, its removal. In the event of removal and disposal by the city as provided herein, the owner or occupant of the private property where the same is located shall be liable for expenses incurred. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-5) 
Sec. 18-128. - Content of notice. 
The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this article, and shall also advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner or occupant of the property. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-6) 
Sec. 18-129. - Request for hearing. 
The persons to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized agents may file a written request for a hearing before the municipal court within a 15-day compliance period prescribed in section 18-127 for the purpose of defending the charges by the city. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-7) 
Sec. 18-130. - Procedure for hearing. 
The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be advised of the time and place of said hearing at least seven days in advance thereof. At any such hearing the city and the persons to whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems necessary. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-8) 
Sec. 18-131. - Removal of motor vehicle from property. 
If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the 15-day period of compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the municipal court judge, the chief of police or his designee shall have the right to take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-9) 
Sec. 18-132. - Notice of removal. 
Within 48 hours of the removal of such vehicle, the chief of police shall give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed, that the said vehicle or vehicles have been impounded and stored for violation of this article. The notice shall give the location of where the vehicle or vehicles are stored, and the costs incurred by the city for removal. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-10) 
Sec. 18-133. - Disposition of vehicles. 
Upon removing a vehicle under the provisions of section 18-131, the city shall, after ten days, cause it to be appraised. If the vehicle is appraised at $75.00 or less, the chief of police shall execute an affidavit so attesting and describing the vehicle, including the license plates, if any, and stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle. The chief of police, after complying with the above, may summarily dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale. If the vehicle is appraised at over $75.00, the chief of police shall give notice of public sale not less than 15 days before the date of proposed sale. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-11) 
Sec. 18-134. - Contents of public sale notice. 
(a)  The notice shall state: 
(1)  The sale is of abandoned property in the possession of the city. 
(2)  A description of the vehicle including make, model, license numbers and any other information which will accurately identify the vehicle. 
(3)  The terms of the sale. 
(4)  The date, time and place of the sale. 
(b)  This notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-12) 
Sec. 18-135. - Public sale. 
The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. At the time of payment of the purchase price, the chief of police shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of which is to be given to the purchaser and the copy thereof to be filed with the city manager. Should the sale for, any reason, be invalid, the city's liability shall be limited to the return of the purchase price. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-13) 
Sec. 18-136. - Redemption of impounded vehicles. 
The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this article may redeem the vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale or destruction thereof upon proof of ownership and payment to the chief of police of any sum as he may determine and fix for the actual and reasonable expense of removal, not to exceed $50.00, plus $2.00 per day for storage of each vehicle redeemed. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-14) 
Sec. 18-137. - Liability of owner or occupant. 
Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of the property on which abandoned vehicle or vehicles have been removed by the city to pay the unrecovered expenses incurred by the city in the removal, a lien shall be placed upon the property for the amount of these expenses. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-15) 
Sec. 18-138. - Proceeds to be paid to general fund. 
All proceeds of such sales shall be paid over to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 10-6-16) 
Secs. 18-139—18-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BIRD SANCTUARY 

Sec. 18-160. - City designated bird sanctuary. 
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city shall be a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1992, § 10-7-1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 18-161. - Shooting, molesting birds prohibited; exception; responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to trap, shoot, hunt or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or fowl; or to rob birds' nests or wild fowl nests, provided, however, that if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregated in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property, in the opinion of the health authorities of the county, then the birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the parent of any child, the guardian of any ward, or the person having parental responsibility for a child to authorize or knowingly permit the child or ward to violate the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1992, § 10-7-2; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 2) 
Secs. 18-162—18-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DOMESTIC ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; rabies control and licensing of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer/department means any person(s) agencies designated by the city as a law enforcement officer/agency, for the purposes of issuing citations in relation to their duties under the specifications of this article. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by the city or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this article. 
Animals, for the purposes of this article, means dog and/or cat. 
Circus means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
Commercial animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition or kennel. 
Domestic animal means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
Grooming shop means a commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon verbal command. Also, any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon which he is located. 
Kennel means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling dogs or cats. 
Owner means any person, partnership or corporation owning, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored If it is fed or sheltered for three or more consecutive days. 
Performing animal exhibition means any spectacle, display, act or event other than circuses in which performing animals are used. 
Pet shop means any person, partnership or corporation, whether operated separately or in conjunction with another business enterprise except for a licensed kennel, that buys, sells, or boards any species of animal. 
Public nuisance means any animal which: 
(1)  Molests passersby or passing vehicles; 
(2)  Attacks other animals; 
(3)  Trespasses on school grounds; 
(4)  Is repeatedly at large; 
(5)  Damages private or public property; or 
(6)  Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion. 
Restraint means any animal secured by a leash or lead, no longer than six feet, or inside a fenced area within the real property limits of its owner. 
Riding school or stable means any place which has available for hire, boarding and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro. 
Veterinary hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of disease and injury of animals. 
Vicious animals means any animal that constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals. 
Zoological park means any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more species of nondomesticated animals operated by a person, partnership, corporation or government agency. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-1) 
Sec. 18-192. - Applicability. 
No person shall raise, keep or permit to be raised or kept on premises he or she owns or controls any animal with the exception of dogs, cats and certain birds of the Psittacine family. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-2; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 18-193. - Rabies inoculation. 
All dogs and cats housed, kept or boarded within the corporate limits of the city shall be inoculated against rabies by a competent veterinarian and a certificate issued to that effect. The owner or any other person responsible for the presence of a dog or cat within the corporate limits shall be liable for the inoculation of the animal and shall provide proof of inoculation for rabies to the city animal control officer upon request. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-3; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 4) 
Sec. 18-194. - Licensing. 
(a)  Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any dog or cat over four months of age within this municipality must obtain a registration tag as herein provided. 
(b)  Written application for registration shall be made to a licensed veterinarian who shall include the name and address of the applicant, description of the dog or cat, appropriate fee, and rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian or anti rabies clinic. 
(c)  Registration for the keeping of dogs or cats shall be for the life of that particular animal, unless revoked or unless ownership changes. 
(d)  Application for registration must be made within 30 days after obtaining a dog or cat over four months of age, except that this requirement will not apply to the nonresidential keeping of a dog or cat within the city for no longer than 60 days. 
(e)  Registration fees shall not be required for Seeing Eye Dogs or governmental police dogs. 
(f)  Upon acceptance of the registration application and fee, the veterinarian shall issue a durable tag stamped with an identifying number and the year of issuance. 
(g)  Dogs and cats must wear identification tags or collars at all times when off the premises of the owner(s). 
(h)  The licensing veterinarian shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available to the public. 
(i)  No person may use any registration tag for any animal other than the animal for which it was issued. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-4) 
Sec. 18-195. - Restraint. 
(a)  All dogs shall be kept under restraint as defined in section 18-191. 
(b)  Owners shall exercise proper care and control of animals so as to prevent their animals from becoming public nuisances, as defined in section 18-191. 
(c)  Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
(d)  Every vicious animal, as defined in section 18-191, and as determined by the animal control officer, shall be confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure, and shall be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owner. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of each owner, tenant or custodian of property upon which or within which a guard dog is located to conspicuously and promptly post a notice on the outside of the property: "Warning, Guard Dog," the letters to be one inch or larger. In the case of a building, notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about each and every entrance or exit. In the case of a general enclosure in which a guard dog is located, the notices shall be posted upon the enclosure at a distance not greater than 50 feet apart, as well as upon each and every entrance and exit through the enclosure. In the case of apartments, condominiums or businesses located within larger buildings where the guard dog is located solely within the apartment, condominium or business, the notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about each and every entrance and exit to the individual living or business unit. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-5) 
Sec. 18-196. - Confinement of a dog which has bitten a person. 
It shall be the dog owner's or custodian's responsibility to report all dog bite cases to the county health department. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-6) 
Sec. 18-197. - Impoundment and violation notice. 
(a)  Unrestrained dogs and nuisance animals shall be taken by the animal control officers or other duly authorized agents of the city and impounded in the animal shelter and confined in a humane manner. 
(b)  Impounded dogs and cats shall be kept for not less than seven working days. 
(c)  If, by a registration tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall immediately upon impoundment notify the owner by telephone or mail. 
(d)  Any owner reclaiming a dog or cat from impoundment shall pay such fees for impoundment, boarding, inoculation and other reasonable fees as may be established by the mayor and council from time to time by appropriate resolution. 
(e)  Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within seven working days shall become the property of the animal shelter or humane society, and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized. 
(f)  In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer, or police officer having possession of the animal, may, in his or her discretion, issue to the owner of the animal, if known, a notice of ordinance violation requiring the owner to appear before the municipal court. The owner, in his or her discretion, within 72 hours of the issuance of the citation, in lieu of appearance, may post a cash bond in an amount set by mayor and council from time to time, which bond schedule shall be maintained by the police department. Upon trial of the case, any owner found guilty of violating this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-6 or by forfeiture of the bond should the defendant fail to appear. 
(g)  The owner of an impounded animal may also be proceeded against for violation of this article. 
(h)  The city shall review automatically all registrations issued to animal owners against whom three or more ordinance violations have been assessed in a 12-month period. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-7; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 5) 
Sec. 18-198. - Animal care. 
(a)  No owner shall fail to provide his animal with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment. 
(b)  No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse any animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(c)  No owner of an animal shall abandon the animal. 
(d)  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall immediately report the death or injury to the animal's owner if possible, and otherwise to the animal control officer. 
(e)  No person shall expose any known poisonous substances, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be consumed by any animal; provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable matter. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-8) 
Sec. 18-199. - Keeping of wild animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, hold or possess any wild animal in captivity except fish and invertebrates, for the purpose of display or exhibition to the public without first obtaining a valid wild animal exhibition permit as provided in O.C.G.A. § 27-2-13. The department of natural resources is hereby authorized to issue the permits. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-9) 
Sec. 18-200. - Performing animal exhibitions. 
(a)  No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering. 
(b)  All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-10) 
Sec. 18-201. - Animal waste. 
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excretion deposited by his animal(s) on public walks, recreation areas or private property. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-11) 
Sec. 18-202. - Animal nuisance. 
Upon a finding by the judge of municipal court that any animal constitutes a public nuisance as defined in section 18-191, the judge may order the owner or custodian to abate the nuisance by permanently removing the animal from the city limits, in addition to other penalties as provided herein. If the owner or custodian fails to abide by such order, the municipal judge, after a hearing, may order the animal to be destroyed by an animal control officer. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-12) 
Sec. 18-203. - Enforcement. 
The civil and criminal provisions of this article shall be enforced by those persons or agencies designated by the city as animal control officers. It shall be a violation of this article to interfere with an animal control officer in the performance of his duties. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-13) 
Sec. 18-204. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 10-8-14; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 6) 
Secs. 18-205—18-231. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BICYCLE HELMET REGULATIONS 

Sec. 18-232. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Millen Bicycle Helmet Ordinance." 
(Code 1992, § 10-9-1) 
Sec. 18-233. - Purpose. 
The city hereby finds and declares that: 
(1)  Disability and death resulting from injuries sustained in bicycling accidents are a serious threat to the public health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the city and the prevention of such disability and death is a goal of our community; 
(2)  Head injuries are the leading cause of disability and death from bicycling accidents; and 
(3)  The risk of head injury from bicycling accidents is significantly reduced for bicyclists who wear proper protective bicycle helmets. 
(Code 1992, § 10-9-2) 
Sec. 18-234. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Operator means any person seated on a saddle seat from which that person is intended to and can pedal the bicycle. 
Passenger means any person who travels on a bicycle in any manner except as an operator. 
Protective bicycle helmet means a piece of headgear which meets or exceeds the impact standards for protective bicycle helmets set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Memorial Foundation, or which is otherwise approved by the director of public safety. 
Public bicycle path means a right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the state or city for use primarily by bicycles and pedestrians. 
(Code 1992, § 10-9-3) 
Sec. 18-235. - General requirements regarding bicycle helmets. 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 years shall operate or be a passenger on a bicycle on a public roadway, sidewalk, or public bicycle path unless at all times when the person is so engaged he or she wears a protective bicycle helmet of good fit fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet. 
(b)  No person shall rent, lease, or loan a bicycle for the use of another person under the age of 18 years unless that other person is in possession of a protective bicycle helmet of good fit at the time of such rental, lease, or loan. 
(Code 1992, § 10-9-4) 
Sec. 18-236. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A violation of this article is a civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(b)  Any public safety officer observing a person operating or being a passenger upon a bicycle without wearing a protective bicycle helmet and reasonably believing the person to be under 18 years of age may stop and temporarily detain such person for purposes of establishing identity and issuing an appropriate warning or citation. 
(Code 1992, § 10-9-5) 
Secs. 18-237—18-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PLACARDS, CIRCULARS, POSTERS AND SIGNS 

Sec. 18-266. - Placarding automobiles; consent required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, paste or in any other manner attach to any automobile or other vehicle any notice, placard or any other sign, within the city unless the automobile or other vehicle shall be the property of the party so placarding it. The provisions of this section shall not apply in any case where the consent of the owner has been obtained by the party so placarding the vehicle prior to the time that it is placarded. 
(Code 1992, § 10-10-1) 
Sec. 18-267. - Posting on utility poles. 
No person shall post, place or nail any circular, placard, paper or any other thing on any telephone pole, electric pole or any other utility pole within the city. 
(Code 1992, § 10-10-2) 
Secs. 18-268—18-279. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - REGULATION OF SOCIAL HOSTING 

Sec. 18-280. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Dwelling unit means, without limitations, any single or multi-family residence including, but not limited to, any apartment, cabin, condominium, townhouse, duplex, manufactured home, recreational vehicle or house and the land upon which it is located, whether owned, leased, rented, or occupied for no compensation by the occupant or occupants. 
Gathering means an assembled group of two or more people for the purpose of a social occasion or activity. 
Legal guardian means a person who is lawfully vested with the power and charged with the duty of taking care of an underage person. 
Other private property includes the following locations when that location is occupied by one or more persons on a temporary or permanent basis; occupied as a temporary or permanent dwelling or residence for a gathering; or owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation for a gathering: 
(1)  A hotel or motel room; 
(2)  An assembly hall or meeting room; 
(3)  A common room of a dwelling unit, when used for a gathering; 
(4)  A site on a privately owned campground; 
(5)  A privately owned vacant lot; 
(6)  Privately owned land or real estate of any type. 
Parent means any person who is a natural, biological, adoptive, or foster parent and such terms means a stepparent or a person who stands in loco parentis. 
Person who has a right of possession includes, with respect to a private residence or other private property, the person who owns title to the property, the tenant or lessee, the landlord, the person or persons in charge of the dwelling unit, residence or other property, and the social host (as defined below). 
Private residence means a dwelling unit occupied on a temporary or permanent basis when used for a gathering and any other part of the property upon which the dwelling unit is located, including, but not limited to garages, pool houses, bodies of water and the like. 
Reasonable steps mean steps that include, but not limited to: 
(1)  Controlling access to alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Verifying the age of persons at a gathering by inspecting government issued identification cards, such as a driver's license; and, 
(4)  Supervising and monitoring the activities of underage persons at a gathering. 
Social host means the person or persons who organize, supervise, officiate, conduct or control a gathering at or on a dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by that person or those persons; and shall include any person or persons receiving money or any other type of consideration for granting access to a gathering at a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by that person or persons. 
Underage person means any person who is under 21 years of age. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016(1)) 
Sec. 18-281. - Prohibition. 
(a)  It is a violation of this article for a social host or any person to knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place or continue at or on any dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property if any underage person at that gathering possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage and the social host or person knows or should have known, of such possession or consumption after taking all reasonable steps to prevent alcoholic beverage possession or consumption by underage persons. 
(b)  It is a violation of this article for the parent or legal guardian of an underage person to knowingly allow that person to attend a gathering if the parent or legal guardian knows or reasonably should have known that the underage person will possess or consume any alcoholic beverage at that gathering, except as may otherwise be permitted by state law. 
(c)  It is a violation of this article for any person to fail to take all reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by any underage person at a gathering. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016(1)) 
Sec. 18-282. - Protected activities. 
(a)  Activities which are otherwise legally protected by state or federal law are exempt from the prohibitions set out in section 18-281 above, specifically, but not limited to, those activities protected pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A § 3-3-23. 
(b)  The exemptions for protected activities set out above shall no longer apply if an underage person leaves the private residence intoxicated and is found in public. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016(1)) 
Sec. 18-283. - Separate violation for each incident. 
Each incident in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016(1)) 
Sec. 18-284. - Enforcement authority. 
Citations for violation of the activities prohibited in this article may be written by officers of the city police department, any city code enforcement officer, the city manager, the city attorney or any other person designated and authorized by the mayor and council of the city and shall be prosecuted in the city municipal court. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016(1)) 
Sec. 18-285. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016(1)) 
Secs. 18-286—18-299. - Reserved. 
Chapter 22 - PUBLIC SAFETY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Creation of department of public safety. 
There is hereby established a department of public safety for the city which shall: 
(1)  Enforce the laws of the state and the city; 
(2)  Assist the mayor and council, acting through the city manager in protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and visitors of the city; and 
(3)  Implement the goals and directives of the mayor and council as directed by the city manager. 
(Code 1992, § 3-1-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Appointments. 
The city manager is authorized to appoint persons to the department of public safety necessary to fulfill the department's responsibilities as set forth in this Code, and the goals and directives of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 3-1-2) 
Secs. 22-3—22-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; statewide application of International Fire Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); false reports of fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; refusal to obey officials at fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-30. 

Sec. 22-23. - Fire prevention codes. 
(a)  The following codes are hereby adopted in their entirety as the fire prevention code of the city and are incorporated in this section as if set out at length herein: 
(1)  The State Minimum Fire Safety Standards, as adopted in the rules and regulations promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner pursuant to chapter 2 of title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.), as said rules and regulations now exist, and as they shall be lawfully amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out by the city. Future amendments to and changes in said standards as reflected in future amendments to or changes in said rules and regulations are hereby adopted and shall become effective in the city upon promulgation without the necessity of further action on the part of the city; 
(2)  The Life Safety Code, NFPA 101, 2000 edition, as recommended by the national fire protection association. 
(b)  A copy of the above-named codes shall be kept on file in the office of the chief of the fire department. These codes shall be effective and controlling throughout the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 3-2-1) 
Sec. 22-24. - Georgia safety fire rules adopted, incorporated by reference. 
The rules and regulations now and hereafter promulgated for the prevention of the destruction of life and property by fire, explosion and related hazards in the state by the state safety fire commissioner under authority of the powers vested in and duties imposed upon the state safety fire commissioner by the laws of the state (Act of 1949), are hereby adopted as the rules and regulations of the city and are herein adopted by reference as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1992, § 3-2-2) 
Sec. 22-25. - References to officials in adopted technical codes. 
Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this chapter, then that designated official of the city, who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code, shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
Sec. 22-26. - Cooperation with state officials. 
The fire chief, together with all other city officials, department heads and employees shall lend their cooperation to the Georgia safety fire commissioner, state fire marshal and/or his deputies or assistants whenever called upon by him or them in the enforcement of the Georgia safety law and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 3-2-3) 
Sec. 22-27. - Fire hazards prohibited. 
(a)  Failure to eliminate a fire hazard is a hazard to life and/or property, and shall be a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Creating a fire hazard is a hazard to life and/or property and shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1992, § 3-2-4) 
Sec. 22-28. - Storage of gasoline in residential places prohibited; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation residing in a residential area to keep, maintain or store gasoline or other highly volatile combustible liquids within any residence or on the premises of a residence (inside or outside), except that each residence shall be permitted to maintain and store a limit of ten gallons of gasoline or other highly volatile combustible liquids at any one residence provided it is stored only in a metal safety container approved by Underwriters' Laboratories. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, all gasoline and other highly volatile liquids contained in proper fuel tanks in motor vehicles are expressly excluded. 
(Code 1992, § 3-2-5) 
Sec. 22-29. - Orders to remove fire hazards—Compliance required; appeal from order. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department or any member or employee thereof shall find any building or other structure which violates any city fire protection ordinance, or for any cause is especially liable to fire and so situated as to endanger other property; and whenever any member or employee shall find in any building or upon any premise or other place, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulations of waste paper, boxes, shavings or any other highly flammable materials, especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property; or shall find obstruction to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in the case of a fire, he or they shall order them to be removed or remedied and this order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of the premises or buildings, subjects to appeal within 24 hours to the chief of the fire department, who shall within five days review this order and file his decision thereon; and unless the order is revoked or modified it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1992, § 3-2-6) 
Sec. 22-30. - Same—Service of order. 
The service of this order shall be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed by either delivering a true copy to the occupant personally or by delivering it to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve the order upon the owner of the premises, it may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the person a true copy of the order, or if the owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer serving the order, by mailing a copy to the owner's last known post office address. 
(Code 1992, § 3-2-7) 
Sec. 22-31. - Same—Effect of noncompliance. 
Any owner or occupant failing to comply within ten days after the appeal shall have been determined, or if no appeal is taken, then within ten days after the service of the order, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and shall be subject to punishment according to the general penalties described in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 3-2-8) 
Sec. 22-32. - Maintenance of fire hydrants. 
The water and sewer department shall maintain all fire hydrants. 
(Code 1992, § 3-2-9) 
Sec. 22-33. - Certain fire calls answerable at the city's discretion. 
Fire calls from the following locations are answerable at the city's discretion: Garfield, Screven County, Midville, Sardis, Statesboro, Swainsboro, Sylvania, Twin City and Waynesboro. 
(Code 1992, § 3-2-10) 
Secs. 22-34—22-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY SERVICES MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local governments to provide for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 

Sec. 22-55. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter article, the term "emergency management" means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical or other weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out forgoing functions. 
(Code 1992, § 3-4-1) 
Sec. 22-56. - Office of the county emergency management director. 
It is the desire and intent of the governing officials of the city that the city be a part of the county emergency management agency. The chairperson, county commissioners of the county, with concurrence of the mayor of the city, shall nominate for appointment by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county plan for emergency functions set forth in section 22-57. Such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the city for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices (e.g., financial, daily activities, etc.). 
(6)  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Code 1992, § 3-4-2) 
Sec. 22-57. - Jenkins County emergency management agency. 
(a)  The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing city and county departments and the emergency functions described is section 22-56 are assigned as follows: 

 
;le=2;(*As appropriate to the local organization, these functions can be assigned to existing departments or may be separate. Functions should be assigned consistent with the local emergency operations plan.) 
(b)  Heads of city departments listed above are responsible for assisting county department heads in developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Code 1992, § 3-4-3) 
Sec. 22-58. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may effect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor separately, or jointly with the chairperson, county commissioners, or in their absence their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property and supplies distributed and for funds received for such property and supplies; 
(4)  And, to perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 3-4-4) 
Sec. 22-59. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Code 1992, § 3-4-5) 
Sec. 22-60. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 3-4-6) 
Sec. 22-61. - Liberality of construction. 
This article shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Code 1992, § 3-4-7) 
Secs. 22-62—22-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule power to exercise authority regarding stormwater systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III (a)(6); Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.; construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

Sec. 22-81. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Authorization. Article IX, section II of the constitution of the state and section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a)) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council of the city does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(d)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1992, § 3-5-1; Ord. of 5-4-2010, § 3-5-1) 
Sec. 22-82. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Basis for area of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated August 5, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated August 5, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county, are hereby adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: City Hall, 919 College Avenue, Millen, Georgia 30442. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1992, § 3-5-2; Ord. of 5-4-2010, § 3-5-2) 
Sec. 22-83. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The city's zoning officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the zoning officer on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 22-84(b)(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The zoning officer shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the zoning officer shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 22-82(b), obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of section 22-84. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection (b)(1)c of this section and section 22-84(b)(2) or (d)(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the zoning officer and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 1992, § 3-5-3; Ord. of 5-4-2010, § 3-5-3) 
Sec. 22-84. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4) of this section, elevated buildings. All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 22-83(c)(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood; 
must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade; or 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Reference subsection (a)(6) of this section.) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (b) (3)a. and c. of this section. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 22-82(b) are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (b)(4)a. of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(c)  Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 22-82(b), where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 22-82(b), then the zoning officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this section. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2 and 3) shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4) of this section, "elevated buildings. 
(4)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The zoning officer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(d)  Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 22-82(b), where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). Areas of special flood hazard established in section 22-82(b) may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4) of this section, "Elevated Buildings." The zoning officer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 22-83(b)(1)c and section 22-83(b)(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(g)  Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Code 1992, § 3-5-4; Ord. of 5-4-2010, § 3-5-4) 
Sec. 22-85. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission, as established by the city, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the zoning officer in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the commission may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1). 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The zoning officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
(5)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning and zoning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 3-5-5; Ord. of 5-4-2010, § 3-5-5) 
Sec. 22-86. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words, terms or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the zoning officer's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the federal emergency management agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 22-82(b). 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) is the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building, means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before May 1, 1987 (the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 1, 1987 (the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study mans the official report by the federal insurance administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing, means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after May 1, 1987 (the effective date of the initial FIRM) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced after May 1, 1987 (the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after May 1, 1987 (the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
North American vertical datum (NAVD) has replaced the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. 
a.  Note: The market value of the structure should be: 
1.  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
2.  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
b.  This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
c.  For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvements" does not, however, include: 
a.  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Code 1992, § 3-5-6; Ord. of 5-4-2010, § 3-5-6) 
Secs. 22-87—22-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DERELICT PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 4, 2018, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 22-116—22-121, 22-141—22-145, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to Public Nuisance and Blight Abatement and derived from Code 1992, §§ 3-6-1—3-6-11; Ord. of April 1, 2008, § 2(3-6-1—3-6-11). 

Sec. 22-116. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Millen, Georgia Derelict Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-117. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property-maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, chapter 2; and any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real-property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. title 16, chapter 13, article 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act". 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface without prior authorization from the owner or occupant of the property. 
Governing authority means the city council of the City of Millen, Georgia. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  The "owner"; 
(2)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(3)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(4)  Those parties having been given a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; and 
(5)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the municipality or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court; provided, however, interested party shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected. 
Municipality means the City of Millen, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures, or use of private property within the city. 
Public officer means the city manager, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by article, and any officer or employee of the city to whom he delegates such authority. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-118. - Duty of owners of real property and structures thereon. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or private property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city or such laws and ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on private property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or use private property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-119. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
Every dwelling, building, or structure within the city which (i) is constructed or maintained in violation of applicable codes in force within the city; (ii) is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use or occupancy due to inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; (iii) poses an imminent harm to life or other property due to fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm or other natural catastrophe; (iv) is vacant and used in the commission of drug crimes; (v) is occupied and used repeatedly for the commission of illegal activities, including facilitating organized crime or criminal enterprises, after written notice to the owner of such activities conducted therein; (vi) is abandoned; or (vii) otherwise constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, is hereby declared a public nuisance. Every private property within the city on which is being regularly conducted any activity or land use in violation of applicable laws and ordinances, including the zoning ordinance of this city, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Property which may be deemed esthetically substandard or deteriorating shall not meet the definition of a public nuisance unless the overall condition or use of the property results in impaired health, safety, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-120. - Powers of city manager or his designee. 
(a)  In carrying out his duties pursuant to this article, the city manager or his designee to whom his authority is assigned shall, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him by the Charter and other ordinances of the city, be empowered to: 
(1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this article. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists. 
(2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants, and attorneys. 
(3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees and agents as he may designate. 
(b)  In addition to the procedures set forth in this article, the city manager or his designee(s) may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions declared to constitute a public health or safety hazard or general nuisance, and to seek enforcement of such citations before the municipal court prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by other summary proceedings. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-121. - Complaint in rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. Such officer shall be guided in his investigation by documenting conditions, which include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair by failure to conform to applicable codes and ordinances; 
(5)  Structural defects which render the structure unsafe for human habitation or occupancy; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; or 
(7)  The presence of graffiti which is visible from adjoining public or private property. 
(b)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall file a complaint in rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered; and, provided further, that if the unsatisfactory condition is limited solely to the presence of graffiti, the dwelling, building or structure shall not be ordered demolished or closed, but its owner may be ordered to repair the same by cleaning or removal of the graffiti. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, chapter 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished within 270 days of the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to subsection (c) of this section or any equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action shall commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(f)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(g)  The lien provided for in subsection (e) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in Jenkins County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (a). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall, within 90 days of the completion of repairs, demolition or closure, forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-5; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply; provided, further, that redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. The tax commissioner may initiate enforcement of liens imposed under this section at any time following receipt of the final determination of costs from the public officer. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(i)  The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the municipality whose ordinance is being enforced. The tax commissioner may retain an amount equal to the cost of administering collection of the lien. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(j)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(k)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-122. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. 
(a)  Summons and copies of the complaint shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure, or property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint and summons by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are readily ascertainable. Copies of the complaint and summons shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants, if any; 
(3)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing; and 
(4)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in which the dwelling, building, structure, or property is located at the time of filing the complaint in municipal court. 
(b)  The public officer shall cause an affidavit of service to be filed of record in the municipal court prior to the hearing showing compliance with the service requirements of this section. Such affidavit shall constitute a prima facie showing of minimum procedural due process and shall constitute sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on every interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-123. - Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created. 
It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained, or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation, or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-124. - General cleanliness of premises. 
The owner and occupant of property within the city shall each be independently responsible for keeping the premises, including all buildings thereon and the full yard thereof, clean and free from all garbage, refuse, filth, dirt, ashes, trash, rubbish and other offensive materials. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-125. - Disorderly house. 
(a)  Any person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, illicit drug activity, or other misbehavior, to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, before any person is charged under this subsection, written notice shall be given the owner of the property and the person in possession thereof by the chief of police stating the general, customary and common habits of the house, giving fair notice of this subsection and the conduct proscribed thereby. 
(b)  Any person who shall allow any boisterous, noisy, drunken or riotous persons to assemble or remain in their house, apartment or upon their property, after receiving oral notice from a police officer that boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing activities have caused complaint and annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, no person shall be charged under this subsection unless the owner or person in possession of the premises has been afforded an opportunity to disburse the assembly or offending person from the premises. This subsection shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on private property after being notified by the owner or lawful occupant to depart. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-126. - Violations; enforcement penalties. 
Any person who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100.00; each day of continued violation, after citation, shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing fines, upon conviction, the director shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection, and service shall not be restored until such cross-connection, auxiliary, by-pass, or inter-connection has been discontinued. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 1) 
Secs. 22-127—22-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 22-174. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Millen Open Burning Ordinance." 
(Code 1992, § 3-7-1; Ord. of 4-6-1999) 
Sec. 22-175. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Open burning means any outdoor fire from which the products of combustion are emitted directly into the open air without passing through a stack, chimney or duct. 
(Code 1992, § 3-7-2; Ord. of 4-6-1999) 
Sec. 22-176. - Open burning prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit burning, or allow to continue to burn, any waste substance in an open outdoor fire, except: 
(1)  Agricultural burning by an agricultural operation as may be permitted by GA ADC 391-3-1-.02 or other statutes, rules and regulations of the state; 
(2)  For recreational purposes or cooking food for immediate human consumption; 
(3)  Fires set for purposes of training firefighting personnel when authorized by the city and guidelines set forth by the state; 
(4)  Fires deemed necessary by the chief of the fire department or the officer in charge at the scene when such fire is necessary for the prevention of a fire hazard that cannot be abated by any other means; 
(5)  For weed abatement, disease, and pest prevention upon application to and as may be permitted by the chief of the fire department; 
(6)  Disposal of tree limbs from storm damage as may be permitted by the chief of the fire department; 
(7)  Destruction of combustible demolition or construction materials either on site or transported to a burning facility upon approval by the chief of the fire department; and 
(8)  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other similar flame-making equipment. 
(b)  The city, through the chief of the fire department, may also declare no-burn days prohibiting any open burning, including those activities permitted in subsection (a) of this section, when conditions are such that open burning might present a significant threat to the peace, health and safety of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 3-7-3; Ord. of 4-6-1999) 
Sec. 22-177. - Penalties. 
Violations of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor offense punishable upon warrant returnable to the municipal court of the city and with such penalties as are provided in section 1-6. Each day a violation of the provisions of this article occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 3-7-4; Ord. of 4-6-1999) 
Secs. 22-178—22-184. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 22-185. - Adoption of National Incident Management System. 
The City of Millen hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in the City of Millen train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 2) 
Sec. 22-186. - Overcharging during emergency prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or property within a designated area upon the declaration of emergency or disaster, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the emergency or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses sold or rented within the county. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Overcharging" means charging prices for goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, which exceed the customary charges by at least 25 percent or, in applicable cases, which exceed by at least 25 percent the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a 25 percent or greater increase in the price at which the merchandise or rate, fee or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency or disaster, but shall not include increases in cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
"Subsequent recovery period" means that period during which the emergency or disaster continues to cause disruptions in the area designated in the declaration of emergency, but shall not exceed three months alter the declaration has been terminated, unless extended by action of the city governing authority. 
(c)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the governing authority of the city, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 2) 
Secs. 22-187—22-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BLIGHTED PROPERTY 

Sec. 22-191. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Millen, Georgia Blighted Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 2) 
Sec. 22-192. - Purpose. 
The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of the state and local government by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, this board of commissioners, in exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations at O.C.G.A. Tit. 36, Ch. 61, Urban Redevelopment, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. 
In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 2) 
Sec. 22-193. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Blighted property , blighted , or blight means any urbanized or developed property which: 
(1)  Presents two or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structure; 
b.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation; 
c.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe respecting which the governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this division shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; 
d.  A site identified by the federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 9601, et seq., or having environmental contamination to an extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; 
e.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
f.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal codes for at least one year after written notice of the code violation to its owner; and 
(2)  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. 
Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of esthetic conditions. 
Building inspector means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or thorough local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Millen, a Georgia municipal corporation. 
Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, which is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
Person means such individual(s), partnership, corporations, business entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. 
Public officer means the city manager or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 2) 
Sec. 22-194. - Ad valorem tax increase on blighted property. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on all real property within the city which has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven to the millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the municipality, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. 
(b)  Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
(c)  Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit building and structures. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 2) 
Sec. 22-195. - Identification of blighted property. 
(a)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed, 
a.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated in ordinance, or 
b.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels which may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this article for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
(2)  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (1) above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspection shall be made and supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)  Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article, and is subject to increased taxation. 
(4)  The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of Jenkins County as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(b)  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person of the public officer's determination the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have 30 days from the receipt of notice in which to request a hearing before the city's municipal court. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the public officer shall notify the municipal court and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. 
(c)  Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for hearing, the municipal court clerk shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published as a legal advertisement in The Millen News, or other designated legal organ in Jenkins County, at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the municipal court judge upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(d)  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article. The municipal court judge shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the judge of municipal court shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the court shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the Tax Commissioner of Jenkins County, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
(e)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the court affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the Superior Court of Jenkins County for a writ of certiorari within 30 days of issuance of the court's written determination. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 2) 
Sec. 22-196. - Remediation or redevelopment. 
(a)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property which has been officially designated pursuant to this article as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's planning and development director which addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or 
(2)  Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to The Code of The City of Millen, Georgia. 
(b)  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the tax commissioner of Jenkins County. 
(c)  All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the director of the city's planning and development department, and contain the following: 
(1)  The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; 
(2)  The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
(3)  On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
(4)  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources which will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; 
(5)  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work; and 
(6)  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this article) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 2) 
Sec. 22-197. - Decrease of tax rate. 
(a)  Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, as provided in section 22-195, Identification of Blighted Property, of this article, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every $25,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four successive years. 
(b)  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 2) 
Sec. 22-198. - Notice to tax commissioner. 
It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the tax commissioner of Jenkins County in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number, as assigned by the Jenkins County Tax Assessor's Office. The public officer shall cooperate with the tax commissioner to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased or reduced ad valorem taxation under this article. 
(Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 2) 
Chapter 26 - PUBLIC WORKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City has power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipal authority to regulate streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3. 

Article VI. - Landscaping and Trees 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Composition of public works department. 
The public works department of the city shall consist of a director of public works and such other employees necessary to perform the functions of the department as determined by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 26-2. - Public works director duties. 
The director of the public works department shall be responsible for the development of the public works plan for the city, the discipline, good order, proper conduct, supervision, care and the management of the public works department's employees and equipment. 
(Code 1992, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 26-3. - Function of the public works department. 
The public works department is responsible for the efficient maintenance of all city streets, sidewalks and city right-of-way, and the collection and disposal of garbage and trash according to the policies adopted by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 4-1-3) 
Secs. 26-4—26-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS—EXCAVATION 

Sec. 26-25. - Cutting, digging, etc.—In public streets; permission required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cut, break, dig in or otherwise disturb any public street or ally in the city, or the surface thereof, without first having obtained the permission therefor from the city through the director of public works. 
(Code 1992, § 4-2-1) 
Sec. 26-26. - Same—Regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any public utility entity, contractor, plumber, city employee or other person having permission required by section 26-1 herein, to cut, break, dig in or otherwise disturb any public street or alley in the city, or the surface thereof, without complying to the following regulations: 
(1)  Notice, in writing, shall first be given to the city, through the office of the director of public works, of the exact location of this work, the approximate time at which this work will be commenced, the probable length of time this work will require and the approximate length of time that this street or alley will remain cut, broken or otherwise disturbed before its repair; and if this work will be such character or of such extent that the movement of traffic over or along this street or alley will be hampered, impeded or stopped, a similar notice shall likewise be given the chief of police and the fire chief; 
(2)  Any such street or alley disturbance which constitutes a traffic hazard or other dangerous condition shall at all times be sufficiently barricaded or guarded adequately to protect the public and at night shall be properly and adequately lighted by the maintenance of sufficient lanterns, pot-torches or other appropriate lights upon, along or beside the disturbance (these lights to be placed and maintained at intervals of not more than 30 feet along the entire length and breadth of the disturbance); 
(3)  In all cases where a state or federal highway is blocked or barricaded within the city, all traffic shall be adequately directed, detoured by means of appropriate signs and, when needed, by guards on duty from the highway around the barricade and back to the highway behind the barricade so as to avoid confusion and unnecessary inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(Code 1992, § 4-2-2) 
Sec. 26-27. - Refilling excavations in streets. 
The refilling of excavations in the streets will be accomplished in accordance with city specifications. 
(Code 1992, § 4-2-3) 
Secs. 26-28—26-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS—IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 26-58. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Frontage means that the side or limit of the lot or parcel of land in question which abuts on the improvement. 
Improve, improvement includes the grading, regarding, construction and altering of streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks and other public places or ways, and the construction, reconstruction and altering of curbing, guttering, storm sewers, turnouts, water mains and water, gas or sewer connections therein. 
Pave includes storm draining, paving, macadamizing and grading. 
Streets includes streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks and other public places or ways. 
(Code 1992, § 4-3-1) 
Sec. 26-59. - Resolution of necessity required for improvement. 
(a)  Adoption, publication, protest. Whenever the city shall deem it necessary to improve any street or any part thereof either in length or width, within the city limits, and shall by resolution declare this improvement necessary to be done, and publish such resolution once in the official organ of the city, if the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the lands abutting on the improvements shall not within ten days after the day of publication of such resolution file with the city manager their protest in writing against this improvement, the city shall have power to cause the improvement to be made, to contract therefor and to make assessments and fix liens as provided for herein. 
(b)  Contents. Any number of streets or any part or parts thereof to be so improved may be included in one resolution, but any protest or objection shall be made as to each street separately. 
(c)  Petition for improvement. If the owners of a majority of the lineal feet frontage of the street are liable to assessment for improvement, they shall petition the mayor and council to proceed, as hereinafter provided, to cause the improvements to be made in accordance with the prayers of the petition and their own best judgment, and in these cases the resolution hereinbefore mentioned shall not be required. The petition shall be lodged with the city manager, who shall investigate the sufficiency thereof, submit the petition to the mayor and council and certify the result of his investigation. 
(Code 1992, § 4-3-2) 
Sec. 26-60. - Notice of proposals, publication, contents. 
Notice of these proposals shall be published twice in the official organ of the city and shall state the street or streets to be improved, the kinds of improvements proposed, and shall state the time when and the place where these sealed proposals shall be filed and when and where they will be considered by the city. 
(Code 1992, § 4-3-3) 
Sec. 26-61. - Award of contract. 
At the time and place specified in the notice prescribed in section 26-60, the mayor and council shall examine all bids received, and without unnecessary delay award the contract to the lowest and best bidder who will perform the work and furnish the materials which may be selected and perform all the conditions imposed by the city as prescribed in this article and notice for proposals, and the mayor and council shall have the right to reject any and all bids and re-advertise for other bids when the bids submitted are not, in its judgment, satisfactory. 
(Code 1992, § 4-3-4) 
Sec. 26-62. - Removal of obstructions from streets; notice; noncompliance by owner. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to notify the owner of any building upon any of the streets of the city, who may have erected adjacent to or in front of the building any structure, shed, posts, steps or other obstruction, upon inspection found by him to be decayed or in a dangerous condition, to remove them within five days, and if at the expiration of this time the owner of the building, shed or other obstruction shall fail to have it removed, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to proceed forthwith to have the shed, fence or other obstruction in the public streets, removed by the street force of the city, at the expense of the owner thereof. It shall be the duty of the chief of police, upon refusal of the owner to pay the amount of cost and expense incurred in this removal, to report it to the city manager, who shall issue executions therefor against the owner. 
(Code 1992, § 4-3-5) 
Secs. 26-63—26-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREET AND SIDEWALK USE AND REGULATION 

Sec. 26-83. - Crowds—Obstructing streets prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person by day or night, for any purpose whatever, to obstruct the sidewalks, streets or alleys of this city, by crowds or otherwise, except as may be provided and permitted herein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business, party, social function, promotion, yard or garage sale, including vending from a vehicle, cart, wagon or any other device, or displaying merchandise on the public sidewalks or common areas, so as to obstruct the sidewalks or streets of the city, except as may be provided and permitted herein. 
(c)  Violations of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 4-4-1) 
Sec. 26-84. - Same—Permit required for picketing. 
No person shall boycott, picket, molest or interfere with any other person having lawful congregation in any manner in any public place, street, lane, alley or highway, or any portion thereof, within the city limits; nor shall any person or persons obstruct any entrance of any building, storeroom or factory by parading or boycotting it, provided that the mayor and council may issue permits to persons applying therefor, subject to reasonable limitations designed to protect the public peace, health and safety. 
(Code 1992, § 4-4-2) 
Sec. 26-85. - Same—Conditions; revocation; regulations; penalty. 
The mayor and council shall issue permits to persons applying for them to peacefully picket any place as hereinbefore designated upon the following terms and conditions and no others: 
(1)  Applications shall be made in writing for a permit to picket and may be filed either by an individual applicant or by any bona fide organization or group. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The permit shall be for only a certain designated place and shall be good for the described area only. 
(3)  No permit, or permits, shall allow more than two pickets at each entrance and/or exit to the premises proposed to be picketed. 
(4)  During this picket no person shall hinder, molest, insult or harass any picket lawfully picketing under the provisions hereof. 
(5)  These permits shall be issued for use during certain hours to be designated therein so that not more than the number of pickets authorized by this article may be present at any one time and these permits shall be valid for those as are designated only and shall not be transferable. 
(6)  Permits may be revoked at any time by the chief of police for any fraud in obtaining the permit, or participation in any unlawful act upon the part of the holder thereof for the interference in any manner with any person using the area picketed for any unlawful purpose or for any conduct tending to the breach of peace provided that any person feeling aggravated at the action of the chief of police in refusing to issue a permit may appeal for redress to the mayor and council, whose decision affirming or reversing the action of the chief of police shall be final. 
(7)  The holder of any permit to picket shall, while picketing, pace to and for on the sidewalk as near the curb as may be practicable at all times within the area designated by the permit, which shall designate the place where the picket shall walk. 
(8)  No picket shall carry any instrument, device or weapon of any kind, nor shall any picket carry a camera for the purpose of photographing the customers or patrons of any place proposed to be picketed, without the consent of the customer or patron to be photographed, but nothing herein shall prevent the picket from carrying such banner or sign as may comply with the ordinance of the city relating thereto. 
(9)  Any person or persons violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided by the provisions of section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 4-4-3) 
Sec. 26-86. - Exceptions. 
The mayor and council may suspend specific provisions of this article by resolution, but only for the purpose of supporting citywide celebrations, "block" parties, civic promotions, sidewalk sales, merchant's days, and the like. 
(Code 1992, § 4-4-4) 
Secs. 26-87—26-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const., art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 26-116. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Refuse Collection Service Ordinance of the City of Millen, Georgia." 
(Code 1992, § 4-5-1) 
Sec. 26-117. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
Director or director of public works means the director of public works of the City of Millen, Georgia. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
(Code 1992, § 4-5-2) 
Sec. 26-118. - Collection by the city. 
All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city. Except as specifically authorized herein, no person shall collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of, any refuse accumulated in the city. 
(1)  Exception for actual producers. This article shall not prohibit the actual producers of refuse, or the owners of premises upon which refuse has accumulated, from personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such refuse, provided such producers or owners comply with the provisions of this article and with any other governing law or ordinances, and provided, further, that no such producer shall be exempt from payment of required collection fees as a result of such action. 
(2)  Exception for outside collectors. This article shall not prohibit collectors of refuse from outside the city from hauling such refuse over city streets, provided such collectors comply with the provisions of this article and with any other governing law or ordinances. 
(Code 1992, § 4-5-3) 
Sec. 26-119. - Collection supervised by director of public works. 
(a)  All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the city under the supervision of the director of public works. The director shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal as he shall find necessary, and to change and modify the same, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a regulation of, or fee charged by, the director shall have the right of appeal to the city manager who shall have the authority to confirm, modify or revoke any such regulation or fee. 
(Code 1992, § 4-5-4) 
Sec. 26-120. - Precollection practices. 
(a)  Separation of refuse. Garbage and rubbish shall be placed and maintained in the containers (e.g., polycarts) provided for such purpose by the city. 
(b)  Preparation of trimmings and clippings. Tree trimmings, hedge clippings, small limbs and similar materials shall be cut to length not to exceed three feet before being deposited for collection. 
(c)  Preparation of leaves and grass clippings. Leaves and grass clippings shall be separated from other refuse and deposited off the street, on the city right-of-way, for collection. 
(d)  Storing of refuse. No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other public place, or upon any private property, except as provided herein for the purpose of collection by the city. 
(e)  Unauthorized accumulation. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(f)  Scattering of refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any occupied premises within the city. 
(Code 1992, § 4-5-5) 
Sec. 26-121. - Collection practices. 
(a)  Frequency of collection. 
(1)  Residential. Refuse accumulated by residences shall be collected at least once each week. 
(2)  Commercial. Business and institutional collection shall occur as required by agreement between the producer of the refuse and the director or as required by the director where necessary, in his discretion, to protect the public health and safety. 
(b)  Limitation on quantity. 
(1)  Residential. The director shall collect a reasonable accumulation of refuse of each family during a collection period for the standard charge. 
(2)  Commercial. The director shall collect a reasonable accumulation of refuse of business, institutional and industrial customers during the collection period at a fair charge based upon the average weight or volume collected. The director shall have the authority to refuse to collect unreasonable amounts or to make an additional charge for such amounts. 
(c)  Special refuse problems. 
(1)  Contagious disease refuse. The removal of refuse possibly carrying disease organisms as the result of contact with highly infectious or contagious diseases should be performed under the supervision and direction of the Jenkins County health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collections. 
(2)  Refuse of unusual size and bulk. The producer of refuse of unusual size and bulk, such as appliances, and the like, shall be responsible for disposal of such items by providing transportation to the county landfill or such other location for disposal as this article or other applicable law shall provide. 
(3)  Dead animals. The owner of a dead animal shall be responsible for disposal of the carcass by burial or transportation to the county landfill, as provided by this article or other applicable law. In no event shall the carcass of a dead animal be placed in a city refuse container, removed from private property to public areas or rights-of-way, or bagged for collection by the city. The director shall provide for the removal and disposal of carcasses of animals from city property only. 
(4)  Refuse produced in connection with commercial operations. Any person who, in connection with the performance of a commercial operation which provides a substantial portion of his income, produces refuse shall be solely responsible for transporting said refuse to the county landfill for disposition. No refuse produced in connection with such operations, including, but not limited to, building, landscaping, tree maintenance, paving, roofing, and demolition, shall be placed on city rights-of-way or other public property, or accumulated in substantial quantities on private property, or placed in any manner for collection and disposition by the city, provided, however, that the city will pick up and haul away grass clippings, small shrubbery and leaves generated in connection with regular, routine lawn maintenance. 
(d)  Collection by actual producers and outside collectors. 
(1)  Requirements for vehicles. The actual producers of refuse, or the owners of premises upon which refuse is accumulated, who personally collect and dispose of such refuse, persons who desire to dispose of waste material not included in the definition of refuse, collectors of refuse from outside of the city who desire to haul over the streets of the city, and those who are required to do so as provided herein, shall use transportation which, as used, will not leak liquids from such refuse within the city, will prevent offensive odors from escaping therefrom, and will prevent such refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled. 
(2)  Disposal. Disposal of refuse by persons so permitted under subsection (a) of this section shall be made outside the city limits and at the county landfill, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the director, or required by other legal authority. 
(3)  Rules and regulations. The director shall have the authority to make such other reasonable regulations concerning individual collection and disposal and relating to the hauling of refuse over city streets by outside collectors as he shall find necessary, subject to the right of appeal as set forth in section 26-119. 
(Code 1992, § 4-5-6) 
Sec. 26-122. - Fees. 
(a)  Residential. The director shall set a standard monthly fee for refuse collection which may make distinctions based on the number of families occupying a premises or the number of persons within a single-family unit, subject to the right of appeal to the city manager. Every residence shall be assessed at least the base fee on a monthly basis even if the resident chooses to dispose of some refuse in accordance with the provisions of section 26-118. 
(b)  Commercial. The director shall set fees for businesses, institutions, industries and other commercial customers based upon the average amount of refuse material and the frequency of collection, subject to the right of appeal to the city manager. 
(c)  Delinquent accounts. All accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid by 2:00 p.m. of the tenth of the month for which service is rendered. All delinquent accounts are subject to stoppage of service without notice and to resumption of service only upon payment of all delinquent amounts and a penalty of ten percent of the past due amount. Such stoppage of service shall be in addition to the right of the city to proceed with collection of such delinquent amounts in a manner provided by law for the collection of a municipal claim, prosecution for other violations of this article directly or indirectly related to such delinquency, or such other remedies as may be available to the city as provided by ordinance or law. 
(Code 1992, § 4-5-7) 
Sec. 26-123. - Penalties. 
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor offense punishable upon warrant directed to the municipal court of the city as provided in, and with such penalties as are provided in, section 1-6. In addition to such penalties, producers of refuse who habitually violate the provisions of section 6-121 shall be subject to revocation of the license issued by the city to carry on such commercial enterprise, upon the third such violation prosecuted under this article, and after notice of intent to revoke such license by the city manager and hearing before the mayor and council not less than seven days nor more than 31 days following the date of such notice. 
(Code 1992, § 4-5-8) 
Secs. 26-124—26-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LANDSCAPING AND TREES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), §§ 2,3, App. A, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 26-145—26-156, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1992, §§ 4-6-1—4-6-12. 

Sec. 26-145. - Findings. 
(1)  The public and private benefits of trees and landscaping within the jurisdiction of the city include improving the appearance of and protecting the value of property; mitigating the adverse impact of vehicular use areas; reducing the glare of headlights and reflected sunlight from parked vehicles; reducing noise, promoting air quality by increasing filtration of dust and fumes; mitigating harsh climatic conditions by absorbing heat and cooling the air; enhancing wildlife diversity by providing food, nesting sites, and shelter; reducing soil erosion; improving surface drainage and reducing flooding; and establishing and preserving scale and spatial identity. 
(2)  The requirement of a high level of quality in the development of land is consistent with community standards and the economic necessity of maintaining the attractiveness of Millen as a desirable place to live and conduct business. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-146. - Purpose. 
(1)  Recognize the importance of trees and other landscaping and their contribution to health, welfare, beauty, safety, history and general well-being in all areas within the jurisdiction of the city; 
(2)  Encourage the proliferation of trees and other landscaping. 
(3)  Preserve and enhance the city's natural environment. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-147. - Intent. 
This ordinance shall apply to all newly developed commercial properties or portions thereof located within the incorporated area of Millen, GA, to the extent of the provisions contained herein. Ordinance does not apply to the Central Business District or single family residences. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-148. - Definition. 
(1)  Administrator. The administrator of the City of Millen or his designee. 
(2)  Canopy tree. A tree that, under normal forest conditions, will compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and generally will reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
(3)  Central Business District. Defined as the property bounded by Cotton Avenue to the south and Winthrope Avenue to the North, excluding property that fronts Winthrope Avenue. 
(4)  Clearing. The removal of vegetation whether by cutting, digging, or other means. 
(5)  City. The City of Millen. 
(6)  Developed land. Any land that will be paved, built upon, hardened, or improved in any way. 
(7)  Diameter, tree. The diameter of a tree measured as follows: 1) for existing preserved trees, at a point 4.5 feet above the ground; 2) for new replaced trees, at a point six inches above the ground. 
(8)  Grading. The placement, removal, or movement of earth by use of mechanical equipment on a property. 
(9)  Landscape strip. Land area located within the boundary of the lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
(10)  Modification. A type of administrative appeal that may be granted by the administrator only where specifically authorized in this article. 
(11)  Shrub. A woody plant of relatively low height, as distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk. 
(12)  Tree. Any self-supporting woody, perennial plant, usually having a main stem or trunk and many branches, and at maturity normally attaining a trunk diameter greater than three inches at any point and a height of over ten feet. 
(13)  Understory tree. A tree that, under normal forest conditions, grows to maturity beneath overstory trees and will generally reach a mature height of at least ten feet but less than 40 feet. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-149. - Administration identification. 
The city administrator or his designee shall be responsible for enforcing this article. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-150. - Plan submittal. 
Prior to disturbing land, commencing grading operations, or commencing the construction of a building, the property owner or his agent must have a landscape plan approved by the City of Millen. The City of Millen shall have 30 days from the day of submittal to review the landscape plan. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-151. - Planting requirements. 
(1)  Tree plantings. 
a.  Quantity. The proposed development shall have a total of ten trees per developed acre. Five of these trees shall be canopy trees. 
b.  Existing trees. The developer is encouraged to preserve existing trees - each existing tree greater than six inches in diameter shall count as two trees towards the required ten trees per developed acre. 
(2)  Property front. 
a.  Landscape strips (See Figure 1). 
aa.  Applicability. Developments shall provide for and maintain landscape plantings on-site as follows: 
aaa.  In a landscape strip at least ten feet in width adjacent to any street right-of-way abutting the property and running the entire length of the property frontage with the exception of the property entrance. 
bbb.  The administrator is hereby authorized to grant a modification of up to 40 percent of the ten foot landscape strip. 
bb.  Planting requirements for landscape strip. 
aaa.  One canopy tree per 35 linear feet of strip. 
bbb.  Trees required herein may be planted and spaced singly or in groups as authorized by the administrator so long as the total number of plantings is achieved. 
ccc.  The remaining ground area shall be planted with grass and/or planted with ground cover species and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof. 
ddd.  Understory trees may be subsitituted for canopy trees in the event that power lines could propose a conflict with the future canopy tree. 
cc.  Encroachments into landscape strips. 
Required landscape strips shall not be encroached upon by parking spaces or driveway surfaces except that driveways crossings may transverse such strips as near to a perpendicular alignment as practical. Signs may also be located in such a strip. 
(3)  Property sides and rear. 
a.  Landscape strips. 
aa.  Applicability. Developments shall provide for and maintain landscape plantings on-site as follows: 
aaa.  In a landscape strip at least five feet in width adjacent to any side or rear property boundary that is also adjacent to proposed parking. 
bbb.  The developer may opt to leave a natural buffer of existing vegetation. In this case the buffer must be at least ten feet wide. 
bb.  Planting requirements for landscape strip. 
aaa.  One shrub or one understory tree for each 30 linear feet of strip. 
bbb.  Trees and shrubs required herein may be planted and spaced singly or in groups as authorized by the administrator so long as the total number of plantings is achieved. 
ccc.  The remaining ground area shall be planted with grass and/or planted with ground cover species and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof. 
(4)  Off street parking (See Figure 1). 
a.  Applicability - Off street surface parking lots which shall have more than nine parking spaces shall contain landscaping or plantings as follows: 
aa.  There shall not be more than ten consecutive parking spaces without a canopy tree planted in a tree island. 
bb.  The minimum planting area island for each canopy tree shall be at least nine foot wide and at least 150 square feet. 
cc.  Planting trees in a six feet wide median between rows of parking spaces (headlight to headlight) shall satisfy the requirements of section (aa) above. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-152. - Buffers. 
Commercial properties abutting residential properties shall have a 20 feet wide buffer between them. The buffer shall contain vegetation intended to visually screen the property within three years of planting. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-153. - Proposed plantings. 
(1)  New trees shall have a diameter of at least two inches. 
(2)  Proposed trees shall be listed on the suitable tree list of this article. Please see Appendix 1. 
(3)  Shrubs shall be a species native or suitable to the City of Millen. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-154. - Tree and landscape plan requirements. 
(1)  Project name and acreage. 
(2)  Owner's name, address and telephone number. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the registered landscape architect, forester, arborist, surveyor or engineer responsible for the preparation of the plan and the seal of professional qualifications of said person. 
(4)  Boundary lines of property. 
a.  North arrow and graphic scale. 
b.  Vicinity map. 
c.  Bearings and distance of all property lines. 
(5)  Proposed buildings, parking and other improvements. 
(6)  Delineation of undisturbed areas. 
(7)  General location of all proposed landscaping, trees, plants, etc. 
(8)  For new plant materials to be installed, a plant list including but not limited to: 
a.  Common name. 
b.  Quantities. 
c.  Size and condition of plant (example: two inch diameter, six foot height, balled or burlapped). 
d.  Spacing. 
(9)  Existing uses of adjoining property. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-155. - Tree bond. 
The owner of the property shall post a tree bond in the amount of $250.00 per tree guaranteeing the survival of the tree for ten years. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-156. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the responsibility of the administrator, or his designee to enforce this article. The administrator shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any building permit or to withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy or approval of a final plat and shall have the ability to suspend all work on a site or portion thereof, until the provisions of this article have been meet. Sewer and water connections shall be withheld until all provisions of this article have been met. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1), § 3) 
Secs. 26-157—26-180. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX 1 Georgia Forestry Commission Planting Guide 
Large Canopy Trees for Overstory: (Minimum 2" caliber) 

 
Large Canopy Trees 

 

 
Medium Canopy Trees: (Minimum 2" caliber) 

 

 
Small Canopy Trees - Understory: (Minimum 2" caliber) 

 

 
ARTICLE VII. - NAMING AND RENAMING OF PUBLIC STREETS, PARKS, FACILITIES, BRIDGES AND MONUMENTS AND ADDRESSING OF STREETS 

Sec. 26-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City bridge means any bridge within the city owned controlled or managed by the city or its departments or agents. 
City facility means any facilities including bridges within the city owned, controlled or managed by the city or its departments or agents. 
City monument means any monument within the city owned controlled or managed by the city or its departments or agents. 
City park means any park within the city owned, controlled or managed by the city or its departments or agents. 
City street means any highway, street, road, lane or other right-of-way in the city, other than a state or federal highway. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2013, § 1(4-7-1)) 
Sec. 26-182. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish consistent procedures and guidelines for the naming of public streets, the addressing of streets, the naming of parks, facilities, bridges and monuments within the city. The mayor and council has determined that renaming streets, parks, facilities, bridges or monuments causes confusion, disruption and considerable expense to the citizens of the city and is, accordingly, strongly discouraged. The intent of this article is to establish a uniform and standardized system of street naming and addressing which shall: 
(1)  Minimize future street name and addressing conflicts; 
(2)  Provide a database for city records and enhanced 911 services; 
(3)  Expedite property identification by emergency services; and 
(4)  Comply with the addressing guidelines published by the U.S. Postal Service Publication 28. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2013, § 1(4-7-2)) 
Sec. 26-183. - Policy. 
(a)  The naming of city streets, parks, facilities, bridges and monuments shall be solely with the purview of the mayor and council. 
(b)  Diversity, balance and creativity will guide the adoption of street names. The following guidelines shall apply to name selection: 
(1)  Unusual spellings and difficult pronunciations shall be avoided. 
(2)  A street name shall not duplicate or be similar in sound or spelling to another street name (e.g., Smith, Smyth, Smythe, Briar, Brier). 
(3)  Variations of the same name with a different street designation shall be prohibited within the first word or the two-word title or in the street extension, (e.g., Pine Street, Pine Drive, White Pine Road, White Lilly Lane). 
(4)  No street name shall consist of more than two words or contain more than 14 letters, excluding the street direction (N, S, E, and W) and extension (Street, Lane, Court, etc.). 
(5)  No street shall have more than one name. 
(6)  Streets that have a definite north-south directional course shall be designated as a "street." 
(7)  Streets which have a definite east-west directional course shall be designated an "avenue." 
(8)  Streets which do not have a definite directional course shall be designated as a "drive, trail, way, or lane." 
(9)  A dead-end street or cul-de-sac less than 1,000 feet in length, when not an extension of an existing street or a continuation of a proposed street, shall be called a "court." 
(10)  A street that has its ingress and egress on the same street shall be designated a "loop." 
(11)  A street that circles back upon itself shall be designated as a "circle." 
(12)  Special scenic routes or park drives may be designated "parkway" upon review and recommendation by the downtown development authority. 
(13)  Streets, public or private, shall be named according to the guidelines in this article when serving or potentially serving three or more users. 
(14)  Duplicate street names are prohibited within the city, existing duplicate names shall be corrected in accordance with this article to the greatest extent possible. 
(15)  Street names which are not readily capable of pronunciation or which would be distasteful to a reasonable person are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2013, § 1(4-7-3)) 
Sec. 26-184. - Street naming and/or renaming. 
(a)  Guidelines for naming new streets or naming unnamed streets. 
(1)  Any new street to be established within the city, public or private, or any existing unnamed street, public or private, shall require a street name approved by mayor and council. 
(2)  Street names within new subdivisions shall be provided on the final plat map which shall be submitted, to the city manager's office, and must be approved by mayor and council prior to final plat processing. 
(3)  For other new streets or naming of unnamed streets, the owner or owners of properties abutting the street may submit recommendations, in writing, for a name to the council member for that district or to the office of the city manager. 
(b)  Guidelines for renaming streets. 
(1)  Property owners abutting an existing street which has an existing name may petition the mayor and council for a name change. 
(2)  Requests for street name changes shall require approval signatures of 90 percent of the property owners abutting the street and the payment of an applicable application fee, set by resolution of the mayor and council, and the applicant shall pay the cost of street sign replacement should a new name be approved. 
(3)  A "street name change package" which explains the policy and procedures for requesting the renaming of a street and includes an application and petition may be obtained from the office of the city manager for a nominal fee set by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(4)  Changes shall be authorized by the mayor and council only when a new name is found to be in the public interest and meets the naming requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2013, § 1(4-7-4)) 
Sec. 26-185. - Addressing procedures. 
(a)  Address numbers. 
(1)  Address numbers shall be clearly readable from the street, and shall contrast with the background color. 
(2)  If a structure is more than 75 feet from the street or is otherwise not clearly visible from the street, its address shall be posted at the driveway or the primary access to the residence from the public or private street. The address sign shall be, no less than four feet or more than six feet above the ground on a substantial, maintained support structure. The view of the address from the street must be unobstructed. 
(3)  All primary letters, numbers, and symbols, whether attached to a building structure or ground support structure, shall be a minimum of four inches in height, with one-half inch spacing between numbers, and shall be contrasting with the background color. 
(4)  Property owners are responsible for displaying proper address number identification in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Address number assignments. The following are basic standards for addressing: 
(1)  The existing block structure will be followed. Distance between addresses is set at 20 feet for possible addresses. Numbers will be rounded to stay consistent. 
(2)  All east-west street names and addressing shall begin at Hwy 25, all north-south street names and addressing shall begin at the Central of Georgia Railway tracks. Streets that do not begin on Hwy 25 or the railroad tracks will stay consistent with surrounding block numbering and direction. 
(3)  Even numbers shall appear on the south and east side of streets and odd numbers on the north and west sides. 
(4)  If a building (commercial, industrial, office, residential or combination thereof) has a number of entrances, each serving a separate occupant, individual addresses will be assigned to each entrance. 
(5)  A building (commercial, industrial, office, residential or combination thereof) with one main entrance shall be assigned one number with the owner of the structure responsible for providing designated individual sub-unit numbering or alphabet designation. 
(6)  Manufactured home parks shall have individual house numbers consistent with this section. Manufactured home parks shall have streets consistent with the city ordinances. Streets shall be named in accordance with city policies. 
(7)  For multiple buildings in a development (commercial, industrial, office, residential or combination thereof), it may be appropriate to establish a private street centerline for addressing purposes. Buildings would then be addressed using the established street centerline in accordance with numbering procedures in this article. 
(8)  A diagonal or meandering street shall be assigned numbers depending upon the quadrant and the address base line that it most favors. 
(9)  Circle and loop street direction designations shall be determined by the road's predominate direction (N, S, E, W). 
For circle streets, the numbering shall start at the intersection point of the road closest to the origination point and shall proceed in a clockwise direction using a consecutive numerical order with the odd/even numbers based on the starting point of the circle street as if the street were straight. 
For loop streets, the beginning of the street is designated by the closest intersection to the origination point and increased numerically to that point that is farthest from the origination point. 
(10)  Property parcels with structure(s), or bare land parcels, which are accessed by a driveway shall be assigned an address at the point where the driveway intersects a named street. 
(11)  For parcels that are accessed by multiple driveways, the owner shall designate a primary access point that will be used for address assignment. If this primary access point is not designated by the property owner, the E-911 director, or his designated officer, shall make the official determination to allow the proper addressing of the property. 
(12)  Parcels served by a common driveway that accesses fewer than three parcels shall be assigned an address at the point where the access intersects a public or private street or named common driveway. Each property shall be assigned a different address. 
(13)  In no case will addresses be issued to illegal structures or uses that are not properly permitted under the zoning ordinance. 
For effective and efficient emergency service and enhanced 911, it is important to provide for consistent and uniform addressing procedures throughout the county. In addition to the basic standards for addressing set forth in this article, the Jenkins County addressing guidelines to be adopted by resolution by the city council shall be followed to provide solutions to addressing situations that do not fall within the type of streets or scenarios that are provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2013, § 1(4-7-5)) 
Sec. 26-186. - Guidelines for naming of public parks, facilities, bridges and monuments. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall designate the names of public parks, facilities, bridges and monuments. 
(b)  It is the policy of the city to choose names for public parks, facilities, bridges, and monuments based upon the site's relationship to the following criteria: 
(1)  Consideration shall be given to pertinent natural or geographic features. 
(2)  Restrictions in deeds for property accepted by the city. 
(3)  Consideration shall be given to neighborhood and street names or the historic significance of the site or the location. 
(4)  Consideration shall be given to proposals for naming to honor deceased individuals who have distinguished themselves locally, regionally, or nationally by their civic, business, or monetary contributions and who have no outstanding indebtedness to the city and have been deceased for a minimum of ten years; provided, however, that no public park, facility, bridge or monument shall be named for any one individual who has already been recognized in the community by the naming of a street, park, facility, bridge or monument. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2013, § 1(4-7-6)) 
Sec. 26-187. - Removal of name or designation. 
(a)  Mayor and council may, in their sole discretion, remove or change the name or designation of any city owned public park, facility, bridge, or monument. The decision to remove or change the name of any public park, facility, bridge, or monument may be done under any circumstances deemed appropriate by mayor and council. 
(b)  The naming of public parks, facilities, bridges, or monuments owned by the city will remain at the sole discretion of mayor and council. 
(c)  In the event a park or facility owned by the city which is named or designated for an individual or for some geographic feature is sold or no longer used as a city park or facility, the name or designation of the park or facility may not automatically transfer upon the sale or disposal of the property. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2013, § 1(4-7-7)) 
Sec. 26-188. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Erect or install a street name sign not in accordance with this article. 
(2)  Remove, alter, change, or deface a street name sign or public park, facility, bridge, or monument sign or address identification erected or installed as provided herein. 
(3)  Place or post addresses not approved by this article. 
(4)  Fail to place an address visible from the street. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be penalized as provided in section 1-6. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2013, § 1(4-7-8)) 
Secs. 26-189—26-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REGULATION OF ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS 

Sec. 26-200. - Findings and purpose. 
The mayor and council of the City of Millen, Georgia ("city") find that carts commonly used at commercial stores for shopping are being abandoned on the streets and public rights-of-way of the city and that the abandonment of these carts creates an unsightly blight upon and diminishes the aesthetic appeal of the city. Furthermore, the subsequent removal of these carts requires the unnecessary expenditure of public resources and funds. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2016(1)) 
Sec. 26-201. - Abandonment of carts prohibited. 
A business utilizing carts, commonly known as "shopping carts," or "grocery carts" ("cart" or "carts"), in connection with its business is prohibited from allowing any person, persons or entities to remove the cart or carts from the property of the business resulting in the cart or carts being abandoned or left upon the streets, ditches, public rights-of-way, or upon any other public space, or upon the property of another without the property owner's express consent. Further, no person may remove a cart from the parking area of a business without the express permission of the business. Persons found to be in possession of a cart off the premises of the business owning the cart may be cited for violating the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2016(1)) 
Sec. 26-202. - Retrieval by city and assessment of storage fee. 
The carts of a business which are found upon the streets, ditches, public rights-of-way, or upon any other public space, or upon the property of another without the property owner's express consent shall be removed by employees of the city and stored at a central location. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall notify the business of the removal and storage, if the business can be identified from the appearance of the cart, through its owner or manager. The business shall be allowed to retrieve the cart upon payment of a retrieval and storage fee set periodically by the city manager, but which shall not exceed $100.00 per cart. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2016(1)) 
Sec. 26-203. - Failure of owner to retrieve cart. 
Upon the expiration of 30 days from the mailing of the notice in section 26-202, the city may dispose of the cart in any manner it deems practicable, including selling the carts to another person or entity. In the event of sale of the cart or carts, the funds shall be placed in the general account of the city for use by the city. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2016(1)) 
Sec. 26-204. - Enforcement. 
Violations of any provision of this article shall be charged by citation and penalized as provided in section 1-6 of this Code, provided, however, that no citation shall issue to a business if payment of the retrieval and storage fee is made as provided in section 26-202. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2016(1)) 
Chapter 28 - REGULATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND OTHER PUBLIC AREAS 
ARTICLE I. - DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 28-1. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Millen, Georgia (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to article 9, section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-3. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Millen, Georgia; 
Codified ordinances means the Code of the City of Millen, Georgia; 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way; 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way; 
Director means the director of public works of the City of Millen, Georgia, or his or her designee; 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property; 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city; 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations; 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code; 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that is consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities; 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public; 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to Law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city; 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof; 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert; 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities; 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 28-4. - Registration required. 
Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-5. - Registration procedure. 
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-6. - Incomplete registration. 
If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-7. - Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. 
Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-8. - Facilities in place without registration. 
nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 

Sec. 28-9. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the public works department in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-10. - Permit procedure. 
Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the city through its director. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-11. - Permit fees. 
Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the mayor and council of the city. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city manager and open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-12. - Issuance of permit. 
If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this chapter; 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-13. - Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-14. - Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)  The permit shall remain in place construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(a)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(b)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
(c)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
(d)  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-15. - Cancellation for cause. 
If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-16. - Expiration of permit. 
If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 28-17. - Utility accommodation manual adopted. 
The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modifications contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this ordinance and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Millen, Georgia, municipal equivalents. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-18. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-19. - Grading. 
If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-20. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-21. - Blasting and excavation notice required. 
As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE V. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 28-22. - Responsibility for costs of repairs. 
Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-23. - Responsibility for replacement, restoration or repair. 
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE VI. - INSPECTION 

Sec. 28-24. - Availability of site for inspection. 
The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-25. - Cessation of work under certain circumstances. 
At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this chapter or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-26. - Notification of completion of construction. 
When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE VII. - OTHER APPROVALS, PERMITS AND AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 28-27. - Additional permits required. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in article II, section 7 (B). 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE VIII. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 28-28. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE IX. - OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 28-29. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-30. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-31. - Compliance. 
No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-32. - Appeal of administrative decisions. 
All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification to the city required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Sec. 28-33. - Chapter headings. 
Chapter headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2016(1)) 
Chapter 30 - SIGNS 

Sec. 30-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Millen Sign Ordinance." 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-1; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-1)) 
Sec. 30-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  Sign regulations achieve public safety rationales not achieved by standard building code provisions. Without a sign ordinance, signs can pose a clear danger to public safety. It has long been recognized that sign controls are needed to promote traffic safety and avoid traffic accidents. Signs can distract motorists by impairing visibility. Traffic safety is improved by restricting the size, height, and location of signs. Signs, if unregulated, can confuse motorists by mimicking traffic safety signals and signs. 
(b)  Unregulated signs may negatively affect the character of communities and the value of buildings. For example, blighted signs and antiquated signs and sign structures (i.e., the pole with a blank structure for a sign face) can contribute to an overall image of blight and a reduction of property values in declining areas if not addressed and removed via sign controls. Unregulated signs can reduce the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public because they compete with public purpose signs and reduce their visibility and effectiveness. Unregulated signage in special character areas, such as the downtown, would almost assuredly neutralize any public plans and investments to improve streetscapes. 
(c)  Sign regulation serves the interests of the business community. Unregulated competition among businesses where individual business signs are not adequately visible results in too many signs and a point of diminishing returns. Sign regulations help to maintain the scenic heritage and unique character of the community. Signs substantially influence the appearance of the community, and sign regulation is essential to the community's long-term economic viability. Sign controls improve visual character. 
(d)  This chapter is adopted to serve substantial governmental interests by correcting and avoiding multiple problems that would occur without the regulation of signs and advertising devices. The regulations contained herein are no more extensive than necessary to serve the substantial governmental interests identified in this statement of purposes. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-2; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-2)) 
Sec. 30-3. - Intent. 
It is not the intent of this chapter to apply regulation to signs because of a disagreement with the message conveyed, to foreclose important and distinct mediums of expression for political, religious, or personal messages, or to suggest the city regulate the message content of signs in any manner. It is, however, the intent of this chapter to regulate the time, place, and manner of signs in a minimal manner sufficient to meet the public purposes articulated in section 30-2. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-3; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-3)) 
Sec. 30-4. - Applicability. 
(a)  A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained within the planning jurisdiction of the city only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The effect of this chapter as more specifically set forth herein shall: 
(1)  Establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial, residential and industrial areas that are subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this chapter. 
(2)  Allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter, but without a requirement for permits. 
(3)  Provide for temporary signs without commercial messages in limited circumstances in the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter. 
(5)  Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-4; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-4)) 
Sec. 30-5. - Definitions and interpretations. 
Words, terms and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words, terms and phrases not defined in this section but defined in this chapter, shall be given the meanings set forth. All other words, terms and phrases shall be given their common, generally accepted meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Animated sign means any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
Banner means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is securely mounted to a pole or a building. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. 
Banner (commercial) means any banner containing a commercial message. 
Banner (noncommercial) means any banner containing no commercial message. 
Beacon means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Building marker means any sign indicating the name of a building, date, and/or incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
Building sign means any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign. 
Canopy sign means any sign that is a part of, or attached to, an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Changeable copy sign means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. 
Commercial message means any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
Flag means any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
Freestanding sign means any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. 
Incidental sign means a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone," and other similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental. 
Marquee means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Marquee sign means any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
Pennant means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
Portable sign means a sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, but not including trailer signs (as herein defined); signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu or sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of business. 
Projecting sign means any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
Residential sign means any sign located in a district for residential uses. 
Roof sign means any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. Roof signs, as defined by this chapter, are not permitted. 
Roof sign, integral, means any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
Sign means any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
Sign setback line means an imaginary line created by this chapter to establish an easily determined setback from any public thoroughfares for the placement of certain temporary signs. The sign setback line shall be ten feet from the back of the street curb edge of pavement or stabilized shoulder. 
Streamer means a streamer is defined the same as a pennant for purposes of this chapter. 
Suspended sign means a sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
Temporary sign means any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted. 
Trailer sign means any sign designed to be transported by means of wheels, whether or not the wheels remain attached, located on the ground and permanently attached thereto, and which is usually a two-sided sign and including any single- or double-surface painted or postered panel type sign, or any variation thereof. 
Wall sign means any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a wall; painted on the wall surface of; or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface. 
Window sign means any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination, thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-5; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-5)) 
Sec. 30-6. - Master or common signage plan required. 
No permit shall be issued for an individual sign requiring a permit unless and until a master signage plan or a common signage plan for the lot on which the sign will be erected has been submitted to and approved by the city as conforming with this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-6(intro.); Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-6)) 
Sec. 30-7. - Master signage plan. 
For any lot on which the owner proposes to erect one or more signs requiring a permit, unless such lot is included in a common signage plan, the owner shall submit to the city, a master signage plan containing the following: 
(1)  An accurate plot plan of the lot at such scale as the city may reasonably require. 
(2)  Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas on such lot. 
(3)  Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual signs, the height of signs, and the number of freestanding signs allowed on the lot(s) included in the plan under this chapter. 
(4)  An accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed location of each present and future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not, except that incidental signs and signs not regulated by this chapter need not be shown. 
(5)  The name of the owner of the property and, if different from the owner, the name of the applicant. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-6(a); Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-6.1)) 
Sec. 30-8. - Common signage plan. 
If the owners of two or more contiguous (disregarding intervening streets and alleys) lots, or the owner of a single lot with more than one building (not including any accessory building) file with the city for such lots a common signage plan conforming with the provisions of this section, a 25 percent increase in the maximum total sign area shall be allowed for each included lot. This bonus may be allocated within each lot as the owner(s) elects. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-6(b); Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-6.2)) 
Sec. 30-9. - Provisions of common signage plan. 
The common signage plan shall contain all of the information required for a master signage plan and shall also specify standards for consistency among all signs on the lots affected by the plan with regard to: 
(1)  Color scheme; 
(2)  Lighting; 
(3)  Location of each sign on the buildings; 
(4)  Material; and 
(5)  Sign proportions. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-6(c); Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-6.3)) 
Sec. 30-10. - Limit on freestanding signs under common signage plan. 
The common signage plan, for all lots with multiple uses or multiple users, shall limit the number of freestanding signs to a total of one for each street on which the lots included in the plan have frontage and shall provide for shared or common usage of such signs. In any instance where the properties included within a common signage plan may contain an intervening street, the number of freestanding signs shall be limited to one for each street and such properties shall be treated as a unified lot. The maximum height of the freestanding signs permitted shall be 30 square feet. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-6(d); Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-6.4)) 
Sec. 30-11. - Other provisions of master or common signage plans. 
The master or common signage plan may contain such other restrictions as the owner(s) of the lots may reasonably determine. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-6(e); Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-6.5)) 
Sec. 30-12. - Consent. 
The master or common signage plan shall be signed by all owners or their authorized agents in such form as the city shall require. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-6(f); Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-6.6)) 
Sec. 30-13. - Joint processing. 
A master or common signage plan shall be included in any development plan, site plan, planned unit development plan, or other official plan required by the city for the proposed development and shall be processed simultaneously with such other plan. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-6(g); Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-6.7)) 
Sec. 30-14. - Amendment. 
A master or common signage plan may be amended by filing a new master or common signage plan that conforms with all requirements of the chapter then in effect. In general, amendments shall be reviewed and acted upon by the city; provided, however, that any amendment of a common signage plan which affects those items governed by section 30-9, provisions of common signage plan, shall be acted upon in a like procedure to the original plan. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-6(h); Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-6.8)) 
Sec. 30-15. - Existing signs not conforming to master or common signage plan. 
When a master or common signage plan is filed for a property on which existing signs are located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into conformance all signs not conforming to the proposed amendment plan or to the requirements of this chapter in effect on the date of submission. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-6(i); Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-6.9)) 
Sec. 30-16. - Binding effect. 
After approval of a master or common signage plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in conformance with such plan and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this chapter. In case of any conflict between the provisions of such plan and any other provision of this chapter, this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1-6(j); Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-6.10)) 
Sec. 30-17. - Permitting procedures. 
(a)  Permits required. If a sign requiring a permit under any provision of this chapter is to be placed, constructed, erected, or modified on a lot, the owner of the lot shall secure a sign permit prior to the construction, placement, erection, or modification of such a sign in accordance with the requirements of this section. Furthermore, the property owner shall maintain in force, at all times, a sign permit for such sign in accordance with subsection (k) of this section (Permits to remain current and in force) of this section. No sign shall be erected in the public right-of-way, except in accordance with section 30-25 and the permit requirements of subsection (b) of this section. No sign permit of any kind shall be issued for an existing or proposed sign, unless such sign is consistent with the requirements of this chapter, including those protecting existing signs, in every respect and with the master signage plan or common signage plan in effect for the property. 
(b)  Application and review procedures. The following procedures shall govern the application for, and issuance of, all sign permits under this chapter, and the submission and review of common signage plans and master signage plans: 
(1)  Application. All applications for sign permits of any kind and for approval of a master or common signage plan shall be submitted to the city on an application form or in accordance with the application specifications established by the city. 
(2)  Fees. Each application for a sign permit or for approval of a master or common signage plan shall be accompanied by the applicable fees, which shall be established by the city from time to time by chapter. 
(3)  Completeness. Within five working days of receiving an application for a sign permit or for a master or common signage plan, the city shall review it for completeness. If the city finds that it is complete, the application shall then be processed. If the application is incomplete, the city shall provide to the applicant a notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with appropriate references to the applicable sections of this chapter. 
(4)  Action on plan. On any application for approval of a master signage plan or common signage plan, the city shall take action on one of the following dates: 
a.  14 days after the submission of a complete application if the application is for signs for existing buildings; or 
b.  On the date of final action on any related application for a building permit, site plan, or development plan for signs involving new construction. 
(5)  Failure to act on plan. Failure by the city to take action within the time periods indicated above shall not be construed so as to relieve the applicant from compliance with all provisions of this article on or before such date. The city shall either: 
a.  Approve the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan and the plan itself conform in every respect with the requirements of this chapter; or 
b.  Reject the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan or the plan itself fails in any way to conform with the requirements of this chapter. In case of a rejection, the city shall specify in the rejection the section or sections of the chapter with which the plan is inconsistent. 
(c)  Permits to construct or modify signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the city without first having obtained a building permit, if required by the standard building code as adopted by the city, for said sign. The applicant for a building permit shall submit application materials as specified by the building inspector, including a sketch or print drawn to scale showing pertinent information, such as wind pressure requirements and display materials, in accordance with the standard building code. Such permits shall be issued only in accordance with the following requirements and procedures: 
(1)  Permit for new sign or for sign modification. An application for construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for modification of an existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show the dimension, design, structure, and location of each particular sign, to the extent that such details are not contained on a master signage plan or common signage plan then in effect for the lot. One application and permit may include multiple signs on the same lot. 
(2)  Inspection. The city shall inspect each lot for which a permit for a new sign or for modification of an existing sign is issued on or before six months from the date of issuance of such permit. If the construction is not substantially complete within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall lapse and become void. If the construction is complete and in full compliance with this chapter and electrical codes, the city shall affix to the premises a permanent symbol identifying the sign(s) and the applicable permit, by number or other reference. If the construction is substantially complete, but not in full compliance with this chapter and applicable codes, the city shall give the owner or applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse and become void. If the construction is completed, the city shall affix to the premises the permanent symbol as described above. 
(d)  Permits to remain current and in force. The owner of a lot containing signs requiring a permit under this chapter shall, at all times, maintain in force a sign permit for such property. Sign permits shall be issued for individual lots, notwithstanding, that a particular lot may be included with other lots in a common signage plan. 
(1)  Initial sign permit. The city covering the completed sign installation, construction, or modification shall issue an initial sign permit. 
(2)  Assignment of sign permits. A current and valid sign permit shall be freely assigned or transferred to a successor as owner of the property or holder of a business license for the same premises, subject only to filing such application as the city may require and paying any applicable fee. The assignment shall be accomplished by filing and shall not require approval. 
(Code 1992, ch. 14-2; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-7)) 
Sec. 30-18. - Temporary permits. 
Permits for temporary signs shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Temporary sign permits. Temporary signs shall be allowed only upon the issuance of a temporary sign permit, which shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Permit exception. No permit is required for temporary political signs and banners in accordance with this chapter. 
b.  Sign setback. A temporary sign shall not be erected, placed or maintained on the thoroughfare side of the sign setback line. 
c.  Traffic hazard, prohibited. In addition to other setback requirements, temporary signs shall be located such that at any intersection ingress/egress point the traffic visibility shall not be impaired. 
d.  Size. 
1.  Temporary signs shall not exceed 16 square feet, with the exception of a sign located at a construction project. If the temporary sign is located on property that faces more than one street, one sign may be allowed for each frontage. Each such sign shall be located no closer than five feet to a street right-of-way. 
2.  Although a temporary sign, a sign located at a construction project may not exceed 32 square feet. Such sign may be displayed from the beginning of the construction of the project, through the completion of the project. 
(2)  Banners. Temporary permits for banners shall be allowed upon the issuance of a temporary sign permit, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Size and number. Temporary banners shall not exceed 40 square feet, and no more than one banner shall be permitted for each business or other tenant occupying any lot. 
b.  Installation. A banner shall be securely attached to a building or other permanent structure on the lot. 
c.  In lieu of permanent signage. A banner may be used in lieu of permanent signage for a period not to exceed six months. All criteria concerning area and dimensions for permanent signage shall apply. 
d.  Pennants and streamers. Temporary permits for pennants and streamers shall be allowed upon the issuance of a temporary sign permit, subject to the following requirement: Pennants and/or streamers shall be securely attached to a building or other permanent structure on the lot. 
e.  Inflatable signs and tethered balloons. Temporary permits for inflatable signs and tethered balloons shall be allowed upon the issuance of a temporary sign permit, subject to the following requirement: An inflatable sign or tethered balloon shall be securely attached and/or anchored so as to remain safe and secure during the term of its use. 
(Code 1992, §§ 14-3-1—14-3-4; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-8.1)-(3-7-8.4)) 
Sec. 30-19. - Signs exempt from regulation under this chapter. 
The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this chapter: 
(1)  Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance. 
(2)  Any sign that is not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the lot or parcel on which such sign is located. 
(3)  Works of art that do not include a commercial message. 
(4)  Holiday signs with no commercial message. 
(5)  Private street name and traffic control signs on private property, such as "Stop," "Yield" and similar signs, the face of which meet city transportation standards, and of which contain no commercial message. 
(6)  "No Trespassing," "No Hunting," "No Fishing," "No Loitering," and like signs not exceeding one square foot in area. 
(7)  Incidental signs as defined by this chapter. 
(8)  Identification signs for home occupations, provided that only one unlighted signs, not exceeding four square feet in area, may be permitted on any lot. 
(9)  A temporary sign placed in a residential district. 
(Code 1992, ch. 14-4; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-9)) 
Sec. 30-20. - Maximum height of signs. 
The maximum height of any ground sign regulated by this chapter shall be 30 feet. No attached wall sign, except those exempted by this chapter, shall exceed the height of the tallest building on the lot. 
(Code 1992, ch. 14-5; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-10)) 
Sec. 30-21. - Minimum setback from right-of-way. 
No sign regulated by this chapter shall be placed or erected closer than two feet of a city, state, or federal road right-of-way. 
(Code 1992, ch. 14-6; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-11)) 
Sec. 30-22. - Freestanding signs. 
The provisions of this section shall govern the number, location, and spacing of freestanding signs. 
(1)  Residential and office subdivision. Signs located in residential district and office subdivisions shall be located at the primary entrance(s) to the development/subdivision or at the beginning of the street upon which the development/subdivision connects directly to an arterial or collector street as shown on the major thoroughfare plan. 
(2)  Other freestanding signs. Freestanding signs other than those regulated by subsection (1) of this section, shall be limited to one per entrance, but no more than a total of two such signs for the development, subject to the spacing distance limitations noted in subsection (3) of this section. 
(3)  Spacing limitations of freestanding signs. Freestanding signs on any premises shall be spaced at minimum intervals of 200 feet along each public way that views the premises. In the event that less than 200 feet of any premises is visible from any one public way, only one sign shall be permitted along that public way. 
(Code 1992, §§ 14-7-1—14-7-3; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-12)) 
Sec. 30-23. - Computations. 
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height: 
(1)  Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall. 
(2)  Computation of area of multi-faced signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. 
(3)  Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest point of the sign face. Normal grade shall be construed to be the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade of the sign is lower than the grade of the adjacent public street, normal grade shall be construed to be the grade of the adjacent public street. The term "adjacent public street" means the street providing approved vehicle access to the property and which does or would bear the street address for the property. 
(4)  Computation of maximum total permitted sign area. Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted sign area for each street frontage. However, the total sign area that is oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of the lot's total sign area allocation that is derived from the lot, building, or wall area frontage on that street. 
(Code 1992, ch. 14-8; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-13)) 
Sec. 30-24. - Design, construction, and maintenance. 
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Except for banners, flags, and temporary signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this chapter, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure. 
(2)  Every sign, including, but not limited to, those signs for which permits are required, shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, and sound structural condition. 
a.  To prevent rust, peeling, flaking, fading or rotting, all signs and supports shall be painted, unless anodized or similarly treated. 
b.  Broken panels, missing letters, defective illumination, torn fabric, flaking or peeling paint and other damage to a sign, shall be replaced or repaired. 
(3)  If a determination is made by the city that any sign is unsafe, not secure, in violation of this section, or is in violation of any applicable law or a public danger, notice of such violation shall be given to the property owner and/or occupant where such sign is located. The property owner and/or occupant shall have 30 days from the date of said notice to remove, repair, or remedy said violation. 
(Code 1992, ch. 14-9; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-14)) 
Sec. 30-25. - Signs in the public right-of-way. 
No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way except the following: 
(1)  Permanent signs. 
(2)  Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(3)  Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company. 
(4)  Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities. 
(5)  Awning, projecting, and suspended signs projecting over a public right-of-way are permitted with a permit. 
(Code 1992, ch. 14-10; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-15)) 
Sec. 30-26. - Signs prohibited under this chapter. 
All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter, or exempt from regulation hereunder in accordance with the previous section, are prohibited in the planning jurisdiction of the city. Such signs include, but are not limited to, the following. 
(1)  Beacons. 
(2)  Pennants and streamers not in accordance with this chapter. 
(3)  Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background, except those exempt under this chapter. 
(4)  Inflatable signs and tethered balloons not in accordance with this chapter. 
(5)  Signs painted on or attached to trees, fence posts, rocks or other natural features, telephone or utility poles, or painted on the roofs of building visible from any public thoroughfare. 
(6)  Signs using the words "stop," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that misleads, confuses or distracts a vehicle driver. 
(7)  Trailer signs. 
(8)  Roof signs. 
(9)  Any sign or sign structure other than freestanding and vertical wall extension, any portion of which extends above the parapet, building roofline or canopy against which the sign is located. 
(Code 1992, ch. 14-11; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-16)) 
Sec. 30-27. - Nonconforming signs and signs without permits. 
Signs existing on effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived . O.C.G.A. § 32-6-83 states, "Any municipal corporation or city is authorized to acquire by purchase, gift, or condemnation and to pay just compensation for any property rights in outdoor advertising signs, displays, and devices which were lawfully erected but which do not conform with the provisions of any lawful ordinance, regulation, or which at a later date fail to comply with the provisions of any lawful ordinance, regulation, or due to changed conditions beyond the control of the sign owner. No municipal corporation or city shall remove or cause to be removed any such nonconforming outdoor advertising sign, display, or device without paying just compensation." In accordance, signs existing in the planning jurisdiction which were made nonconforming by the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be permitted to remain in place and be maintained, provided that no action is taken which increases the degree or extent of the nonconformity. 
(Code 1992, ch. 14-12; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-17)) 
Sec. 30-28. - Criteria for approval of sign variances. 
A variance may be granted upon application if an individual case of unusual hardship is placed upon the applicant. The request for a variance must meet the following conditions: 
(1)  There exist extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the property in question resulting from its size, shape, or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area. 
(2)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other similar properties. 
(3)  Granting the variance requested would not confer upon the property of the applicant any significant privileges that are denied to other similar properties. 
(4)  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare. 
(5)  The special circumstances are not the result of actions of the applicant. 
(6)  The variance is not a request to permit a type of sign which otherwise is prohibited by this chapter. 
(7)  The mere existence of a nonconforming sign or advertising device shall not constitute a valid reason to grant a variance. 
(Code 1992, ch. 14-13; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-18)) 
Sec. 30-29. - Signs permitted and maximum sizes. 
Signs permitted in the city shall be as provided for in table 30-29.1 of this section. Each of the types of signs listed in table 30-29.1 are mutually exclusive; meaning, a property owner is entitled to each of the following signs, independently of each other, if it clearly pertains to the land use as provided for in table 30-29.1. 
TABLE 30-29.1. SIGNS PERMITTED BY TYPE OF LAND USE 

 
TABLE 30-29.2. MAXIMUM TOTAL SIGN AREA 
The maximum total area of all signs on a lot except incidental, building marker, temporary signs in compliance with this chapter, and identification signs, and flags, shall not exceed the lesser of the following: 

 
TABLE 30-29.3. NUMBER, DIMENSIONS, AND LOCATION OF INDIVIDUAL SIGNS 
Individual signs shall not exceed the applicable maximum number dimensions or setbacks shown on this table and on Table 7-D. 

 
Note: 
(a)  For locations that are situated within 500 feet of a freeway interchange, the maximum height of freestanding signs shall be 125 feet and the maximum area shall be 250 square feet 
(b)  Maximum sign height is 24 feet, and minimum setback is five feet; however, in no case shall the actual sign height exceed the actual sign setback from any adjacent lot that is zoned and used for residential purposes. For example, if the sign is set back seven feet from such a lot, it may be no more than seven feet high. 
(c)  In addition to the setback requirements on this table, signs shall be located such that there is at every street intersection a clear view between heights of three feet and ten feet in a triangle formed by the corner and points on the curb 30 feet from the intersection or entrance way. 
(d)  The percentage figure here shall mean the percentage of the area of the wall of which such sign is a part or to which each such sign is most nearly parallel. Provided, however, that the area of such signs shall not exceed the area of a freestanding sign permitted for the property. 
TABLE 30-29.4. NUMBER AND DIMENSIONS OF CERTAIN INDIVIDUAL SIGNS BY SIGN TYPE 
VERTICAL CLEARANCE 

 
TABLE 30-29.5. TYPES OF ATTACHED SIGNS 

TABLE 30-29.6. TYPES OF GROUND SIGNS 
        

(Code 1992, ch. 14-14; Ord. of 6-11-2008, § 3(3-7-19)) 
Chapter 34 - TAXES, LICENSING AND REGULATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION, GENERALLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(a) and (b)(2); ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal power of ad valorem taxation to provide for financial assistance to its development authority, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 34-19. - Property tax; levied, rate. 
A tax on real property in the city is hereby authorized and may be collected by the tax assessor for the purpose of operating the city, the maintaining of its government and for other lawful uses in connection with the furtherance of city welfare. The actual millage shall be established by the mayor and council upon the recommendation of the city manager each year by resolution. 
(Code 1992, § 7-1-1) 
Sec. 34-20. - Due dates for returns and payment of taxes; "split billing." 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish a system of "split billing" for ad valorem taxation for the city as is provided for cities by state statute, so as to create an opportunity for citizens to better manage the fiscal impact of payment of ad valorem taxes and to create for the city an improved cash flow situation. 
(b)  Establishment. There is hereby established for the city a system of installment billing and payment of ad valorem taxes pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-23, as follows: 
(1)  The initial ad valorem tax billing for each fiscal year shall be made on July 1, for one half of the total tax due, based upon the latest tax digest available for city and county ad valorem taxes at the time of said billing. This first installment of city ad valorem taxes shall become due and payable on September 1 each year. 
(2)  The second ad valorem tax billing for each fiscal year shall be made by no later than October 20, for the balance due for that fiscal year based on the current final tax digest for said fiscal year. This second installment of city ad valorem taxes shall become due and payable on December 20 each year. 
(3)  Taxes not paid when due as provided herein above shall bear interest at the rate provided by state law for unpaid ad valorem taxes from the due date of any such installment. Taxes not paid in full by December 20 of any year shall be subject to the penalties and interest provided by state law. State statutes, as amended, providing for interest and penalties on unpaid ad valorem taxes are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this article by reference. 
(Code 1992, § 7-1-2) 
Secs. 34-21—34-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT AD VALOREM TAXES 

Sec. 34-44. - Adoption of state law provisions governing judicial in rem tax foreclosures. 
In addition to any other rights and remedies provided by state law for the enforcement of tax liens, the city through its city manager, shall have the right and power to proceed with judicial in rem tax foreclosures for delinquent taxes in accordance with the provisions of article 5 of chapter 4 of title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq.). The city manager shall select those properties which in his opinion meet the criteria of state law for use of this procedure. 
(Code 1992, § 7-2-1) 
Sec. 34-45. - Interest on past due taxes and assessments; penalty. 
All delinquent taxes, fees and assessments shall bear interest at the maximum rate allowed by the laws of the state, and, in addition, shall incur a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent amount to defer the cost of collection. 
(Code 1992, § 7-2-3) 
Secs. 34-46—34-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 34-66. - Occupation tax required for business dealings in the city. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an annual occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the county tax assessor or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of said county, upon request. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-1) 
Sec. 34-67. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Person means sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 ("Specific, Business, and Occupation Taxes—Definitions"), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-2) 
Sec. 34-68. - Administrative fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. The amount of the administrative fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-3) 
Sec. 34-69. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule; number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation, as computed on a fulltime position basis or fulltime position equivalent basis, is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the mayor and council of the city: 

 
(c)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(d)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-4; Ord. of 11-3-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 34-70. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-5) 
Sec. 34-71. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city manager and that line of business being noted by the city manager upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-6) 
Sec. 34-72. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-7) 
Sec. 34-73. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on the number of employees. 
(2)  A fee per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by December 31 of each year. 
(4)  The amount of the fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council, from time to time. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-8) 
Sec. 34-74. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by, and who is employed in practice exclusively by, the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-9) 
Sec. 34-75. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-10) 
Sec. 34-76. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid 90 days from the due date of the tax, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained within 30 days following the commencement of the business and a flat fee penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city manager or his designate and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the judge of municipal court, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-6. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the city manager may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-11) 
Sec. 34-77. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 60 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-12) 
Sec. 34-78. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-13) 
Sec. 34-79. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-14) 
Sec. 34-80. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-15) 
Sec. 34-81. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein. Every person commencing business in city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required within 30 days following the commencement of the business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without having obtained said registration within 30 days following the commencement of the business shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 34-82. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city manager or his designate, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-16) 
Sec. 34-82. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city or county judge, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-17) 
Sec. 34-83. - City manager as revenue collection officer; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The city manager and his duly designated officers and inspectors or their successors shall be classified as deputy marshal/business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the Business Tax Ordinance for 1995 (this law) and succeeding years. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-18) 
Sec. 34-84. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-19) 
Sec. 34-85. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-20) 
Sec. 34-86. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-21) 
Sec. 34-87. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in said city after the registration for said business has been revoked as above, hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-22) 
Sec. 34-88. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city manager or his designate, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the chief of police, or his designate, upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the ordinances and charter and the laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city manager or his designate against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-23) 
Sec. 34-89. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the mayor and council amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-24) 
Sec. 34-90. - Applications of provisions prior to provisions of this article. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-25) 
Sec. 34-91. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city manager, or his designate, and police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city manager or his designate, chief of police, members of the police department, and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-26) 
Sec. 34-92. - Article provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the mayor and council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-27) 
Sec. 34-93. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The mayor and council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-28) 
Sec. 34-94. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The mayor and council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-29) 
Sec. 34-95. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Code 1992, § 7-3-30) 
Secs. 34-96—34-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LICENSE TAXES ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation of financial institutions generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-90 et seq. 

Sec. 34-119. - Financial institutions business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, as amended, there is hereby levied for each year an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions as defined. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institutions pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1992, § 7-4-1) 
Sec. 34-120. - Definition of gross receipts. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the term "gross receipts" shall mean the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized below during the calendar year immediately proceeding the date on which the tax imposed by the article is due. 
(b)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: 
(1)  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
(2)  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions; 
(3)  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale; 
(4)  Interest on other bonds, notes, and debentures, excluding interest on obligations in the state or its political subdivisions and obligations on the United States; 
(5)  Dividends on stocks; 
(6)  Income from direct lease financing; 
(7)  Income from fiduciary activities; 
(8)  Service charges on deposit accounts; 
(9)  Other service charges, commissions, and fees; and 
(10)  Other income. 
(c)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
(1)  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold in service for others; 
(2)  Interest on mortgages, participations, or mortgage-backed securities; 
(3)  Interest on real estate sold on contract; 
(4)  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; 
(5)  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
(6)  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; 
(7)  Loan fees; 
(8)  Loan servicing fees; 
(9)  Other fees and charges; 
(10)  Gross income from real estate owned operations; 
(11)  Net income from office building operations; 
(12)  Gross income from real estate held for investment; 
(13)  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; 
(14)  Miscellaneous operating income; 
(15)  Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans, and other assets; and 
(16)  Miscellaneous no-operating income. 
(d)  The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) of this section: 
(1)  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; 
(2)  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to article 5(a) of chapter I of title 7 of the Office Code of Georgia Annotated; 
(3)  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions; 
(4)  An amount equal to a depository financial institution's gross income which is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than Georgia; and 
(5)  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (3)b, c and d and (4) of this section, any deductions taken under subsection (3)a of this section shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (3)b, c and d of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (3)a through d of this section. 
(Code 1992, § 7-4-2) 
Sec. 34-121. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of each year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in subsection (d) of Code section 48-6-93 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d)). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1, 1984, and April 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Code 1992, § 7-4-3) 
Secs. 34-122—34-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LICENSE FEES AND GROSS PREMIUM TAXES ON INSURERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— General assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c); powers of municipal corporations to impose license fees on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 34-141. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for each year an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 34-142, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee. For the purpose of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. The amounts of the license fees levied by this section shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Code 1992, § 7-5-1) 
State Law reference— Schedule of license fee amounts municipal corporations may impose on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(1). 
Sec. 34-142. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee for each year. The amount of the license fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Code 1992, § 7-5-2) 
Sec. 34-143. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for each year an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 34-141. 
(Code 1992, § 7-5-3) 
Sec. 34-144. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for each year an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2 ½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 34-141. 
(Code 1992, § 7-5-4) 
Sec. 34-145. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in section 34-141 shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. 
(Code 1992, § 7-5-5) 
Sec. 34-146. - Administrative provisions. 
The city manager is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the insurance commissioner of the state within 45 days of its enactment. 
(Code 1992, § 7-5-6) 
Secs. 34-147—34-177. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REGULATION OF THE SALE OF BEER AND WINE 

Sec. 34-178. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals actually are served and regularly served, such space being provided, in no event less than 1,000 square feet, with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity (adequate seating for no fewer than 50 persons) and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 (Alcoholic Beverages—General Provisions—Definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-1; Ord. of 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 34-179. - Sales of alcoholic beverages generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage within the city other than malt beverages and wine. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage within the city in violation of any provision of the article or of any state or federal law or regulation. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-2; Ord. of 12-5-1995; Ord. of 3-4-2014(2), § 2) 
Sec. 34-180. - License required for sale of beer and wine. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or distribute any malt beverage or wine within the city without having first obtained a license from the city for that purpose. Application may be made for license: 
(1)  To sell malt beverages or wine by the package; or 
(2)  In connection with the operation of a restaurant, for the sale of the same for consumption on the premises. 
The two licenses are separate and distinct and the acquisition of one shall not provide any benefit reserved by the city to the other. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-3; Ord. of 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 34-181. - Licensing applications, procedures and fees. 
Persons desiring a license to sell or distribute malt beverages or wine either by the package or for consumption on the premises of a restaurant shall make annual application for such license in writing on forms provided for that purpose by the city. Such application shall be signed, under oath, by the owner of the business or a principal officer of the entity operating the business if other than a natural person. The initial application shall require, minimally, the following: 
(1)  The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; or, the case of corporations, clubs and the like, the names, ages and addresses of persons entitled to share in the profits, the name of the corporation, the address of the registered office, the name and address of the registered agent, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and, if the majority interest is owned by one person, the name, address and percent of the outstanding stock in the possession of that person. 
(2)  The nature and character of the business enterprise being operated by the applicant within which the license will be utilized. 
(3)  The length of time the applicant has been in the business described. 
(4)  The location and description of the premises or place of business in which the license will be utilized. 
(5)  Identification of all other license applications for the sale of malt beverages or wine in any locale and the disposition of such application, if any. 
(6)  A statement that no person is, or will be, involved in the business or its operation has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude and is not otherwise disqualified to hold a license to sell malt beverages or wine by federal or state law. 
(7)  A statement that no previous license to sell malt beverages or wine granted to the applicant or any person who is, or will be, involved in the operation of the business has been withdrawn, revoked or suspended, or, in the alternative, a complete statement of the details of such withdrawal, revocation or suspension. 
(8)  Finger printing of the applicant and all such other persons as the city manager, in his or her discretion, deem appropriate upon consideration of the application as a whole. 
(9)  A copy of the applicant's Georgia (state) application and license. 
Subsequent to the initial application, annual applications for renewal of the applicant's license shall confirm that the information on the initial application has not changed and is true and correct and, further, shall include a copy of the applicant's renewed Georgia license. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-4; Ord. of 12-5-1995; Ord. of 3-4-2014(2), § 3) 
Sec. 34-182. - Licensing standards. 
Licenses to sell malt beverages or wine within the city shall be issued annually only to those persons who, or to corporations, clubs and associations which, meet all of the following qualifications: 
(1)  The individual applicant, or at least one officer or major stockholder of a corporation, club or association, must be a United States citizen. 
(2)  No individual nor any officer, director or major stockholder of a corporation, club or association may have a record of conviction of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  No individual nor any officer, director or major stockholder of a corporation, club or association may have a history of withdrawal, revocation or suspension of a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the city, the county, the state, the United States of America, or any other state, or political subdivision thereof. 
(4)  No proposed business location may include a game room. 
(5)  Licenses for sales of packaged malt beverages and wine may be issued only to those businesses in which such sales shall not exceed 50 percent of the gross sales of that business. Each such business shall submit an affidavit under oath, at the end of each calendar year, attesting to the percentage of sales of malt beverages and wine as compared to the gross sales of the business, which shall be supported by appropriate business records. No business or beverage license shall be issued until this affidavit is filed with the city manager. 
(6)  Licenses for sales of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises may be issued only for use only in connection with the operation of a restaurant. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-5; Ord. of 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 34-183. - Procedure for consideration of applications. 
(a)  The city manager shall, upon receipt of the initial application, immediately submit a complete set of the applicant's fingerprint record to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation for a search of its records for past criminal activity. Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2, the GBI shall present the fingerprint records to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a similar search of its records. 
(b)  The city manager shall present all applications for licenses hereunder at the next regular meeting following submission of the application and fee and, as to initial applications, receipt of a response from the GBI and the FBI as to the search for prior criminal activity. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall consider each application and grant or deny the application based upon the standards set forth herein. The decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and, if the application is denied, shall state the reasons for the denial. 
(d)  A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant at the address provided on the application as soon as practicable following the decision. 
(e)  Any person aggrieved by the action of the mayor and council may petition the mayor and council for a hearing on the application before the mayor and council at which time the mayor and council may receive evidence both for and against granting the application, which evidence may be by authenticated document or sworn testimony. The mayor and council shall reconsider the application upon the close of the evidence. The decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and, if the application is denied, shall state the reasons for denial. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-6; Ord. of 12-5-1995; Ord. of 3-4-2014(2), § 4) 
Sec. 34-184. - Term of license. 
Each license issued hereunder shall terminate on January 31 following the issuance thereof. Applications for renewal of a license must be submitted by not later than February 20 of each year in order to be included for consideration by mayor and council at its March meeting and avoid potential suspension of the existing license. All beer and wine licenses shall be effective on April 1 each year and terminate on March 31 of the following year. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-7; Ord. of 12-5-1995; Ord. of 3-4-2014(2), § 5) 
Sec. 34-185. - License fees. 
(a)  Package sales. The annual fee for a license to sell packaged malt beverages and wine shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(b)  Restaurant sales. The annual fee for a license to sell malt beverages and wine by the drink in connection with the operation of a restaurant shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(c)  Disposal of fees. Fees shall be submitted with the annual application and shall be held in the city treasury until action has been taken on the application by the mayor and council. Fees shall be refunded only upon rejection of an application. Fees shall not be prorated for partial years nor refunded for any reason subsequent to approval of an application. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-8; Ord. of 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 34-186. - Transfer of license. 
A license issued under this article is a purely personal privilege, good only for the year issued unless sooner revoked, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution. A license issued under this article may not be alienable or transferable, either voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. A license issued under this article shall cease upon the death of the licensee, in the case of an individual, or the dissolution of the licensee, in the case of a corporation, club or association; provided, however, that the properly qualified executors and administrators of the deceased, or the trustee, receiver or other court officer in the case of individuals and corporations, clubs and associations, may continue the business and exercise the privilege of the license until the expiration thereof, subject to the orders of appointing court. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-9; Ord. of 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 34-187. - Change of business location. 
A license issued under this article shall permit the sale of malt beverages and wine only at the premises described in the application. A request for change of location during the year for which the license was issued must be made to the mayor and council in writing and must be approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-10; Ord. of 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 34-188. - Records of applications; licenses. 
The city manager shall keep a complete and accurate record of all applications and licenses issued and shall furnish the chief of police with a copy of the same. Upon revocation or suspension of any license, the city manager shall immediately notify the chief of police in writing. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-11; Ord. of 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 34-189. - Business subject to inspection. 
Businesses operating under a license issued pursuant to this article shall prominently display the license at all times and shall be subject to periodic, unscheduled inspection by officers and agents of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-12; Ord. of 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 34-190. - Adoption of state law by reference. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of articles 2 and 3 of chapter 3 of title 3 of the Uniform Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-20 et seq. and 3-3-40 et seq.) establishing prohibited acts under the Georgia Alcoholic Beverages Code are adopted by reference and made the law of the city for the purpose of regulating the sale and use of beer and wine within the corporate limits of the city. In those circumstances where a provision of this article and a federal or state law are in conflict, the provisions of this article shall apply unless preempted. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-13; Ord. of 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 34-191. - Local prohibitions. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or during any time of day when such sales are prohibited by state law. Further, package licensees shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. Package licensees shall not permit their places of business to be open except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, or between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sundays, except that where the primary business of a malt beverage package licensee or wine package licensee is other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, such restrictive hours shall apply only with respect to the sale of malt beverages or wine. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity having a license to do business in the city, either pursuant to an ordinance of the city or by the laws of the state or federal government, to allow the consumption of alcoholic beverage by the public on the premises of that business, except as may be permitted herein pursuant to a valid license issued as provided in this article for the sale and consumption on the premises of a restaurant. 
(c)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell, or offer to sell, any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any church building, which distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground, determined in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure from which beverage alcohol is sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; 
(4)  To the front door of the church building. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-14; Ord. of 5-2-1995; Ord. of 12-5-1995; Ord. of 1-1999; Ord. of 7-2012) 
Editor's note— The ordinance adopted by the mayor and city council on July 2012 amended § 7-6-14(a) of the 1992 city code by authorizing the package sale of malt beverages and wine in the city on Sundays pending its approval by a majority of the voters through referendum. The referendum was approved by the voters on the November 6, 2012, election ballot. 
Sec. 34-192. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Any person who has personal knowledge of a violation of any provision of this article shall make a written complaint of violation to the city, either to the city manager or a member of the city police department. Upon receipt of a complaint of violation, the chief of police shall be notified and shall cause the complaint to be investigated. If the investigation reveals probable cause that a violation has occurred, the chief of police shall immediately seize the license under which the individual suspect was operating and all sales of malt beverage and wine shall be suspended until the next regular meeting of the mayor and council and a citation shall be issued, in triplicate, charging the individual suspect with the violation. The individual shall be provided a copy of the citation. 
(b)  One copy of the citation issued as provided herein shall be forwarded to the city manager who shall place the matter of suspension or revocation of the license under which the individual suspect was operating on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the mayor and council. 
(c)  Violation of any provision of this article, or any federal or state law, or any ordinance of the county, regulating or controlling the sale or use of alcoholic beverages, shall result in suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this article as follows: 
(1)  The first such violation shall result in a suspension of the license for a period of not more than six months which period shall be deemed to have begun on the day the license was seized and sales ceased; 
(2)  The second such violation within five years shall result in a suspension of the license for a period of not less than one year from the date of the decision by the mayor and council; 
(3)  The third such violation within five years shall result in revocation of the license. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by the action of the municipal court may petition the mayor and council for a hearing on the application before the mayor and council at which time the mayor and council may receive evidence both for and against granting the application, which evidence may be by authenticated document or sworn testimony. The mayor and council shall reconsider the application upon the close of the evidence. The decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and, if the application is denied, shall state the reasons for denial. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-15; Ord. of 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 34-193. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  A copy of the citation issued as provided herein above shall also be forwarded to the municipal court for disposition of charges of violation of the criminal provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this article, in addition to suspension or revocation, shall be subject to criminal penalties as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 7-6-16; Ord. of 12-5-1995) 
Secs. 34-194—34-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LICENSING AND REGULATION BILLIARD ROOMS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local government authority to license, regulate, and tax billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-226. - License required for operation of billiard rooms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard room within the city without having first obtained a license from the city for that purpose. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-2) 
Sec. 34-227. - Licensing applications, procedures and fees. 
Persons desiring a license to operate a billiard room shall make annual application for such license in writing on forms provided for that purpose by the city. Such application shall be signed, under oath, by the owner of the business or a principal officer of the entity operating the business if other than a natural person. The application shall require, minimally, the following: 
(1)  The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; or, in the case of corporations, clubs and the like, the names, ages and addresses of persons entitled to share in the profits, the name of the corporation, the address of the registered office, the name and address of the registered agent, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and, if the majority interest is owned by one person, the name, address and percent of the outstanding stock in the possession of that person. 
(2)  The nature and character of the business enterprise being operated by the applicant within which the license will be utilized. 
(3)  The length of time the applicant has been in the business described. 
(4)  The location and description of the premises or place of business in which the license will be utilized. 
(5)  Identification of all other license applications for the operation of billiard rooms in any locale and the disposition of such application, if any. 
(6)  A statement that no person is, or will be, involved in the business or its operation has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude and is not otherwise disqualified to hold a license to operate a billiard room by state law. 
(7)  A statement that no previous license to operate a billiard room granted to the applicant or any person who is or will be involved in the operation of the business has been withdrawn, revoked or suspended, or, in the alternative, a complete statement of the details of such withdrawal, revocation or suspension. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-3) 
Sec. 34-228. - Licensing standards. 
Licenses to operate a billiard room within the city shall be issued annually only to those persons who, or to corporations, clubs and associations which, meet all of the following qualifications: 
(1)  The individual applicant or at least one officer or major stockholder of a corporation, club or association, must be a United States citizen. 
(2)  No individual nor any officer, director or major stockholder of a corporation, club or association may have a record of conviction of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  No individual nor any officer, director or major stockholder of a corporation, club or association may have a history of withdrawal, revocation or suspension of a license to operate a billiard room by the city, the county, the state, the United States of America, or any other state, or political subdivision thereof. 
(4)  Licenses for the operation of a billiard room may not be issued to those businesses in which beer and wine may be sold or consumed. 
(5)  No license may be issued for the operation of a billiard room at a location where a billiard room has been operated in violation of this article at any time within the past two years. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-4) 
Sec. 34-229. - Procedure for consideration of applications. 
(a)  The city manager shall present applications for licenses hereunder at the next regular meeting following submission of the application and fee. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall consider each application and grant or deny the application based upon the standards set forth herein. The decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and, if the application is denied, shall state the reasons for the denial. 
(c)  A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant at the address provided on the application as soon as practicable following the decision. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by the action of the mayor and council may petition the mayor and council for a hearing on the application before the mayor and council at which time the mayor and council may receive evidence both for and against granting the application, which evidence may be by authenticated document or sworn testimony. The mayor and council shall reconsider the application upon the close of the evidence. The decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and, if the application is denied, shall state the reasons for denial. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-5) 
Sec. 34-230. - Term of license. 
Each license issued hereunder shall terminate on January 31 following the issuance thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-6) 
Sec. 34-231. - License fees. 
(a)  Annual fee. The annual fee for a license to operate a billiard room shall be charged for the first table and an additional amount for each additional table. The amounts of the fees shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(b)  Disposal of fees. Fees shall be submitted with the annual application and shall be held in the city treasury until action has been taken on the application by the mayor and council. Fees shall be refunded only upon rejection of an application. Fees shall not be prorated for partial years nor refunded for any reason subsequent to approval of an application. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-7) 
Sec. 34-232. - Transfer of license. 
A license issued under this article is a purely personal privilege, good only for the year issued unless sooner revoked, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution. A license issued under this article may not be alienable or transferable, either voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. A license issued under this article shall cease upon the death of the licensee, in the case of an individual, or the dissolution of the licensee, in the case of a corporation, club or association; provided, however, that the properly qualified executors and administrators of the deceased, or the trustee, receiver or other court officer in the case of individuals and corporations, clubs and associations, may continue the business and exercise the privilege of the license until the expiration thereof, subject to the orders of appointing court. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-8) 
Sec. 34-233. - Change of business location. 
A license issued under this article shall permit the operation of a billiard room only at the premises described in the application. A request for change of location during the year for which the license was issued must be made to the mayor and council in writing and must be approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-9) 
Sec. 34-234. - Records of applications; licenses. 
The city manager shall keep a complete and accurate record of all applications and licenses issued and shall furnish the chief of police with a copy of the same. Upon revocation or suspension of any license, the city manager shall immediately notify the chief of police in writing. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-10) 
Sec. 34-235. - Business subject to inspection. 
Businesses operating under a license issued pursuant to this article shall prominently display the license at all times and shall be subject to periodic, unscheduled inspection by officers and agents of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-11) 
Sec. 34-236. - Adoption of O.C.G.A. § 43-8. 
Chapter 8 of title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq.), popularly known as the "Operators of Billiard Rooms" law, is hereby adopted as and for the regulation of the operation of billiard rooms within the city, with like effect as if recited verbatim herein. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-12) 
Sec. 34-237. - Local prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful to allow the use of billiard tables on Sunday except between the hours of 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m. All tables must be fully covered for periods during which play is prohibited. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-13) 
Sec. 34-238. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Any person who has personal knowledge of a violation of any provision of this article shall make a written complaint of violation to the city, either to the city manager or a member of the city police department. Upon receipt of a complaint of violation, the chief of police shall be notified and shall cause the complaint to be investigated. If the investigation reveals probable cause that a violation has occurred, the chief of police shall immediately seize the license under which the individual suspect was operating and operation of the billiard room shall be suspended until the next regular meeting of the mayor and council and a citation shall be issued, in triplicate, charging the individual suspect with the violation. The individual shall be provided a copy of the citation. 
(b)  One copy of the citation issued as provided herein shall be forwarded to the city manager who shall place the matter of suspension or revocation of the license under which the individual suspect was operating on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the mayor and council. 
(c)  Violation of any provision of this article, or any federal or state law, or any ordinance of the county, regulating or controlling billiard rooms, shall result in suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this article as follows: 
(1)  The first such violation shall result in a suspension of the license for a period of not more than 30 days which period shall be deemed to have begun on the day the license was seized and sales ceased; 
(2)  The second such violation within five years shall result in a suspension of the license for a period of not less than 60 days from the date of the decision by the mayor and council; 
(3)  The third such violation within five years shall result in revocation of the license. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by the action of the municipal court may petition the mayor and council for a hearing on the application before the mayor and council at which time the mayor and council may receive evidence both for and against granting the application, which evidence may be by authenticated document or sworn testimony. The mayor and council shall reconsider the application upon the close of the evidence. The decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and, if the application is denied, shall state the reasons for denial. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-14) 
Sec. 34-239. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  A copy of the citation issued as provided herein above shall also be forwarded to the municipal court for disposition of charges of violation of the criminal provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this article, in addition to suspension or revocation, shall be subject to criminal penalties as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 7-7-15) 
Secs. 34-240—34-256. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - REGULATION OF VENDORS AND YARD SALES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-257. - Peddlers. 
For purposes of this article, the term "peddler" shall be defined as any person or entity which sells goods, wares or merchandise from a location which is not owned or rented by such person or entity or from a vehicle or structure which is not permanently affixed to real estate. 
(Code 1992, § 7-8-1; Ord. of 4-4-2009, § 7-8-1) 
Sec. 34-258. - Restrictions on peddling. 
Peddlers may sell or display goods, wares or merchandise only at the location of the city of Millen Vendor Market on Cotton Avenue across from Regions Bank or areas zoned B-1 (Central Business District) or B-2 (Highway Commercial) with the written permission of the property owner or owners. 
(Code 1992, § 7-8-2; Ord. of 4-4-2009, § 7-8-2) 
Sec. 34-259. - Licensing requirements for peddlers. 
All peddlers shall obtain a business license issued by the city upon the payment of a license fee. The amount of the license fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Code 1992, § 7-8-3; Ord. of 4-4-2009, § 7-8-3) 
Sec. 34-260. - Yard sales. 
A "yard sale" is defined as the sale or trading of used clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise on a lot utilized primarily for residential purposes by the owner of that lot. The term "yard sale" shall include garage sales, carport sales and similar types of sales or events. 
(Code 1992, § 7-8-4; Ord. of 4-4-2009, § 7-8-4) 
Sec. 34-261. - Location of yard sales. 
Yard sales may be conducted in the city Monday through Saturday between the hours of 8:00 o'clock a.m. and 6:00 o'clock p.m. on (1) a lot or parcel of land upon which there is situated a house, apartment or other structure which is utilized primarily for residential purposes; (2) at the City of Millen Vendor Market on Cotton Avenue across from Regions Bank; or (3) areas zoned B-1 (Central Business District) or B-2 (Highway Commercial) with the written permission of the owner or owners of the property where the sale is being conducted. 
(Code 1992, § 7-8-5; Ord. of 4-4-2009, § 7-8-5; Ord. of 12-3-2013, § 2) 
Sec. 34-262. - Permits for yard sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a yard sale in the city without a permit. Any citizen of the city or a charitable or religious entity which has a regularly functioning organizational structure and which conducts regular, periodic meetings in the city, wishing to conduct a yard sale within the city shall, upon request, be issued a permit by the city manager or his designated representative, which permit shall authorize one sale at one of the specific locations set out in section 34-261. Permits for yard sales conducted on an individual's residence lot or a church lot shall be issued without a fee, provided, however, no person may conduct or allow more than two such sales upon such site during each calendar year. Yard sale permits for use of the City of Millen Vendor Market on Cotton Avenue or in the Central Business District or Highway Commercial District shall be issued to any citizen or charitable or religious entity which has a regularly functioning organizational structure and which conducts regular, periodic meetings, whether a citizen of or located in the city or county, only upon payment of a fee for each such permit as shall be set from time to time by the mayor and council by resolution. There shall be no restriction on the number of sales per year at the Vendor Market on Cotton Avenue or in the Central Business District or Highway Commercial District. 
(Code 1992, § 7-8-6; Ord. of 4-4-2009, § 7-8-6; Ord. of 12-3-2013, § 3) 
Sec. 34-263. - Restriction on goods sold at yard sales. 
Only the sale or trading of used clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise that are actually owned by the permittee or permittee's guests shall be allowed at the permitted yard sale location. 
(Code 1992, § 7-8-7; Ord. of 4-4-2009, § 7-8-7) 
Secs. 34-264—34-266. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 4—6 of an ordinance adopted December 3, 2013, repealed §§ 34-264—34-266, which pertained to number of yard sales permitted; time, days of yard sales; charitable and religious organizations and derived from §§ 7-8-8—7-8-10 of the 1992 Code; Ord. of 4-4-2009, §§ 7-8-8—7-8-10. 
Sec. 34-267. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, in addition to suspension or revocation of any permit previously issued, shall be subject to criminal penalties as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 7-8-11; Ord. of 4-4-2009, § 7-8-11) 
ARTICLE X. - REGULATION OF COMMERCIAL SOLAR POWER GENERATION 

Sec. 34-268. - Definitions. 
Commercial solar power generation means the production of energy using large grid-connected photovoltaic power systems capable of providing an energy supply for multiple consumers which may be stored, used directly, or most often, fed into a large electricity grid powered by central generation plants. 
Photovoltaic power system means an arrangement of components, generally a photovoltaic array, designed to supply usable electric power for a variety of purposes, using the sun (or, less commonly, other light sources) as the power source. 
Photovoltaic array (also "solar array") means an arrangement of multiple photovoltaic modules, casually referred to as solar panels, to convert solar radiation (sunlight) into usable direct current (DC) electricity. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2014, § 2) 
Sec. 34-269. - Conditions precedent to the development of commercial solar power generation. 
Developers of commercial solar power generation facilities shall: 
(a)  Graphically demonstrate to the mayor and council through the use of renderings, photographs, engineering diagrams or reports, or similar credible media, that the proposed photovoltaic power system or solar array is, or shall be, designed and located so as to avoid glare or reflection onto adjacent properties and adjacent roadways and shall not interfere with traffic or create a safety hazard. 
(b)  Shall employ screening, using fencing and/or vegetative buffers, along all sides that do not collect energy to limit the visual impact of the site and to minimize glare. 
(c)  Enclose the entire area with security fencing at least six feet in height and shall provide the city with a means of access to the compound at all times for emergency service purposes. An electrical disconnect switch shall be clearly identified and available to emergency personnel at all times. 
(d)  Provide the following documentation to the building inspector, before land development begins: 
(1)  Proof of adequate project financing, along with insurance or surety (in such amounts as may be determined to be adequate by the mayor and council); 
(2)  Proof of compliance with regard to interconnection requirements with appropriate public utilities or public utilities regulatory agencies; 
(3)  Submission of a site plan that meets the requirements of the city soil erosion and sedimentation ordinance, and most recent edition of the Georgia Storm Water Management Manual; 
(4)  An approved right-of-way encroachment permit from the Georgia Department of Transportation (where state highways are involved) to ensure adequate roadside access and drainage; and 
(5)  Provide engineering specifications or other suitable documentation to ensure that noise from inverters, transformers or other equipment shall not exceed 40db at the property line. 
(e)  Comply with such other reasonable restrictions and requirements as may be deemed necessary by the mayor and council for the protection of the city and the citizens of the City of Millen. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2014, § 2) 
Sec. 34-270. - Removal of abandoned systems or arrays. 
Photovoltaic power systems or any photovoltaic array not operated for a continuous period of 12 months and for which there are no applications pending for permitted use of the structure at the end of such 12-month period, shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of the device(s). 
The owner of an abandoned system or array and the owner of the property where the abandoned system or array is located shall be under a duty to remove all equipment and fixtures from the property. If any photovoltaic module or any piece of supporting equipment is not removed within a reasonable time, not to exceed three months after receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the mayor and council may remove such device(s) and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The mayor and council may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned device(s) are removed. Delay by the mayor and council in taking action shall not in any way waive its right to take action. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2014, § 2) 
Chapters 35—37 - RESERVED 
APPENDIX A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 5, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 38, §§ 38-1—38-8, 38-35—38-41, 38-71—38-76, 38-81—38-90, 38-96—38-102, 38-133—38-147, 38-178—38-189, 38-205—38-213, and enacted a new App. A as set out herein. The former Ch. 38 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1992, § 11-1-1—11-7-1; Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 1(36-1—36-10); Ord. of 12-1-2015, § 2. 

SECTION 1. - ENACTMENT, SHORT TITLE, JURISDICTION, PURPOSE 

1-1. - Enactment Clause. 
The mayor and council of the City of Millen, under the authority of the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, Georgia L. 1957, page 420, no. 358; and the amendments thereto, hereby ordains and enacts into law the following sections. 
1-2. - Short Title. 
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance for the City of Millen." 
1-3. - Long Title. 
An ordinance regulating within the corporate area of City of Millen, Georgia, the location; height, bulk; number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; and the uses of buildings, structures, and the land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes, creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the methods of administration and amendment; providing penalties for violations; repealing conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes. 
1-4. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall govern the use of all land and the developments thereof within the corporate limits of the City of Millen. 
1-5. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations shall be to promote the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density and distribution of population, and the uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the City of Millen so as to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to prevent urban sprawl; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; to promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; to protect property against blight and depreciation; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; to conserve the value of buildings and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and structures throughout the City of Millen; and for other purposes. 
SECTION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of these regulations, certain terms of words used herein shall be defined as follows: 

2-1. - Interpretation of Certain Terms and Words. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
The word "person" includes a firm, co-partnership, company, corporation, or association. 
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel". The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. 
The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
Acceleration/Deceleration Lanes. Paved exits and entrances off a major thoroughfare onto private property for the purpose of expediting the free flow of traffic. Said lanes shall be constructed in accordance with the State Department of Transportation specifications. 
Accessory Building. A detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to, customarily associated with, and related to the principal structure or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. 
Note: Accessory structures will be considered as attached to the principle structure by means of a covered breezeway and/or walkway where the roof system of the attachment is designed as like construction as the principle building and the distance of the breezeway and/or walkway does not exceed a distance of 20 feet. In no case shall there be more than one (1) breezeway and/or walkway attached to the principle structure. 
Administrator, Zoning. The person, officer, or official and his/her authorized representative, whom the city/council has designated as its agent for the administration of these regulations. (Refer to Section 10-1) 
Apothecary. One who prepares and sells drugs or compounds for medicinal purposes. 
Bed and Breakfast Inn. A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided or offered to transient visitors for compensation. 
Boarding or Rooming House. A facility where overnight accommodations are provided to transients for compensation with or without meals. 
Buffer Yard. An area of land which includes landscape material established for the purpose of separating, screening, or shielding a use from a dissimilar or more intense use. 
Building. Any structure, except a trailer, which has a roof and which is for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building Height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
Care Home. An orphanage, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, boarding home for the aged, or similar use established to render domiciliary care, but not including facilities for the care of mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics, drug addicts and not including nursery schools. 
Care Home, Personal. A building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals and personal care for non-family ambulatory adults for compensation. Personal care homes are categorized as follows: 
Family Personal Care Home means a home for adults in a family type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons. 
Group Personal Care Home means a home for adult persons in a residence or other type building(s), non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven through 15 persons. 
Congregate Personal Care Home means a home for adults which offer care to 16 or more persons. 
Cemetery. For internment of human remains and shall comply with state law and may include one or more of the following: a burial park for earth internments; a mausoleum or crypt internment; or a columbarium internment. 
Church. A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Club or Lodge, Private . An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
Condominium. A building containing three or more individually owned dwelling units and related, jointly owned, common areas as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Curb Cut. The providing of ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Day Care Centers. Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than 24-hours per day without transfer of legal custody, 19 or more children under 18 years of age and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Density. The overall intensity of land use for the total project. When referred to residential areas it is the number of housing units permitted per acre in the zoning district involved in accordance with the terms of the zoning ordinance or as authorized under the development standards of this ordinance. 
Dwelling, Manufactured Home. A new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. For the purposes of the administration of this ordinance, the term manufactured home shall not be interpreted to include mobile homes. For the purposes of this definition, singlewide shall be construed as any manufactured or mobile home having a width of between 8 and 16 feet and is transported entirely in one section. 
Dwelling, Mobile Home. A new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. These were built prior to June 15, 1976 and do not meet current Department of Housing and Urban Development manufactured home codes. 
Dwelling, Modular Home. See Industrialized building . 
Dwelling, Two Family, or Duplex. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for two adjoining dwelling units that are connected by a fire rated common wall and/or if two story, by a fire rated common floor. 
Dwellings, (Attached) Single Family. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for a dwelling unit that is connected by a fire rated common wall and/or if two story by a fire rated common floor. This includes lofts, garage apartments, guest quarters or any other type of single-family structure. 
Dwelling, (Detached) Single Family. A detached building used and either designed or constructed for one dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, Site Built. A dwelling, other than a modular home, manufactured home, or mobile home, which is constructed on site on a permanent foundation. 
Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for more than two adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a common wall or common floor connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the building. This includes apartments, condominiums, or any other type of multi-family structure. 
Dwelling Unit. An enclosure of one or more rooms in addition to kitchen and bathroom facilities, but excluding closets, designed or constructed as a unit for residential occupancy by one family. 
Family. Three or less persons occupying a dwelling unit unless all members are related by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
Family Day Care Homes. A private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care fewer than 24-hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, three but not more than six children under 18 years of age who are not related to such persons and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. 
Family Residential (Guest Quarters). Provided no more than one shall be permitted on a lot with another dwelling and provided such shall be permitted only within a rear yard. Such structure shall be accessory residential and intended for use by family members related to occupants of the principal structure, and is not to be used for rental purposes. The structure shall not exceed 75% of the required minimum gross floor area per dwelling unit for the respective zoning district or primary dwelling whichever is less in square footage. 
Floor Area, Gross. The total number of square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls, excluding basement areas, porches, carports, and garages. 
Garage Apartment. A dwelling unit for no more than one family above or attached to an outbuilding, or part of a building for housing automobiles. The structure shall not exceed 75% of the required minimum gross floor area per dwelling unit for the respective zoning district or primary dwelling whichever is less in square footage. 
Group Day Care Homes. Any place operated by any person(s), partnership, association or corporation wherein are received for pay for group care not less than seven nor more than 18 children under 18 years of age for less than 24-hours without transfer of legal custody and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Home Business. Any business occupation or profession customarily conducted on residential property and carried on by an occupant thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes. This includes, but is not limited to, uses such as home beauty shops with more than one (1) operator, pet grooming, and other similar uses, including Home Occupation uses that do not meet the Home Occupation restrictions. Such uses are operated out of the proprietor's residence. Any use that would otherwise be allowed by right under the existing zoning, shall not be deemed to be a Home Business. 
Home Business Sign. A sign for a legally existing home business on residential premises, containing no commercial message except advertising for services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located. 
Home Occupation. Any business occupation or profession customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by an occupant thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. This includes, but is not limited to, uses such as accountant, architect, art instructor, beauty shop (with no more than one operator), daycare (with no more than six children and on a lot no smaller than 6,000 square feet), drafting, dressmaking, insurance agent, manufacturing agent (provided that no items are stored or delivered from the premises), music teacher, notary public, photographer, real estate agent, or consultant. (Refer to Section 6-1) 
Home Occupation Sign. A wall sign for a legally existing home occupation on residential premises, containing no commercial message except advertising for services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located. 
Hospital. Any institution receiving in-patients, or a public institution receiving out-patients, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of senile psychotics or drug addicts, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
Impervious Surface. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water including streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar structures. 
Industrialized Building. Certain manufactured buildings which are regulated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Georgia law defines an Industrialized Building as "any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof." Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the "Industrialized Buildings Act", Georgia Law 1982 (O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 2, Part 1). An industrialized building must meet all requirements of the district in which it is located. Industrialized buildings designed for residential uses are often referred to as "modular homes". For the purposes of enforcement of this ordinance, industrialized residential homes are subject to the same standards as site built homes. 
Junk Yard. Use of property for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials, and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Junk Yard Storage Area. Property and/or buildings used for the permanent or temporary storage or inoperable vehicles, machinery or other equipment or materials awaiting salvage, restoration or sale, but not including exterior displays or new or used merchandise in operable condition for retail or wholesale distribution. 
Kennel. Any location where boarding, caring for, and keeping of more than a total of three dogs or cats, or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on for compensation, and also raising, breeding, caring for, or boarding of dogs, cats, or other small animals for commercial purposes. 
Kennel, Non-Commercial. Any location where the boarding, caring for and keeping of more than three but not more than ten dogs or cats or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on, not for commercial purposes, but as a hobby such as the raising of show and hunting dogs. 
Loft Apartment. A floor consisting of a large partitioned or unpartitioned space with a minimum of 600 sq. feet over a factory, warehouse, or commercial business for single-family dwellings. Parking arrangements provided by City of Millen. 
Lot. A lot of record, or any combination of lots of record, held in a single ownership by one person, or in common ownership by more than one, which has both usable lot area and lot dimensions equal to or greater than the lot width and lot area requirements established by this ordinance for the zoning district in which such tract of land is located and for the use proposed for the tract of land. (Refer to Section 3-22) 
Lot, Corner. A lot having frontage on two or more public streets at their intersection. (Refer to Section 3-11) 
Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court, or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. (Refer to Section 9-1) 
Lot, Through. A lot other than a corner lot, having frontage on more than one street. 
Lot Width. The distance between the side lot lines, measured along the minimum front yard setback line as established by this ordinance, or if no setback line is established the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the street right-of-way line. 
Minor. Any person under 18 years of age. 
Nightclub (Lounge). A place of entertainment open at night, usually serving food and alcoholic beverages providing music and space for dancing. 
Non-Conforming. A building, structure, or use of land existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Operator. The manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Open Space. That required portion of a lot at ground level, unoccupied by enclosed buildings and available to all occupants of the project. This space shall not be devoted to driveways or off-street parking but shall be usable for green space, recreational use and other leisure activities normally carried on outdoors. 
Planned Development. This district is intended for the combination of residential, office, and limited commercial uses. This district is established to encourage creative and resourceful projects that include compatible, interrelated uses and related public facilities. 
Planning Commission. As utilized in this ordinance, the planning commission shall mean the City of Millen Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Principal Building. The building containing or to contain the principal use of a lot. 
Principal Use. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied, or maintained. 
Public Space. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated or reserved for public or private use as an amenity to the development. Public space shall not be interpreted to include public street right-of-way or individual private front, side, or rear yards. Storm water management facilities may be incorporated into the public space, but shall not consist of more than 75% of the required amount of public space. 
Public Street. Right-of-way dedicated to the city or owned by the city for public street purposes. 
Residential. Pertaining to the use of land, means premises such as homes, townhomes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums or apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein. 
School. A facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education including any playgrounds, stadiums, or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. This shall include but not be limited to public and private schools used for primary, secondary, or post-secondary education. 
Setback. The shortest distance between the centerline of a street and the principal building or structure on a lot. 
Shopping Center. Two or more commercial establishments planned and managed as a single unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property. 
Sign. (See Section 8 - Sign Regulations) 
Special Exception. A special exception is a use, which within certain districts specified by this ordinance is not permitted as a matter of right but may be permitted within these districts by the mayor/council. (See Section 5-1.2) 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools, and fall-out shelters but does not include walls or fences. 
Tourist Home. A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided or offered to transient visitors for compensation. 
Townhouse. One of a group of three or more attached dwelling units under fee simple or condominium or cooperative ownership, as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Travel Trailer. A vehicular portable structure not exceeding 32 feet in length or eight feet in width designed for travel, recreational and vacation uses. 
Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. (Refer to Section 11-6.2) 
Yard, Front. That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way and the principal building of the lot and extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. 
Yard, Rear. That area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building on the lot. 
Yard, Side. That area of a lot between the side lot lines and the principal building on the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
SECTION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

3-1. - Interpretation and Application. 
In interpreting and applying these regulations, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of these regulations. Except as hereinafter provided, these regulations shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul, or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of these regulations impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits, or any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
3-2. - Zoning Affects All Land and Buildings. 
No buildings, structures, or land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
3-3. - Every Use Must Be Upon a Lot. 
No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this ordinance except as provided in Section 3-23 or Section 9-1. 
3-4. - Only One Principal Building Per Lot. 
Except as herein provided (Refer to Section 6-3), there shall be no more than one (1) principal building or structure upon any lot other than within an I-1 or HI district. 
3-5. - Open Space Not to be Encroached Upon. 
No open spaces shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and such other regulations required by this ordinance for the district in which such building is located. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and planted buffer strips shall be construed not to be encroachments of yards. (Refer to Section 3-25) 
3-6. - Required Open Space May Not Be Used by Another Building. 
No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required or in connection with any building, structure, or use by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space for any other building structure, or use except as provided in Section 7-6. 
3-7. - Reduction of Yards or Lot Area. 
Except as provided in Section 3-23, no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use. 
3-8. - Encroachment on Public Rights-of-Way. 
No building, structure, service area, or required off-street parking and loading facilities, except drive-ways, shall be permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
3-9. - Location of Accessory Buildings or Uses. 
Accessory buildings on residential lots, when located within a side yard, shall be located no closer to property lines than would be allowed for a principal building. Accessory buildings shall not be located in the front yard of the principal use. Within a rear yard, an accessory building on a residential lot shall be located at least 8 feet from all rear and other property lines, except that in the case of corner lots, accessory buildings shall be set back from the centerline of an abutting street right-of-way a distance equal to 3/4 the front yard setback established for the zoning district in which the accessory buildings are located. In the case of a through lot (refer to Section 3-11), accessory buildings shall conform to front yard setbacks on both streets. Swimming pools shall conform to front yard setbacks on both streets. Accessory buildings or uses on non-residential lots shall comply with the minimum yard requirements established for the zoning district in which such accessory buildings or uses are located. 
3-9.1. - Accessory Building on Separate Lot. 
An accessory building may be permitted as a special exception by the mayor/council on a separate lot from the lot of the principal building provided that: 
(a)  The lot upon which the accessory building is located shall adjoin the lot which contains the principal use, and 
(b)  All requirements established for the zoning district in which such accessory building is located shall be complied with, and 
(c)  Any structure or building erected shall meet the requirements of the City of Millen Building Code and shall be approved by the Building Inspector, and 
(d)  Provided the mayor/council may require design features such as buffer strips, screening, etc., as may be found necessary to protect the purpose of the ordinance. 
3-9.2. - Swimming Pools. 
Swimming pools exceeding 24" in depth, accessory to residences or commercial uses, shall be secured from the public in accordance with International Residential Code (IRC), Appendix G for residential uses and International Building Code (IBC) for commercial uses. 
3-9.3. - Accessory Building; Size and Number Limitations. 
This shall not apply to swimming pools, garden arbors, playground equipment, decks, or patios. Accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum square footage as indicated in the following: 

 
Any increase in square footage requirements shall be allowed only upon proper application and granting of a variance by the mayor/council (Refer to Section 11-6.2). 
3-10. - Every Lot Shall Abut a Street. 
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut an open public street, except as provided for in planned developments. (Refer to Section 6-3) 
3-11. - Lots with Multiple Frontage. 
In the case of a corner lot, side yard setback requirements from the centerline of the street right-of-way shall be equal to 75% of that required for the front yard setback for all zoning districts. On a corner lot where the main entrance into a residence is facing a side yard, it shall be permissible for purposes of this ordinance to construe the residence to be fronting on the street other than that street which said entrance faces, and side and rear yard requirements may be provided accordingly. If a building is constructed on a through lot having frontage on two roads not at an intersection, a setback from each road shall be provided equal to the front yard requirement for the district in which the lot is located. 
3-12. - Visibility at Intersections. 
On corner lots within all zoning districts except the B-1 zoning district, no fence, shrubbery or other obstruction to the traffic sight vision, except utility poles or light or sign standards, shall exceed a height of 3 feet within a triangular area formed by the intersection of the right-of-way lines of 2 streets or a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way line, and a diagonal line which intersects the right-of-way lines at 2 points, each 20 feet distance from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, or, in the case of a rounded corner, from the point of intersection of their tangents; provided, however, signs, lights, or similar objects which are totally located at least 12 feet above the finished grade shall be permitted. 
3-13. - Uses Prohibited. 
If either a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being permitted in a district, either as a matter of right, or as a special exception, then such use, class of use, or structures for such uses, shall be prohibited in such district. 
3-14. - Zoning of Annexed Areas. 
Areas annexed to the City of Millen subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance shall be placed in the R-E zoning district, unless other zoning is formally requested and approved with the annexation petition. All rezoning requests which accompany an annexation petition shall pay the required fee for zoning amendments (refer to Section 12-2.1). Such annexed and R-E zoned areas shall remain R-E until such time as the comprehensive zoning plan of the city has been extended to include the annexed area and a zoning change is executed in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance for zoning amendments. (Annexation is governed by O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 36 (§ 36-36-1 et seq.) This paper will also address the latest amendments to the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.,( including the problems it was designed to address). 
3-15. - Zoning to Apply When Lot is Divided by District Boundary Line. 
In the event that a district boundary line on the zoning map divides a lot of record held in one ownership on the date of passage of this ordinance, each part of the lot so divided shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by this ordinance for the district in which each such parcel is located; except, however, that if the property owner of such a lot, other than a through lot, so desires, he may extend a use allowed on the greater portion of said lot 50 feet beyond the district boundary line in accordance with setbacks and yard requirements of the district into which he is encroaching. 
3-16. - Height Limitations of Walls and Fences. 
Within any residential district, no wall or fence shall exceed 4 feet in height within or along a boundary of a front or 8 feet side yard. 
3-17. - Buffer Yard Requirements. 
Buffer yards shall be required along the side and rear yards of the proposed development wherever the proposed development abuts a different existing or permitted use. The existing use of the zoning classification of the adjacent property, shall determine the type of buffer yard required. Vacant property will not require a buffer. 
(1)  Buffer Yard Specifications. The following tables prescribe buffer yard types as well as minimum number of trees and shrubs per 100 linear feet. Where feasible and appropriate, developers are encouraged to exceed these minimum requirements. 
 Buffer Type Required 

 
 Buffer Type Descriptions 

 
A minimum 50% of all canopy trees, and minimum of 75% of all understory trees and shrubs shall be evergreen vegetation. Planting areas must be mulched with approved material. Upon maturity, buffer yards shall not contain any unobstructed openings more than 10 feet in width. 
(2)  Location. Buffer yards shall be located on the side and rear yard of the lot or parcel and extend inward from the parcel boundary line for the required depth. Buffer yards shall not be located in any portion of an existing or dedicated public right-of-way or private street, or stormwater detention/retention area. Buffer yards shall not be used for any parking or loading purposes, nor contain any structures. Only approved driveways and pedestrian pathways may encroach into a required buffer yard. 
(3)  Existing vegetation. Existing vegetation may be retained and used to meet buffer requirements. In the event existing vegetation does not satisfy buffer requirements, it shall be supplemented with additional plantings. Proposed plant materials shall be grouped or massed to achieve a natural looking and unified buffer. 
(4)  Maintenance. The entire buffer yard shall be maintained as green open space with the required plantings. Maintenance of a required buffer yard shall be the responsibility of the property owner or any consenting grantee. If the plant materials die, they shall be replaced within 60 days. 
General Landscaping Standards 
A.  Minimum specifications for plant materials. 
1.  All plant material shall be nursery grown, and installed according to accepted planting procedures. 
2.  Shrubs shall be at least 18 inches in height at the time of installation. 
3.  All landscaped areas and buffers shall be sodden or covered with ground cover. 
4.  Ground cover used in lieu of grass shall be planted so as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within three months of installation. 
5.  At least 25 percent of the required trees installed in landscaped buffers, landscaped parking areas, and to meet tree planting requirements shall be canopy trees. 
6.  Existing trees, which are four inches DBH (Diameter at Breast Height) or larger, and shrubs may be counted toward meeting the requirements for landscaped buffers, landscaped parking areas, and tree retention. 
7.  Canopy trees shall not be installed under any overhead utility line, over any buried utilities, or within a utility easement. 
B.  Requirements for landscaping. 
1.  The plan shall show the location, size, and description of all proposed plant materials. 
2.  Existing plant materials, other than invasive species, may be counted toward meeting the landscaping requirements. 
3.  At least ten percent of the total gross land area of a development site shall be landscaped. The landscaped areas shall be located on the site in such manner as to maximize preservation of existing trees. 
4.  At least four shade trees per acre shall be provided, which may include existing trees, trees required for buffers, or trees required for parking lot landscaping. 
C.  Landscaping requirements for parking lots. 
1.  Perimeter landscaping: a minimum of a ten foot wide strip of land, located between the property line and a parking lot shall be landscaped. Width of sidewalks shall not be included within the ten foot wide from setback perimeter landscape area. 
D.  Interior landscaping. 
1.  Parking lots with 20 or more parking spaces shall provide interior landscaping. 
2.  Interior planting areas may be located in tree islands, at the end of parking bays, or between rows of parking spaces. One raised parking lot island shall be provided along the length of each row, thereby creating separated parking areas to aid in safe and orderly use of the lot and confine vehicle movements to marked drives. Planting areas may also be located within driveway medians, provided the median is a minimum of ten feet wide. The height of the island is a minimum six inches from parking lot surface. Length of island is equal to the length of the parking row. 
3.  The design of interior landscaped areas shall comply as set forth in the General Landscape Standards. 
3-18. - Screening of Service Areas Within 100 feet of Public Street. 
Screening requirements for such areas shall be as prescribed in section 3-17 Buffer Yard Requirements. 
3-19. - Side and Rear Yards Not Required Next to Railroad. 
Within any non-residential district, side yards and rear yards shall not be required adjacent to railroad rights-of-way. 
3-20. - Substandard Lots of Record. 
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, which has an area or a width which is less than required by this ordinance, shall be subject to the following exceptions and modifications identified in Sections 3-23 and 3-25. 
3-21. - Permitted Modification of Setback Requirements. 
When a building or structure is proposed on a lot and when on either or both lots which adjoin such lot at the street right-of-way line there exists a principal building which does not conform to the setback requirements of this ordinance, the required setback for such building or structure shall be as follows: 
(1)  where only one said adjoining lot contains a principal building with a non-conforming setback, the setback shall be the computed average of 
(a)  the normal setback requirement with; 
(b)  the nonconforming setback, or 
(2)  where both adjoining lots contain a principal building each with a non-conforming setback, the minimum setback shall be the computed average of the two nonconforming setbacks. 
3-21.1. - Cul-de-sacs. 
On cul-de-sacs approved by the city engineer the minimum front yard setback line can be increased up to 15 feet further back from the right-of-way line and must be established on a recorded plat. 
3-22. - Structures Permitted Above the Height Limit. 
The height limits of these regulations shall not apply to a church spire, belfry, cupola, dome, or ornamental tower not intended for human occupancy, monument, water tower, observation tower, transmission tower, chimney, smoke stack, conveyor, flag pole, radio or television tower, mast or aerial, parapet wall not extending more than four feet above the roof line of the building, and necessary mechanical appurtenances. 
3-23. - Permitted Encroachments of Yards and Setbacks. 
Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters, and fire escapes may not project more than three feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways which are or may be used for access and service and/or emergency vehicles. However, in the case of automobile service stations, motels, and similar uses which serve the motoring public, canopies shall be allowed over a driveway or walkways within the front yard not to extend from the principal building to a point any closer than 15 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
3-24. - Prohibited Uses in All Residential Districts. 
In all residential districts or upon lots with residential structures, it shall be prohibited: 
(1)  To park or store in open sight, wrecked or junked vehicles, power driven construction equipment, used lumber, metal or rubbish, or any other miscellaneous scrap or salvage material in quantity; 
(2)  To park tractor-trailer combinations, tractors and/or trailers; 
(3)  To place or operate a commercial animal kennel; 
(4)  To park or place containers commonly known as "freight", "shipping", "storage" and/ or "Portable On-Demand Storage (PODS)" unless one of the following exceptions are met: 
a.  Container is used in the construction of the primary residence or accessory structure or development of new subdivision provided it is removed from the premises within 30 working days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy; or 
b.  Container is being used to facilitate the transport of personal property to and from existing structures in connection with the moving of a resident provided that there is no more than one container per site at any one time which shall be removed within 15 days of its placement. 
Placement of any container in compliance with this section shall not encroach upon any portion of any right-of-way, shall not obstruct or impair any visual lines of sight to any public thoroughfare, and shall comply with all applicable side and rear yard setback requirements. 
3-25. - Modification of Side Yard Requirements. 
When a lot of record has a width less than the frontage required in the district in which it is located and said lot cannot be increased in width as provided in Section 3-23, then the zoning administrator shall be authorized to reduce the side yard requirements for such lot provided, however, that there shall be not less than an eight foot side yard. 
3-26. - Recreational Vehicles. 
Recreational vehicles shall not be utilized as a permanent dwelling in any zoning district. Occupancy exceeding 30 days shall be considered permanent. 
3-27. - Use Change of Residential Structure. 
When a lot within a residential zone is proposed by rezoning, the rezoning application shall include a site plan drawn to scale, showing the lot, the street, the house, the driveway and the proposed off-street parking; this site plan shall be approved by the Building Official prior to the zoning administrator accepting the application. If the lot is to be rezoned by governmental petition, the site plan will be required when the change in use is requested through the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Where a lot and house is configured such that the minimum development standards of this ordinance or other ordinances of the City of Millen cannot be adhered to, the City Engineer has the authority to allow subsequent improvements provided the contract fee for the City Engineer's consultation is paid for by the rezoning applicant. 
a.  Pavement width. 
b.  Pavement encroachment to adjacent property lines. 
c.  Driveway radius encroachment to beyond the property line. 
Off-street parking in front of the residential structure shall not be allowed. However, off-street parking or development in front of existing structure may be considered and approved by the City of Millen's mayor/council only after review of a site plan submitted as a part of the rezoning request. 
3-28. - Residential Development in the Central Business (B-1) Zoning District. 
Residential development in the B-1 district is subject to a parking plan for the downtown area approved by the mayor/council. 
3-29. - Building Codes. 
The International Building Code; International Fuel Gas Code; International Mechanical Code; International Plumbing Code; National Electric Code; International Fire Code; International Energy Conservation Code; International Residential Code including Appendix G; International Property Maintenance Code; and International Existing Building Code shall be enforced in the corporate limits of the City of Millen, Georgia. Whenever a provision of these codes conflicts with a City of Millen ordinance or regulation then the standard code provision shall control, unless the City ordinance or regulation contains an express statement that it supersedes the standard code requirement. 
SECTION 4. - ZONING 
DISTRICTS 

4-1. - Establishment of Districts. 
In order that the purposes of this ordinance as defined in section 1-5 may be accomplished, there are hereby established within the City of Millen, Georgia, the zoning districts identified as follows: 
A-1  Agricultural. The purpose of this district is established to provide for rural farm or non-farm residences in areas where intensive land development is unlikely to occur at present. As urban growth continues, demand will grow for amendments to remove land from the agricultural district and place it in more intensely developed zones but the intent is to reserve the bulk of land for low density residential uses. 
R-E  Estate Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family detached residential areas with minimum lot sizes of one acre. 
R-1A  Single-Family Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide low-density single-family detached residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 10,000 square feet. 
R-1B  Single-Family Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family detached residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 8,000 square feet. 
R-2A  Single-Family Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family detached residential area with minimum lot sizes of 6,000 square feet. 
R-2B  Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide orderly development of medium density single- and two-family residential use areas and also allows manufactured homes as a matter of right, with a minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet. 
R-3  Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide orderly development of medium to high density residential areas for one, two, and multi-family dwellings; also allows manufactured homes as a matter of right in a conventional subdivision with a minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet. 
RMH  Manufactured Housing Park. The purpose of this district is to provide for the development of property that is appropriately located and planned for manufactured housing park use. Property developed in this district is to remain in single ownership for rental or leasing purposes only. To be considered for this zoning classification, a site plan meeting the requirements of this ordinance must be submitted with any rezoning petition. Manufactured housing parks shall be developed only in strict accordance with the Manufacturing Housing Park provisions of this ordinance. 
P-1  Professional District. The purpose of this district shall be to create and provide areas in which residential, professional, educational and institutional uses not normally involving the sale of merchandise, which do not generate large volumes of traffic, noise or other harmful effects on adjoining residential areas can be compatibly mixed while maintaining a healthy living environment for the residents of the district. 
P-D  Planned Development District. Planned Development Districts are intended to provide an alternative method of land development and redevelopment not available within the framework of standard zoning districts. The standards and procedures of approving these districts are intended to promote flexibility of design and allow for planned diversification and integration of uses and structures while at the same time, retaining in the mayor/council the absolute authority to establish such conditions, limitations, and regulations as it deems necessary to maintain community aesthetics and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B-3  Neighborhood Commercial. The purpose of this district is to provide for and to protect areas that are convenient to and will serve immediately adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
B-2  Highway Commercial. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect convenient areas for community shopping facilities consisting of a wide variety of sales and services. 
B-1  Central Business District. The purpose of this district shall be to enhance and protect shopping facilities in the central business district of the city. 
A-C  Adult Commercial. The purpose of this district shall be to provide a reasonable location within the community for the development of adult-oriented businesses including adult entertainment establishments. 
I-1  Industrial District. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those industrial uses which do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust, and which do not possess other objectionable characteristics which might be detrimental to surrounding neighborhoods, or to the other uses permitted in the district. 
I-2  Heavy Industrial District. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those industrial uses which cannot comply with the regulations of the I-1 district. 
4-2. - Zoning and Street and Road Classification and Major Thoroughfare Plan, Millen, Georgia, Maps. 
The boundaries of each zoning district are shown on the official zoning map, for the City of Millen, Georgia. The classification of streets (local and collector streets and principal and minor arterials) within Millen, Georgia are shown on a map entitled "Major Thoroughfare Plan, City of Millen, Georgia". Both maps shall be dated and certified by the mayor and the city clerk, and said maps and all explanatory matter thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this ordinance. 
Accurate copies of the "Official Zoning Map, City of Millen, Georgia and the Major Thoroughfare Plan, Millen, Georgia" shall be on file in the office of the zoning administrator at all times. Said map shall accurately show all map amendments made in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and the date when said amendments became effective. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to see to it that the official zoning map and "Major Thoroughfare Plan, Millen, Georgia", displayed in his/her office is kept up-to-date and accurately shows all amendments. 
4-3. - Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries. 
When uncertainty exists with respect to the location of boundaries of any zoning district as shown on the "Zoning Map of the City of Millen," the following rules shall apply: 
4-3.1.  Unless otherwise specifically indicated, where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the centerline of a street, highway, railroad right-of-way line, stream bed or river bed; such centerlines shall be construed to be such district boundaries. 
4-3.2.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
4-3.3.  Where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the corporate limit line of the City of Millen, then such corporate limit lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries. 
4-3.4.  Where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as being set back from a street, road, highway, railroad, stream, or river, and parallel thereto, then such district boundaries unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of such street, road, highway, railroad, stream, or river and as being parallel thereto. 
SECTION 5. - SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED USES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

5-1. - Table of Permitted Uses. 
Within the various zoning districts as indicated on the "Zoning Map of the City of Millen," no building, structure, or land shall be constructed, erected, altered, or used except as indicated in the following schedules. 
5-1.1. - Uses Permitted by Right. 
Uses permitted as a matter of right are indicated on the following schedule by the letter "X" in the appropriate column. 
5-1.2. - Special Exceptions. 
Uses permitted only after special review and approval of the mayor/council are indicated on the following schedule by the letters "SE" in the appropriate column. Requests to approve a use by special exception shall be advertised, reviewed and processed in the same manner as an amendment to the official zoning map as described in Section 12 Amendment. In the event that a rezoning is also necessary for the proposed use, the special exception request and rezoning request may be processed and heard in conjunction with each other at the required public hearing. Special exception requests will be reviewed after council has: (1) reviewed the proposed site plans for the use, its location within the community, its arrangement and design, its relationship to neighboring property and other conditions peculiar to the particular proposal which would determine; (2) desirability or undesirability; (3) has found the proposal not to be contrary to the intent of this ordinance; and (4) has approved the use as specified. Special exceptions shall only be approved based on findings by the mayor/council. 
(a)  The proposed use will not be contrary to the purpose of this ordinance. 
(b)  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood, nor affect adversely the health and safety of residents and workers. 
(c)  The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such facility, vehicular movement, noise or fumes generation, or type of physical activity. 
(d)  The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses of adjacent properties; and the proposed use will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of said use. 
(e)  The parking and all development standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may be granted have been met. 
Provided, that the mayor/council may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood; and provided that wherever the mayor/council shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations that any term, condition or restriction upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said mayor/council shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing. 
If activities towards the special exception have not commenced within 12 months after approval by the mayor/council, or if the special exception is discontinued for a period in excess of 12 consecutive months, the request shall be rescinded and subject to re-submission in the same manner as an amendment as described in Section 12 of this ordinance. special exceptions shall not be transferable except upon written approval of the mayor/council. 

 
5-2. - Development Standards. 
Within the various zoning districts as indicated on the "Zoning Map of the City of Millen, Georgia," no building or structure, excluding all signs other than the advertising signs, shall be constructed or erected except as indicated in the following schedule: 

 
* Plus ½ any amount which the right-of-way width exceeds 50 feet for residential streets, 60 feet for collector streets, and 80 feet for Major and Secondary Streets. 
** The minimum distance from other property lines to any building over 35 feet in height shall be increased one foot for every two feet (or part of 2 feet) of building height greater than 35 feet. 
sf = Single-family. 
mf = Multi-family. 
SECTION 6. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN USES 

6-1. - Home Occupation. 
A home occupation as defined by this ordinance shall be approved by the zoning administrator and governed by the following requirements: 
6-1.1  Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the principal dwelling, unless the occupation requires off-site work, in which case only administrative functions may be conducted at the premises. 
6-1.2.  Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation. 
6-1.3.  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the dwelling. 
6-1.4.  Except as otherwise stated by this section, there shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation, including but not limited to, outside storage of materials or equipment, nor shall such items be displayed in a manner to be viewed from the outside of the dwelling. 
6-1.5  No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted. 
6-1.6  No machinery or equipment causing noise, smoke, odor, vibration, electrical interference, or other objectionable condition may be used, nor may the occupation otherwise constitute a nuisance in the neighborhood. 
6-1.7  Instruction in music and similar subjects shall be limited to two students at a time. 
6-1.8  No more than two vehicles used in conjunction with the home occupation shall be allowed provided. 
6-1.9  Unless otherwise specified, there shall be no more than one client or customer on the premises at any one time. 
6-1.10  Signs for home occupations shall be limited to one. 
6-1.11  No variances shall be considered to the above criteria and any occupation that does not meet the above criteria shall be considered a Home Business, if it meets the Home Business restrictions. 
6-2. - Home Business. 
A home business as defined by this ordinance shall be approved by the zoning administrator and be governed by the following restrictions: 
6-2.1.  Home businesses shall conform to the restrictions of the Home Occupation regulations sections 6-1.3, 6-1.5, and 6-1.8 as it pertains to the property. 
6-2.2.  Accessory buildings used for home businesses shall be subject to all applicable accessory structure standards. 
6-2.3.  At least one resident and not more than one non-resident of the dwelling may be engaged in the home business. The resident must be the owner of the home business. 
6-3. - Planned Development. 
A.  Master Plan. The developer of the proposed planned development shall file a master plan along with the planned development rezoning request with the planning commission. Being a rezoning, the process shall follow the same process for rezonings as prescribed by this ordinance except that planned development requests shall require an additional month for review prior to being heard by the planning commission. Prior to submission, however, planned development requests must have been reviewed by all departments including Fire, Engineering, Health, Utilities, Building Inspections, Planning, etc. Any application will be deemed incomplete if the applicant does not show where each of these agencies has reviewed the proposal. Said master plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  An attached statement describing why standard zoning districts are insufficient and how the proposed development conforms to those parameters and ideals set forth in Section 4-1 of this ordinance. 
(2)  Name or names of the proposed development. Name or names and addresses of the owners and designers of the site of the master plan and his/her seal. 
(3)  Date, appropriate north arrow and scale. 
(4)  The boundary line of the tract to be developed drawn accurately to scale and with accurate lineal and angular dimensions. 
(5)  A map to an appropriate scale showing the location of the development. 
(6)  Contours with a minimum vertical interval of one foot referred to sea level datum shall be provided for both existing and proposed topography. 
(7)  The location and extent of existing and proposed public rights-of-way, easements and water and drainage courses within the tract. 
(8)  The location and type of existing buildings and structures proposed to be retained or removed and an indication of the use for each retained building. 
(9)  The general location of proposed buildings and an indication of the use for each building. 
(10)  Proposed lot layout in sketch form. 
(11)  Dwelling unit density. 
(12)  Minimum standards for interior lot development including setbacks, distances between buildings, etc. 
(13)  The percentage of development maintained as public space (as defined by this ordinance) and impervious surface. 
(14)  Public transportation facilities or provisions (if any). 
(15)  Landscape and buffer plan. Nothing in this subsection shall be misconstrued as preventing the mayor/council from requiring more stringent design standards. 
B.  Plan Amendments. Any increase in density or intensity of development or other major change shall constitute a plan amendment and shall require re-submittal of the master plan. Minor changes to the design of an approved planned development and net decreases in overall density or intensity may be submitted for administrative approval. Said changes will require review and approval by all necessary agencies. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. The planned development district is intended to allow flexible site planning and building arrangements for both single and multi-family residential developments, for business and commercial developments under a unified plan so that innovative land planning methods may be utilized which fosters natural resource conservation and neighborhood cohesiveness as well as neo-traditional developments. This may permit buildings to be clustered or arranged in an unconventional manner to maximize public space, create a pedestrian scale and incorporate other public benefits. In this district, smaller lots than would otherwise be permitted under traditional zoning districts may be allowed; however, the purpose is not merely to allow smaller lots or reduce development requirements but to achieve other goals including the protection of sensitive environmental, historic, or aesthetic resources as well as the provision of site amenities such as parks, public space, walking trails, etc. The planned development district is not intended to encourage greater density of development, but rather to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning techniques which result in quality residential patterns that conserve and create public space, reduce vehicle trips and provide stable developments that enhance the surrounding area. 
(2)  Allowed Uses. All dwelling types, commercial and office uses shall be allowed in the planned development district including manufactured homes. Any use requiring a special exception within any zoning district shall be processed as a special exception. The planned development district shall allow all types of uses except those allowed only within the A-C, I-1, and I-2 districts. 
(3)  Development Standards. A planned development shall conform to the following restrictions and development standards. 

 
* There is no minimum setback for interior lot lines, except as otherwise indicated within the approved master plan. 
6-4. - Family Day Care Homes and Group Day Care Homes. 
Shall conform to the following regulations: 

 
6-5. - Manufactured and Mobile Homes. 
(1)  No mobile homes, defined as units constructed prior to June 15, 1976 shall be allowed within the City limits of Millen. Only manufactured homes constructed to the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards governed by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq. shall be permitted to be installed or relocated within the City of Millen. 
(2)  All new manufactured homes shall be installed as required by O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-160 and 8-2-164. For the purposes of administration of this section, installation shall mean the construction of a foundation system and the placement or erection of a manufactured home on the foundation system. This also includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing or anchoring such home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such home. Said installation shall be performed by a person who is able to obtain a license pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-164. 
(3)  Manufactured homes may only be used as a dwelling unit. 
(4)  A curtain wall, also known as skirting or underpinning, shall be constructed of masonry or approved material and shall be un-pierced, except for required minimum ventilation and access so that the area under the home is enclosed to the ground level. Said access shall remain closed when not being used for that purpose. 
(5)  After placement on the lot and before occupancy, all tongues, axles, transporting lights and other towing apparatus are to be removed from sight. 
(6)  Utility meters shall be mounted directly to the manufactured home, to a pedestal, or to a pole as required by the building and electrical codes as adopted by the City of Millen. 
(7)  At all exterior doors there shall be a landing as required by the building codes as adopted by the City of Millen. Said landing shall be constructed in a manner as to be permanently affixed to the ground. 
(8)  All manufactured homes must meet the minimum size requirements for the district in which they are to be located. 
6-6. - Manufactured Home Parks. 
Manufactured home parks are allowed in the RMH district as a matter of right provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The minimum size shall be three acres. 
(2)  The park shall have minimum side yards of 20 feet and a front yard at least 20 feet greater than that required for other uses permitted in the district. 
(3)  Each manufactured home shall be connected to a proper water and sewer system as required by the City of Millen or the Jenkins County Health Department. The manufactured home park plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval from the Jenkins County Health Department. 
(4)  The minimum lot area per manufactured home shall not be less than 4,000 square feet with a minimum width of 40 feet where served by public water and sewer or public health department approved community water and sewer. The lot shall be not less than 7,500 square feet of lot area per manufactured home where served by septic tanks or private wells. 
(5)  The minimum distance between any two manufactured homes or between any manufactured home and any other building in the park shall be 20 feet. 
(6)  A 20 foot wide interior street paved and properly drained shall serve all manufactured home lots and be drained so as to prevent damage to adjoining property, public and private. 
(7)  Each manufactured home lot shall be clearly defined by means of concrete, steel or iron pipe markers placed at all corners. 
(8)  At least 200 square feet per manufactured home lot not to be a part of required manufactured home lot, shall be provided in one or more locations for community playgrounds and recreation purposes. 
(9)  Any property line of a manufactured home park which abuts or is within a residential zoning district shall be screened as described in this Ordinance. 
(10)  No manufactured home park shall be occupied by a greater number of manufactured homes than that authorized in the approved building and inspection permit. No manufactured home park shall be enlarged or extended unless a separate building permit and a separate final inspection permit have been issued. 
(11)  Access to the park shall be limited to paved streets with at least 50 feet of right-of-way. 
(12)  No building permit may be issued unless the park layout has been reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator. 
(13)  Site must directly abut a major thoroughfare roadway as designated on the Official Road Classification Map for the City of Millen. 
6-7. - Cemeteries. 
(1)  Cemeteries are permissible in the B-2 zoning district, and by SE in P-1 and B-3 zoning districts, subject to the site design standards of the district and the specific supplemental standards in this section. Cemeteries for internment of human remains shall comply with State law and the provisions of this section. Cemeteries for internment of pet remains shall comply with the provisions of this section. All cemeteries must have a perpetual care and maintenance plan as described in O.C.G.A. § 10-14-3(6). 
(2)  A cemetery may include one or more of the following: a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt internments, and a columbarium. 
(3)  A cemetery may include a chapel when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
(4)  Site design requirements are as follows: 
Standards for Cemeteries 

 
(5)  Location requirements. 
a.  A cemetery shall not be located in a wetlands, 100-year floodplain, floodway, or flood hazard area. 
b.  All new cemeteries must be located not less than 150 feet from a drinking water well. 
(6)  Adequate off-street waiting space shall be provided for funeral processions so that no vehicle stands or waits in a dedicated right-of-way. 
(7)  All cemetery access shall be provided from an arterial street, collector street, or state highway. The entrance and exits to the cemetery shall be only from the frontage street. 
(8)  Mausoleums and columbaria may be located only within the boundaries of approved cemeteries. Mausoleums and columbaria shall have facades of brick or stone. 
SECTION 7. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND SERVICE REQUIREMENTS 

7-1. - Scope of Provisions. 
Except as provided in this section, no application for a building permit excluding single-family shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvements, or use, a plat plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. These provisions shall not apply to the B-1 district. 
7-2. - Parking Spaces May Not Be Reduced. 
Off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum required number for the use or facility to which they are assigned. 
7-3. - Drainage, Construction, and Maintenance. 
All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or public streets and shall be constructed of asphalt, concrete, solid brick pavers, or any other material approved by the building official with concurrence from the Fire Chief and the Public Works Director where applicable. All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the expense of the owners thereof, in a clean, orderly, dust-free, and deteriorated free condition. 
7-3.1.  Requirements for Unpaved Parking. Unpaved parking areas may be approved by the Building Official or his designee with conditions including, but not limited to, the following: 
7-3.1.1.  Unpaved spaces shall be located on the periphery of parking areas, in locations that will receive less use than those paved and more remotely located to the use served. 
7-3.1.2.  Stormwater management facilities shall be provided for all vehicular use areas, whether paved or unpaved. The developer must demonstrate that stormwater management facilities can be expanded to accommodate future required paving. 
7-3.1.3.  Use of the unpaved parking area shall not cause the introduction of sediment or debris onto city rights-of-way and easements. 
7-3.2.  Inspection. At least six months after a final certificate of occupancy is issued, an inspection will be made by the building official or designee. If findings indicate that the unpaved spaces are in good condition or are infrequently used, such unpaved spaces may remained unpaved. If findings show that the spaces receive as much use as the paved spaces, or have deteriorated, such unpaved spaces shall be paved within 90 days of written notice to the owner of the property. If paving is deemed necessary by the city engineer, the property owner may be required to expand the stormwater management facilities (as provided in section 7-3.1.2). 
7-4. - Separation from Walkways, Sidewalks, Property Lines and Streets. 
All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, property lines, and streets by concrete curbing. Curbing located in parking areas shall be constructed a minimum of three feet from private and/or public property lines so that parked vehicles will not project over such lines. 
7-5. - Parking Area Design. 
Parking stalls shall have a minimum interior clearance width of eight and one-half feet and length of 20 feet. There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. Interior driveways shall be at least 24 feet wide where used with 90 degree angle parking, at least 18 feet wide where used with 60 degree angle parking, at least 12 feet wide where used with 45 degree parking, and at least 12 feet wide where used with parallel parking; or where there is no parking interior driveways shall be at least 10 feet wide for one-way traffic movement and at least 20 feet wide for two-way traffic movement. 
7-6. - Joint Parking facilities. 
Two or more neighboring uses, of the same or different types, may provide joint facilities, provided that the number of off-street parking spaces is not less than the sum of the individual requirements. 
7-7. - Pavement Markings and Signs. 
Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and pavement directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
7-8. - Number of Parking Spaces. 
In order to assure a proper and uniform development of public parking areas throughout the area of jurisdiction of this ordinance, to relieve traffic congestion on the streets, and to minimize any detrimental effects on adjacent properties, off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained as called for in the following schedule. For any use or class of use not mentioned in this schedule, the requirements shall be the same as a similar use as mentioned herein. 
Parking requirements for additions to existing uses shall be based upon the new addition even if the existing use is deficient. These regulations shall apply to all districts except B-1 district. 

 
7-9. - Minimum Number of Loading Spaces Required. 
Industrial, wholesale, and retail operations shall provide loading space as follows: 
7-9.1. - Design of Loading Spaces. 
Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park and unpark vehicles for loading and unloading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way. 
7-10. - Curb Cut Requirements. 
In any district as described below where the lowering or cutting away of curbs, or the placement of asphalt and/or driveway pipe on non-curbed sections for the purpose of ingress and egress is required to the property, such curb cuts or asphalt width shall be placed through the entire right-of-way and shall be subject to the following provisions. 
7-10.1.  Residential Curb Cuts (excluding multi-family development). 
7-10.1.1.  No more than two combined entrances and exits shall be allowed any parcel of property, the front of which is less than 200 feet on any one street. Additional entrances or exits for parcels having a frontage in excess of 200 feet shall be permitted at the rate of one entrance/exit for each additional 100 feet. 
7-10.1.2.  At street intersections (corner lots), no curb cuts shall be located within 25 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or such lines extended; or within 15 feet of the intersection of two property lines or such curb lines extended whichever is more restrictive. On major, secondary or collector streets, no driveway shall be within 70 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or curb lines extended. 
7-10.1.3.  The distance between any two curb cuts on the same side of the street shall be not less than ten feet. Said distance shall be measured between the point of tangency of the curb return radius and the established curb of the abutting street. 
7-10.1.4.  All driveways shall be constructed so as to have at least five feet from any property line (excluding right-of-way), except that a curb return may become tangent to a curb line at a point where such property line extends with the curb line. 
7-10.1.5.  The maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 24 feet measured at the right-of-way line. 
7-10.1.6.  The sum of the two curb return radius for any curb cut shall not exceed 15 feet. 
7-10.1.7.  When development on sites where existing curb cuts are abandoned and access is no longer afforded due to parking lots, buildings or other permitted structures, the driveway shall be removed, the sidewalk (if existing) shall be replaced, the curb and gutter shall be replaced, fill dirt back filled to its natural state; where it is a piped driveway to a dirt or paved street, said pipe shall be removed, asphalt removed and the shoulders and ditch regraded to its natural pre-existing state. 
7-10.2.  Commercial and Multi-Family Curb Cuts. 
7-10.2.1.  No more than two combined entrances or exits shall be allowed any parcel or frontage which is less than 300 feet on any one street. On parcels less than 150 feet, only one entrance shall be allowed provided it is a two-way driveway (two one-way driveways shall be allowed in lieu of the one two-way). Additional entrances or exits for parcels of property having a frontage in excess of 300 feet shall be permitted at the rate of one entrance-exit for each additional 150 feet. 
7-10.2.2.  No driveway shall be located closer than 150 feet of an existing driveway on an abutting lot. Existing lots of record less than 150 feet frontage shall be allowed one combined entrance/exit not to exceed 24 feet at right-of-way line. 
7-10.2.3  At street intersections (corner lots), no curb cuts shall be located within 70 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or within 60 feet of the intersection of two property lines where such lines extended whichever is more restrictive. Within the B-1 zoning district, mayor/council, at their discretion, may grant a variance to this requirement. 
7-10.2.4.  All driveways shall be constructed so as to be at least 12.5 feet from any property line except that a curb return may become tangent to a curb line at a point where the property line extended intersects such curb line. 
7-10.2.5.  Maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 35 feet measured at the right-of-way line; minimum two-way shall be 24 feet at right-of-way line with a maximum of 12½ foot radius. No two driveways on the same property shall be closer than 25 feet. 
7-10.2.6.  The maximum width of any curb cut in P-1, I-1 or I-2 zone shall not exceed 35 feet. 
7-10.2.7.  The sum of the two curb return radius for any one curb cut shall not be less than 25 feet, nor greater than 40 feet. 
7-10.2.8.  When development on sites where existing curb cuts are abandoned and access is no longer afforded due to parking lots, buildings, or other permitted structures, the driveway shall be removed, the sidewalk (if existing) shall be replaced, the curb and gutter shall be replaced, fill dirt backfilled to its natural state; where it is a piped driveway to a dirt or paved street, said pipe shall be removed, asphalt removed and the shoulders and ditch re-graded to its natural pre-existing state. 
7-11. - Solid Waste Container Pad. 
All site plans for apartments and commercial buildings shall include a solid waste container paid that has easy and safe access for the front end loader and must be screened as per sections 3-17 and 3-18. The number of pads shall be based on the following criteria if apartments: .2 cubic yards per unit; minimum container shall be four cubic yards. 
SECTION 8. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

8-1. - Purposes. 
It is the purpose of the City of Millen in enacting these regulations to provide standards to safeguard life, public health, property and welfare by regulating the location, size, illumination, erection, maintenance and quality of materials of all signs. More specifically, signs have a powerful impact on the aesthetic environment of the community, and it is the purpose of this ordinance to encourage an aesthetically attractive environment, allowing sufficient opportunities for communications to serve business, interest groups and the public, while complying with the Federal and State Constitutions and laws. Signs create visual clutter and therefore should be regulated in their size, location, construction and illumination. Signs can detract from the beauty of the neighborhood and lower property values. In seeking to comply with federal and state law, the City has determined the following: large signs are, as the U.S. Supreme Court has recognized, an aesthetic harm; the Georgia Supreme Court has upheld sign regulations on the basis of aesthetics and preserving the beauty of environment; and, the Eleventh Circuit has recognized portable signs are visual clutter and a potential traffic hazard. These holdings show that the City's ordinance is within the law and constitutional, which is a goal of the City. The goal of this Article is to avoid being an impermissible content-based regulation, and instead to be a permissible time, place and manner restriction. 
Many signs can also be a hazard and negatively impact traffic safety, by distracting drivers and blocking views of other vehicles and dangers, by making intersections more treacherous, and by making it difficult to see oncoming traffic when entering a roadway. Therefore, it is also the purpose of this ordinance to prevent those harms by regulating signs to safe locations, safe sizes, with proper and safe illumination and construction. Business owners have 90 days to remove all signs from closed business or relocated business. 
Downtown Development Authority (DDA) sign regulations see section 8-11. 
8-2. - Jurisdiction and Applicability of Code Requirements. 
8-2.1.  This article shall apply to all properties within the incorporated areas of the City of Millen, Georgia. This article shall not relate to the copy or message on a sign within the City of Millen. 
8-2.2.  All signs and sign structures shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the building and electrical codes adopted by the City of Millen. 
8-2.3.  If any provisions or requirements of this article are in conflict with any other provision or requirement of this ordinance or any other applicable governmental law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or other governmental regulation of any kind, the more restrictive rule or standard takes precedence. 
8-3. - Variances. 
8-3.1.  Variances from the provisions of this ordinance may be requested. All such variances shall be considered and decided by the mayor and council of the City of Millen in accordance with officially adopted procedures and standards contained in the Millen Zoning Ordinance, provided that the decision to grant or deny a variance shall be based upon conditions and factors pertaining to the time, place, and manner of the exhibition and construction of a sign, and not the content of the sign's copy. 
8-4. - General Provisions and Definitions. 
8-4.1.  No sign shall be placed or maintained within the City of Millen except in conformity with this sign ordinance. 
8-4.2.  Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this Sign Ordinance, any sign, display or device allowed under this Ordinance may contain any commercial or non-commercial message, or any political or non-political message; except that such messages cannot depict obscenity, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, nor can they depict sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 
8-4.3.  Height limitations in this ordinance control over the general height limitations of this ordinance, and apply to any structure that contains a sign. For example, a church spire or radio antenna with a sign would be subject to the height limitations of this ordinance, rather than general height limitations. 
8-4.4.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words have the following meanings. The general definitions and interpretative rules of the zoning ordinance shall also be used. To the extent those general rules or definitions conflict with these specific definitions, these definitions shall control. 
Abandoned Sign. A sign and/or sign structure which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person, or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or service. 
Animated Sign. Any sign that all or any part thereof visibly moves or imitates movement in any fashion whatsoever. Any sign that contains or uses for illumination any lights (or lighting devices) that change color, flash or alternate, show movement or motion, or change the appearance of said sign or any part automatically. 
Area of Sign (Copy Area). The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, or material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. 
Banner. A sign hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind. This definition expressly excludes all fabric signs mounted from one side to a flag pole. 
Building Sign. Any sign attached to any part of a building other than a freestanding sign. 
Canopy. Any permanent roof-like structure, including awnings and marquees, projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of a building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Canopy Sign. Any sign attached to, or made a part of the front, side, or top of a canopy. These signs are regulated as wall signs. 
Copy. The wording or graphics on a sign surface in either permanent or removable form. 
Crown of the Road. The highest point of a road, usually the center line of a road. 
Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, paint or affix. 
Establishment. A commercial, industrial, institutional, educational, office, business or financial entity. 
Flag. Any fabric sign, regardless of the message conveyed, mounted to a flag pole on one side only. 
Flashing Sign. (See Animated Sign). 
Freestanding Sign. Any sign which is independent from any building or other structure and is entirely supported by a single or multiple pedestals that are permanently attached at or below ground level. 
Frontage, Building. The length of an outside building wall facing a street. 
Frontage, Street. The length of the property line of any one parcel along a street on which it borders. 
Ground Sign. A sign that is anchored to the ground and is wholly independent of a building for support. Freestanding signs are included in this definition, as are signs on poles, frames, or other mounting structures other than buildings. 
Illuminated Sign. A sign which contains an internal source of light or which is designed or arranged to reflect light from an artificial source. 
Mansard Sign. Any sign attached to or erected within 12 inches of an actual or simulated mansard of a building, with the sign face parallel to and within the limits of the building, but not exceeding the roof line, and not deemed to be a roof sign. These signs are regulated as wall signs. 
Monipole Sign or Unipole Sign. A freestanding sign that is erected on a single pedestal attached to the ground for the display of messages irrespective of the number of faces or the configuration of the faces. 
Monument Sign. A permanent sign, other than a freestanding pole sign, placed upon or supported by the ground independent of any other structure and constructed of stone, concrete, masonry, stucco or equal architectural material. These signs are regulated as ground signs. 
Moving Sign. (See Animated Sign). 
Painted Wall Sign. Any sign that is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall. 
Parcel (Lot)-(Business Lot). Any standard lot or parcel of land, the boundaries of which have been established by a recorded legal instrument and is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership, with said parcel being duly recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court, Jenkins County. 
Permanent Sign. A sign permanently affixed to a building or the ground. 
Person. Any association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind. 
Portable Sign. Any sign supported by its own frame or trailer, with or without wheels, that is designed to move from one place to another. 
Principal Building. The building with the principal use of the parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings. However, storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory are not considered principal buildings. 
Projecting Sign. Any sign affixed to a building or wall, which horizontally extends more than twelve inches beyond the surface of a building or wall. 
Residential District. Includes all land in R-E, R-1A, R-1B, R-2A, R-2B, and R-3. 
Revolving Sign. (See Animated Sign). 
Road. A right-of-way which provides vehicular access to abutting properties. 
Roof Sign. Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained upon or over the roof of any building and projecting above the roof line. 
Roof Sign (Intregral). Any sign erected or constructed as an integral part of a normal roof structure of any design. No part of the sign can extend vertically above the highest portion of the roof and no part of the sign can be separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
Setback. The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line. 
Sidewalk, Sandwich or A-Frame Sign. A sign which is normally in the shape of an "A" of some variation, which is usually two sided. 
Sign. Any display of words, shapes or images designed to convey a message to the viewer, located on the exterior of any dwelling, building or structure, or located anywhere on a lot upon a dedicated supporting structure or device, including poles, banners, windows and similar devices. 
Sign Face. The actual message-carrying portion of the sign that can be used to display content, including any area that can display or does display words, pictures or other communicative elements of the sign, including the background color. 
Sign Structure. This includes all the elements of the sign, including its supporting structure, sign face, base, lights and every portion of the sign. 
Street. Any public or private right-of-way for automobile use. This excludes alleyways, parking lots and driveways. 
Street Frontage. The width in linear feet of a lot or parcel where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Under Canopy Sign. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a canopy (in awnings and marquees) is perpendicular to the wall surface of a building, and whose copy is not clearly visible from the public right-of-way. 
Wall Face. A measurement of area equal to the height of the structure from the ground to the coping or eave of the roof multiplied by the width of the wall associated with the individual business. The wall face is to be measured for each wall independently. 
Wall Sign. A sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior wall of a building. 
Window Sign. A sign having its message visible from the exterior of a building that is either located within a building so as to be visible through a window, or affixed directly to the window either inside or outside the building. 
8-5. - Permitted Signs. 
8-5.1.  If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically permitted in a zoning district as provided under this section shall be prohibited. These regulations apply to signs located on any lot or development. 
8-5.2.  Standard Permitted Signs. The following signs are permitted in the following zoning districts. A double-sided sign is counted as one sign, but each face counts towards the maximum area permitted. Height is measured from grade to the highest portion of the sign structure. Area is calculated as shown in Section 8-6.5. 
Table of Standard Permitted Signs. 

 
8-5.3.  Highway Signs. In addition to the signs permitted elsewhere in this ordinance, in the I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts, the following additional permitted signs are allowed. 
(a)  One additional ground sign of not more than 300 square feet per face, and not more than 35 feet in height, and not more than two-faced (back to back), may be erected on any lot that has road frontage on any U.S. Highway (e.g. 25), or any Georgia Highway (e.g. 17, 67) Such sign must be erected within 50 feet of the right-of-way of said highway. No sign of more than 250 square feet erected under this section may be erected within 2,000 feet of any other ground sign exceeding 250 square feet, whether such sign is on the same lot or another lot. No sign of less than 250 square feet erected under this section may be erected within 500 feet of any other ground sign exceeding 100 square feet, whether such sign is on the same lot or another lot. 
(b)  Distances between signs are measured from the closest points of the signs at issue, whether that is the sign base or a portion of the sign structure. 
(c)  No sign erected under this section may be "double stacked"; that is, have two separate signs one higher than the other, both facing the same direction. Double stacked signs are permitted under other provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  It is the intent of this section to allow more signage along certain higher traffic corridors, while at the same time protecting the appearance of the City of Millen. Whenever the distance requirements of this section would, if applied strictly, result in denying a person all opportunity for additional signage allowed under this section, because of the existence of a sign or signs on the property of another person or entity, a variance may be issued, subject to the procedure provided in the zoning ordinance, that both serves the interests of the City in adopting this sign ordinance, and also affords to such person reasonable additional signage. However, no variance shall be granted where the hardship is the result of the property owner or his predecessor-in-title's subdivision of the property. 
8-5.4.  Minor Signs. Any number of minor signs are permitted in addition to all other signs permitted under this ordinance. In residential zoned areas, these signs must be no more than one sq. ft. in area, and no more than four feet in height. In B-2, I-1, and I-2 zoned areas, these signs must be no more than four sq. ft. in area, and no more than four feet in height. However, the area of all such sign faces on a single lot, parcel, residence, development, business or property may not exceed ten square feet in residential and 20 square feet in highway commercial, industrial, or heavy industrial zoned areas. 
8-5.5.  Internal Signs. Any sign not visible from the outside of a structure or to passing members of the public is not restricted or regulated by this ordinance. 
8-5.6.  Sign Support Structures. Signs 300 sq. ft. per face or larger must be constructed with a monopole-type support system. 
8-6. - Regulations For Signs. 
8-6.1.  Location, Height, and Setback. 
(a)  The property owner must give permission for all sign placement on the owner's property, through the issuance of a letter signed by the owner. 
(b)  All signs must comply with all side and rear setbacks of the underlying zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Signs can be located in front setback areas, but all signs and sign structures,(in excess of four feet in height from natural grade shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet above natural grade before beginning of copy area in order to maximize traffic safety). No portion of a sign or sign structure shall encroach on or overhang the public right-of-way or any other person's property. 
(d)  Distances are measured from the closest portion of the sign (whether that is the base, sign face, or the sign structure) to the right-of-way, curb or pavement. 
(e)  The height requirements of a sign shall be computed as the length of a straight vertical line from normal grade to the height of the highest attached component of the sign or sign structure. When the sign is constructed within 15 feet of a right-of-way, the normal grade shall be considered the elevation of the crown of the road. When a sign is constructed 15 or more feet from any right-of-way, normal grade shall be considered the lower of (1) existing grade of the site of the sign prior to construction of the sign or (2) the newly established grade at the base of the sign after construction, exclusive of any filling, beaming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. Refer to the Table of Standard Permitted Signs for specific height limits and requirements. 
8-6.2.  Number. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, ground signs shall be equal to the number of sign structures. All other non-ground signs shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. 
8-6.3.  Illumination. 
(a)  Ground signs cannot be illuminated in any residential zoning district. 
(b)  Illumination of any sign in any district shall be positioned and shielded so that the light source does not shine directly into the path of motorists on a public right-of-way or into the windows of adjacent dwellings or businesses without the permission of the owner and resident thereof. 
(c)  Flashing, blinking or otherwise varying illumination is not permitted. No external or internal illumination that causes confusion with or distraction from any traffic signal or safety device shall be permitted 
(d)  All illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries, mounted in fixtures designed to direct the light and eliminate light trespass, such as light shining into residences or other neighboring structures. 
(e)  All illuminated signs over ten feet in height shall either be internally illuminated or illuminated by external lighting fixtures not visible to passing motorists. 
8-6.4.  Variable Message Boards / LED. 
(a)  Variable message boards will only be permitted in B-2, I-1, and I-2 zoning districts, and only in conjunction with a legally permitted freestanding sign. 
(b)  Each message will remain fixed for a minimum of ten seconds. 
(c)  When a message is changed, it shall be accomplished in three seconds or less. 
(d)  Messages shall not be illuminated by blinking, scrolling, or flashing lights. 
(e)  Submittal of a complete sign application and receipt of proper permit in accordance with Section 8.9. 
8-6.5.  Calculation of Area. The area of a sign is calculated by determining the area of the smallest square or rectangle which encloses the sign face and the structure surrounding the sign face. For example, the pole or base would not be included, but any frame holding the sign face in place would be counted. See examples: 

8-6.6.  Unusual Shaped Signs. Unusual shaped sign are signs that are any shape other than a square or rectangle, and include signs with projecting elements or features, round, oval, and triangular signs, signs with more than four sides, signs in the shape of an animal, object, or device, and so forth. For all such signs, the area is calculated by calculating the area of the smallest rectangle that will completely enclose all elements of the sign face and sign structure supporting the face, not including the base, or any open space. 
8-7. - Safety and Construction Standards. 
8-7.1.  Engineering Approval. All signs in excess of 15 feet in height should be constructed according to plans approved by a Georgia registered professional engineer. The sign owner shall produce such approved plans at the request of City of Millen Building Official. 
8-7.2.  Official Confusion. Signs which contain or are in imitation of an official traffic sign or signal are prohibited. 
8-7.3.  Fire Safety. No sign or sign structure may be erected or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, ventilation, or door; nor shall any sign or sign structure be attached to a fire escape. 
8-7.4.  Corner Visibility. No sign or sign structure above a height of four feet shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. 
8-7.5.  Traffic Visibility. No sign shall obstruct the view of vehicles entering the roadway (i.e., the view of oncoming traffic by vehicles attempting to enter the road). 
8-7.6.  Good Repair. All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in good repair. Any structure formally used as a sign, but not in use for any other purpose, must be removed by the owner of the property within ten days after written notification from a designated official of the City of Millen or 30 days after its use as a valid sign has ceased, after which time, the City may cause the removal of the sign at the owner's expense. (See Code of City of Millen Section 30-124 thru Section 30-128.) 
8-7.7.  Removal of Unsafe Signs and Safety Hazards. The City may remove a sign in violation of this ordinance, without giving notice to any party, if said sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. 
8-8. - Prohibited Signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited: 
8-8.1.  Roof Signs (which means signs mounted above a roof or projecting above the roof-line of a structure). 
8-8.2.  Rotating signs. 
8-8.3.  Signs with more than two sides. 
8-8.4  Flashing, blinking or signs of varying light intensity. Signs with reflective elements that sparkle in the sunlight or that contain luminous paint that glows in the dark are not allowed, including signs that spell words or create images with numerous small lights or other illumination. 
8-8.5  A-frame, sandwich type, sidewalk or curb signs. 
8-8.6  Swinging or projecting signs. 
8-8.7.  Portable signs (mobile, trailer). 
8-8.8.  Mural signs or painting on buildings, unless approved by City council. 
8.9. - Procedures. 
8-9.1.  Sign Registration and Building Permits. 
(a)  Except as specifically exempted from the provisions of this article, a person or firm may not legally maintain, post, display, enlarge, erect, move, or substantially change a sign that is larger than four square feet, without first obtaining a permit from the building official or his/her designee. Signs using electrical wiring and connections (i.e. illuminated signs), as well as larger signs, will require additional permits under the City of Millen Building Code or Zoning Ordinance, and the City of Millen Building Official should be contacted regarding such signs. 
(b)  All parties are advised to consult with the building official to avoid erecting signs that violate this ordinance. No person shall obtain a vested right to maintain a sign that does not comply with this ordinance at the time it is erected. Signs erected in violation of this ordinance shall be removed or reconstructed in compliance with this ordinance. 
(c)  Permit applications for conforming signs shall be filed by the sign owner or his/her agent with the zoning administrator or his/her designee upon forms furnished by the City. Flags flown in a manner consistent with the Table of Standard Permitted Signs are excluded from the permit requirement. 
(1)  Applications shall contain the following: 
i.  The type of the sign as defined in this ordinance. 
ii.  The value of the sign. 
iii.  The street address and zoning designation of the property where the sign is to be located. 
iv.  A site plan drawn to scale, that shows the location of the sign on the lot, including indicating setbacks from property lines and rights-of-way. 
v.  The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
vi.  The name(s) and address(s) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the sign is to be located, along with written consent of said owner(s). 
vii.  Engineered construction plans for signs exceeding 15 feet in height, showing they are approved by a registered Georgia professional engineer. 
viii.  Name, address, phone number and business license number of the sign contractor. 
(2)  Fees. No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application, has been filed with the zoning administrator or his/her designee and permit fees have been paid as adopted by the mayor and council and as amended from time to time. 
(3)  The building official or his/her designee shall grant a permit upon receipt of a completed application if the proposed sign meets the requirements of this article. 
(4)  Permit expiration. A permit shall become null and avoid if construction of the sign has not begun within six months from the date of issuance. Issuance of a permit shall in no way prevent the city from later declaring the sign to be nonconforming or unlawful if, with further review of available information, the sign is found not to comply with the requirements of the ordinance applicable at the time that the complete permit application was filed. 
(5)  A violation of any provisions of this ordinance will be grounds for termination a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this article, the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall revoke the permit. 
No information shall be required regarding the content of the sign. Any person failing to obtain a permit prior to construction shall be subject to citation and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with the enforcement provisions of the City of Millen Zoning Ordinance and applicable law. 
8.10. - Non-Conforming Signs. 
Signs existing legally at the time of the adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but which do not conform to newly adopted or amended provisions of this ordinance solely because of a change in the ordinance, and not because of a change to the sign, may remain as legal non-conforming signs, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  There must be existing property rights in the sign; 
(2)  The right to continue a non-conforming sign is confined to the sign owner or his transferee; 
(3)  A non-conforming sign may be restored to its original condition provided that not more than 50% of the sign is destroyed. The 50% is to be determined by 50% of the value of the materials of the sign, inclusive of poles and other structural members, immediately prior to damage; 
(4)  A non-conforming sign when relocated or moved shall no longer be considered a non-conforming sign and thereafter shall be subject to all the provisions of law and of these rules relating to outdoor advertising; 
(5)  The sign must remain substantially the same as it was on the effective date of the adoption of this ordinance which rendered the sign non-conforming. Extension, enlargement, replacement, rebuilding, adding lights to a non-illuminated sign or re-erection of the sign will be considered a change in the existing use. The maintenance will be limited to: 
i.  Replacement of nuts and bolts; 
ii.  Additional nailing, riveting or welding; 
iii.  Cleaning and painting; 
iv.  Manipulate to level or plumb the device, but not to the extent of adding guys or struts for stabilization of the sign structure; 
v.  A change of the message, including changing faces, as long as similar materials are used and the sign face is not enlarged. 
(6)  At no time may changes be made in a non-conforming sign which would increase the value of the sign; 
(7)  A non-conforming sign may continue as long as it is not abandoned, destroyed, discontinued, or purchased by any governmental agency. Any sign suffering damage in excess of normal wear cannot be repaired without: 
i.  Notifying the building official in writing of the extent of the damage, the reason the damage is in excess of normal wear, and providing a description of the repair work to be undertaken, including the value of the sign materials and the cost of the repair; and, 
ii.  Receiving written notice from the building official authorizing the repair work as described above. If said repair is authorized by the terms of this ordinance, the zoning administrator shall mail such notice to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the information described in (i.) above. 
8.11. - Downtown Development Authority (DDA) Area. 
Applicability. The standards and guidelines set forth apply to all properties within the DDA area of the City of Millen as indicated below, with referenced streets extended to intersection points: 
Highway 25 as the Western boundary; Magnolia Street as the Eastern boundary. 
Winthrope Avenue and College Avenue as the Northern boundaries; Cotton Avenue and Old Sylvania Rd as the Southern boundaries and all properties adjacent thereto. 
Applications are to be made to the City. The City will then forward all completed applications to the DDA for their review and recommendations. The DDA will have 15 days to forward their comments back to the building official for final determination. More than 15 days the application goes forward to the building official with a recommendation of approval. 
(1)  All proposed signs consistent with the guidelines state herein shall require review of the DDA and approval by the building official as outlines in Section 8.9 Procedures. 
(2)  Signs not consistent with the guidelines stated herein shall be subject to the review of the Millen DDA. 
(3)  Signs may not be changed or installed until the DDA has reviewed and the Zoning Official gives approval. 
(4)  Many non-conforming signs will exist within the commercial core of downtown Millen after the guidelines are implemented. The intent of the DDA is to improve the downtown shopping experience for everyone. Therefore, voluntary compliance with these guidelines is highly encouraged for businesses with existing signage. 
Purpose. The intent of the sign design guidelines is to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Establish reasonable and improved standards for business identification. 
(2)  Assist property owners and business owners in understanding city expectations. 
(3)  Reduce the time and fees for processing sign approvals. 
(4)  Encourage creative and innovative approaches to signage within an established framework. 
(5)  Promote economic vitality in the downtown. 
(6)  Enhance overall property values and the visual environment in the city by discouraging signs which contribute to the visual clutter of the streetscape. 
(7)  Ensure that commercial signs are designed for the purpose of identifying a business in an attractive and functional manner, rather than to serve primarily as general advertising for business. 
(8)  Ensure signs on the facade of a building reinforce the existing character and are integrated into the architectural scheme of the building. 
(9)  Promote a quality visual environment by allowing signs that are compatible with their surroundings and which effectively communicate their message. 
Permitted Signs. The following sign types are permitted in the Downtown Millen Development Area. 
(1)  Awning and canopy signs. 
(2)  Projecting signs. 
(3)  Hanging signs. 
(4)  Plaque signs. 
(5)  Restaurant menu signs. 
(6)  Low profile and monument signs. 
(7)  Tenant directory signs. 
(8)  Temporary signs. 
(9)  Street light mounted flags/banner. 
Sign Overview. 
(1)  All signs should be architecturally integrated with their surroundings in terms of size, shape and lighting so that they are complementary to the overall design of buildings. 
(2)  Signs should reflect the character of the building and its use. 
(3)  Signs should respect the immediate context of the building's location and the overall character of downtown. 
(4)  Signs should enhance the primary design elements or unique architectural features of buildings. 
(5)  Signs should be designed with the purpose of promoting retail and street activity while enhancing the pedestrian experience. 
(6)  The size of signs and its letters should be located in logical "sign areas" which relate to the patters of the facade. 
(7)  The number of signs per building facade should be limited to the fewest necessary to clearly identify businesses located within. 
(8)  Signs are not permitted to cover or obscure architectural features of a building. 
(9)  Consider the layout and shape of the architectural features of the building when determining the size and location of a sign. 
(10)  Design elements such as window patterns (vertical and horizontal rectangles, arches, squares, etc.) will help determine the sign shape that will suit the building. 
(11)  All signs are to be maintained properly such that they are always in clean, working donation and the copy is not obscured or damaged. 
(12)  New signs proposed for existing buildings shall provide a compatible appearance with the existing signage of other tenants. Signs should attempt to unify the business with its nearest neighboring tenants. 
Placement . 
(1)  The architecture of the building often identifies specific locations for signs, and these locations should be used. 
(2)  The size of signs shall be in proportion to the size of their location. 
(3)  Repetitious signage information on the same building frontage should be avoided regardless of the sign area square frontage allowed in the zoning code. 
(4)  To minimize irreversible damage to masonry, all mounting and supports should be inserted into mortar joints and not into the face of the masonry. This technique does not damage the surface and allows for easy removal. 
(5)  Signs that are replaced on stucco exteriors can result in unattractive "patched" areas. These potential maintenance problems shall be addressed during the approval process for the sign replacement. 
Multi-Storied Buildings. 
(1)  Ground floor tenants should place signs at the storefront level. 
(2)  Window signs are permitted on upper portions (see guidelines for qualifying signs) 
(3)  Signs on the upper facade of multi-storied buildings may be permitted for ground floor tenants. 
(4)  Upper story tenant signs shall use window signs not exceeding 15% of the window area. 
(5)  Window signs for upper story tenants are permitted if the tenants has an entrance at the sidewalk and a directory sign is located at the ground floor. 
Design & Materials. 
(1)  Exterior materials, finished, and colors should be the same or similar to those of the building or structures on site. 
(2)  Signs should be professionally constructed using high-quality materials such as metal, stone, hardwood, brass-plated, and exposed neon. 
(3)  Internally lit plastic letters or plastic box signs are discouraged. 
(4)  The colors and lettering styles should complement the building facade and harmonize with neighboring businesses. 
(5)  Excessively bright colors or over-scaled letters shall not be used as a means to attract attention. 
(6)  Exposed neon tubing may be used in conjunction with other types of materials to artistically emphasize the business name and/or logo and/or the architectural elements of the building. 
(7)  The design and alignments of signs of multiple use buildings should complement each other such that a unified appearance is achieved. 
(8)  Signs should respect the zoning district's dominant characteristics. 
Sign Lighting. 
(1)  Arrange any external spot or flood lighting such that the light source is directed away from passersby. The light source must be directed against the sign such that it does to shine into adjacent property or cause glare for motorists and pedestrians. 
(2)  Back-lit, hallo-lit illumination, or reverse channel letters with halo-illumination are highly encouraged for lighting purposes. Such signs convey a subtle and attractive appearance and are very legible under moderate ambient lighting conditions. 
(3)  Signs that use blinking or flashing lights are not permitted. 
(4)  Visible raceways and transformers for individual letters are prohibited. Sign installations details shall indicate the location of the transformer and other mechanical equipment. 
(5)  Projecting light fixtures used for externally illuminated signs should be simple and unobtrusive in appearance. They should not obscure the graphics of the sign. 
Wall Signs. Are to be mounted flush and fixed securely to a building wall, projecting no more than 12 inches from the face of a building wall, and not extending sideways beyond the building face or above the highest line of the building to which it is attached. 
(1)  Wall signs should be located on the upper portion of the storefront, within or just above the enframed storefront opening. The length of the sign should not exceed the width of the enframed storefront. 
(2)  Wall signs shall be placed within a clear signable area. Signable areas defined as an architecturally continuous wall surface uninterrupted by doors, window, or architectural detail. 
(3)  Wall signs shall not exceed 25% of the building facade (the exterior walls of the building exposed to the public view). 
(4)  Wall signs shall be mounted in locations that respect the design of a building, including the arrangement of bays and openings. 
(5)  Signs should not obscure windows, grillwork, piers, pilasters, and ornamental features. Typically wall signs should be centered on horizontal surfaces (i.e. over a storefront opening). 
(6)  Wall signs shall be designed to be compatible with the storefront in scale, proportions, and color. 
(7)  Signs should be designed to create a clearly defined edge, provide shadow relief, and a substantial appearance. This effect is generally difficult to achieve by painting the sign directly on the building. For this reason, painted signs are discouraged. 
Awnings and Canopy Signs. Are signs that are printed on, painted on, or attached to an awning or canopy above a business floor or window. They generally serve to bring color to the shopping environment and are oriented toward pedestrians from the opposite side of the street. 
(1)  Sign lettering and/or logo shall comprise no more than 30% of the total exterior surface of an awning or canopy. 
(2)  Awnings and canopies must be permanently attached to buildings. 
(3)  The minimum height of awnings shall be eight feet from the lowest point to the sidewalk. 
(4)  Open-ended awnings are preferred. 
(5)  Awnings and canopies shall be mounted in the horizontal framing element separating the storefront window from the transom (a crosspiece separating a doorway from a window). 
(6)  Awnings shall be mounted on the wood or metal framing within a door or window opening, not on the wall surrounding the opening. 
(7)  Awnings with back-lit graphics or other kinds of interior illumination are not permitted. 
(8)  Matte finish canvas, glass, or metal are appropriate materials for awning or canopies. 
(9)  Awnings with solid colors are preferred. Striped awnings may be appropriate for some buildings without ornamental facades. Striped awnings with highly contrasting bright colors may be visually blaring and inappropriate. 
Projecting Signs. Are affixed to the face of a building or structure and project in a perpendicular manner more than 12 inches from the wall surface of that portion of the building or structure to which it is mounted. Projecting signs are strongly encouraged and should be carefully designed to reflect the character of each building and business as well as fitting comfortably with other adjacent signage. 
(1)  Projecting signs should not be mounted above the second floor window-sill in multi-storied buildings. 
(2)  The design of the sign should consider visually interesting elements such as square or rectangular shapes with painted or applied letter, two or three dimensional symbols or icons, irregular outlines, and/or internal cut-outs. 
(3)  Projecting signs shall be small in scale and provide a vertical clearance of eight feet along pedestrian areas. 
(4)  Projecting signs shall be oriented to pedestrians passing on the sidewalk in front of the buildings rather than to automobiles or pedestrians on the far side of the street. This can be achieved by providing a minimum clearance of 12 inches between the building ace and sign and maintaining a projection of 36 inches. 
(5)  Projecting signs should fit within an imaginary rectangle with a maximum area of five square feet. 
(6)  Mounting hardware should be an attractive and integral part of the sign design. Simple round pipe brackets with plugged ends or added decorative end elements are generally appropriate for signs. However, metal brackets of a more decorative and complex shape are encouraged where appropriate to add to the character of the building. 
Marquee Signs. 
(1)  Marque signs are projecting signs attached to or supported by a permanent canopy often made of metal or glass. Marquee signs are to be installed only on buildings occupied by theaters, cinemas, performing arts facilities, or parking structures. 
(2)  The sign copy of marquee signs shall be limited to include only the facility's name, and changeable copy related to current and future attractions. 
(3)  The facility name portion of the sign shall not exceed 40% of the total sign area and the changeable copy portions of the sign shall not exceed 80% of the total sign area. 
Hanging Signs. Are similar to projecting signs except that they are suspended below a marquee or under a canopy. Hanging signs are generally smaller than projecting signs due to their lower mounting height. 
(1)  Hanging signs shall be used only at ground floor locations except for upper floor businesses with covered entry porches and balconies. 
(2)  Hanging signs shall be treated similar to but smaller than projecting signs. 
(3)  Hanging signs, excluding supporting rods, chains or similar hangers, shall fit within an imaginary rectangle with a maximum area of four square feet. 
(4)  Signs shall be oriented toward the pedestrian and impart a sense of creativity in its design. 
Window Signs. Are signs that are painted, posted, displayed or etched on an interior translucent or transparent surface, including windows or doors. This type of signage generally contains only text but in some circumstances can express a special business personality through graphic logos or images combined with color. 
(1)  Window signs shall not exceed 15% of the window area so that visibility in and out of the window is not obscured. 
(2)  Sign copy shall not exceed eight inches in height. 
(3)  Window sign copy shall be applied directly to glazed area. 
(4)  Window signs should be created from high-quality materials such as paint, gold-leaf, or neon. Appropriate techniques for window signs include sandblasting or etched glass. 
(5)  Window signs should be applied directly to the interior face of the glazing or hung inside the window thereby concealing all mounting hardware and equipment. 
(6)  Well-designed window graphics shall be used in the construction of the sign to attract attention but still allow pedestrians to view store interiors. 
Plaque Signs. Are small versions of wall signs that are attached to surfaces adjacent to shop front entries. 
(1)  Plaque signs are to be located only on wall surfaces adjacent to tenant entries. 
(2)  Plaque signs are to fit within an imaginary rectangle with a maximum area of two square feet. 
(3)  Limit plaque sign projections from wall surfaces to a maximum of two inches. 
(4)  Signs are to include the business name and a business logo. 
(5)  Plaque signs are encouraged to include unique designs or other visually stimulating decorations and may be irregular in outline and shape. 
Restaurant Menu Signs. Are signs that incorporate a menu containing a listing of products and prices offered by the business. Such signs facilitate the customer in locating a restaurant in which to patronize. Therefore, prominently displayed menus with prices and other important information can help the customer in making this decision. 
(1)  Restaurant menu signs should be located in a permanently mounted display case on the surface of the building adjacent to the entry. Taping a menu to a box is not an appropriate menu sign. 
(2)  For special circumstances in which restaurants occupy a considerable amount window space, menus are to be decoratively displayed in the window adjacent to the entry. 
(3)  High quality materials and artistic designs shall be used in the construction of menu signs. 
(4)  Restaurant menu signs are not included in the calculation of maximum sign area. 
(5)  The allowable are for restaurant menu signs shall be a maximum of four square feet. 
(6)  Restaurant menu signs shall be appropriate in size, location, and design to the character and architectural detail of the building as well as to the character of the restaurant. 
Low Profile or Monument Signs. Are free-standing signs with a lower height configuration. Such signs are usually used for building complexes that are separated from adjacent streets by substantial setbacks. 
(1)  Low profile or monument signs do not overhand public property and are supported by two columns, uprights, or have a solid footing in or upon the ground. 
(2)  Low profile signs should be constructed out of materials that complement the building structure and its use. 
(3)  Architectural lines which compliment that of the building shall be incorporated, especially with respect to the top of the sign. 
(4)  The design of the sign structure and the text should express high quality construction. 
(5)  Low profile or monument signs shall be composed of individual lettering that is consistent with the image of the business and the surrounding architectural style. 
(6)  Letter heights should not exceed 12 inches. 
(7)  Low profile signs must be illuminated wither by external fixtures designed to complement the appearance of the sign or halo-lit illumination. 
(8)  Internal illumination may be permitted and shall be designed such that only text and logos illuminate. Opaque backgrounds are required and shall of a non-reflective material. 
(9)  The maximum sign height, including the sign base is not to exceed six feet in the downtown development area. 
(10)  Low profile or monument signs should only be used when all other alternative types of signage would not provide adequate identification. 
Tenant Directory Signs. Are used to identify multi-tenant buildings and businesses that do not have direct frontage on a public street. Tenant directory shall be constructed and oriented to the pedestrian. 
(1)  Tenant directory signs shall be mounted flat against a solid wall or incorporated into a freestanding sign located on the property on which the tenants are located. 
(2)  The maximum sign height, including the sign base, is not to exceed six feet in the downtown development area. 
(3)  The sign copy may include the following: building or project name, project logo, address, business tenant names, and suites numbers or letters. 
(4)  The letter size of the building name, project name, or logo shall not exceed four inches in height. All other copy shall not exceed two inches in height. 
(5)  Tenant directory signs should be constructed out of materials that compliment both the building structure and its use. 
Temporary Signs. Can take the form of banners, window graphics, or as cards integrated with a window display. Temporary signs may contain written messages and should use a simple font that is easy to read. 
(1)  Temporary signs shall not cover more than 10% of the total window and door sign area visible from the exterior. 
(2)  Temporary signs are to be allowed on the exterior of the business establishment only. 
(3)  Temporary signs are permitted to contain no more than five square feet of text and should not exceed ten square feet in size. 
(4)  Temporary signs should be made of durable materials and shall not incorporate fluorescent or intensely bright colors. 
(5)  Temporary signs are to be displayed for no more than 30 days in a calendar year. 
SECTION 9. - NONCONFORMANCES 

9-1. - Nonconforming Lots. 
Any lot for which a plat or legal description has been recorded in the Office of Superior Court of Jenkins County at the time of passage of this ordinance which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may, if vacant, be used for any of the uses permitted within the district by this ordinance or, if occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged, or extended; provided that in either case: 
(1)  Minimum requirements of the district for front, side, and rear yard setbacks, height, and floor area shall be complied with. 
(2)  The lot may be used for duplexes or multi-family dwellings when allowed within the district only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district. 
(3)  The requirements of Section 3-22 are met. 
9-2. - Nonconforming Open Uses of Land. 
Nonconforming uses consisting of lots used for storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junk yards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf and similar open uses where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the open use of the lot and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter under this ordinance in the district in which it is located, shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to the other requirements in this ordinance: 
(1)  When a nonconforming open use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use. 
(2)  A nonconforming open use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming. 
(3)  When any nonconforming open use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
9-3. - Nonconforming Use of Structures. 
Nonconforming uses consisting of structures used, at the time of passage of this ordinance, for purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located shall in addition to the other requirements of this ordinance be governed by the following restrictions: 
(1)  Any existing nonconforming use of a structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use that generates more automobile or truck traffic, creates more noise, vibration, smoke, dust or fumes, is a more intensive use of structures than the existing nonconforming use, and is in any way a greater nuisance to the adjoining properties than the existing nonconforming use. 
(2)  A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure which at the time the use became nonconforming were already erected and arranged or designed for such nonconforming use. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area, or volume of space occupied by the use, except that the mayor/council may, after a public hearing and review of the proposed plan, grant approval if it is determined that said use will not be detrimental to the neighboring properties and is non-contrary to the intent of this ordinance. 
(3)  When any nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of one year, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
9-4. - Nonconforming Signs. 
(Refer to Section 8) 
9-5. - Reconstruction of Nonconforming Structures. 
When a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use or nonconforming sign is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, or act of God, such structure or sign may be reconstructed as a nonconforming use only if the damage totals less than 50% of the assessed tax value of the structure. Structures which do not conform to the yard requirements of this ordinance shall also be governed by this provision. 
9-6. - Changes in Zoning. 
Any nonconformances created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance regulations after the date of passage of this ordinance shall also be governed by the provisions of this section. 
SECTION 10. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES 

10-1. - Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
The building official is hereby appointed as the zoning administrator and it shall be his/her duty to administer and to enforce this ordinance. The zoning administrator is authorized to issue building permits, construction permits, certificates of occupancy and any duly authorized legal document or order that affects the use or development of property within the jurisdictional or administrative boundaries of the City of Millen. He is also authorized to issue citations answerable to the Municipal Court of the City of Millen when he detects a violation of the ordinance. He is also authorized to issue subpoenas and take out warrants answerable to the Municipal Court of the City of Millen. 
10-2. - Building Permit Required. 
A building permit, or a sign permit in case of a sign, issued by the zoning administrator, is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving, or alteration of any building or structure, including manufactured housing, or sign. No building permit or sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance; however, a building permit issued before the adoption of this ordinance shall remain valid with the same qualifications as issued under this ordinance. 
10-3. - Application for Building / Development Permit. 
All applications for building/development permits, shall be accompanied by two site plans drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the lot, the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, the setback lines of the building on the "permit lot", the various easements on the lot and such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. Applications shall also include construction documents (building plans) along with any other documentation required by the building/zoning administrator. The following is required on the site plan before the site plan is considered by the zoning administrator and any permits are approved (single-family residential, duplexes and agricultural buildings, and their accessory uses are excluded from the following items except number 3 below): 
1.  Topography (MSL) existing and proposed; 
2.  Drainage plans; 
3.  Location and size of ingress/egress; 
4.  Water and sewer mains and services, both existing and proposed; 
5.  Water services as well as fire hydrants in the lot and the specific meter size and location. 
Any building/development permit shall become void if the work involved has not begun within six months after the date of issuance of the permit or if the work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the work or development is commenced; provided that extensions of time and periods not exceeding six months each may be allowed in writing by the zoning administrator. Any unapproved deviation from the site plan shall cause the zoning administrator to not issue a certificate of occupancy. 
Toilet facilities shall be provided for construction workers, and such facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition, that conforms to ANSI Z43. 
Building sites and/or work sites must have a dumpster on site (either city furnished, at owner's expense, or by private company), and the site must be maintained in a clean manner. 
The applicant for a building permit shall submit a certificate with his application which certifies that the lot which he proposes to develop is a lot of record. When the lot in question does not meet the lot width and lot area requirements of this ordinance, then the applicant shall certify that such lot was a lot of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance or is a lot which has been created through governmental taking of property. In such case, the applicant shall file a copy of the recorded deed showing the date that the property was transferred and the deed recorded, or, in the case of condemnation, the easement or order of taking and survey showing the date and scope of the taking. All applications for a building/development permit shall be closely coordinated with City of Millen's Soil and Sedimentation and Erosion Control Ordinance. 
10-4. - Sign Permits. 
The zoning administrator shall receive applications for the construction of signs, as required by this ordinance. Such applications shall follow the same forms as required for building permits, and shall contain information required by this ordinance in section 8. The zoning administrator shall process such sign applications and shall issue sign permits and sign permit numbers for proposed signs which comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
10-5. - Penalties for Violation. 
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, demolished, altered, repaired, moved, converted, or maintained in violation of this ordinance, the offender shall be guilty upon conviction and shall be punished as provided in section 6-103 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Millen for each separate offense. 
10-6. - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the zoning administrator or any other appropriate authority, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the violation in the case of such building, structure, or land. 
10-7. - Stop Work Order. 
A demolition, building, or sign permit shall be stopped by the zoning administrator when the method of demolition, construction, or use violates any provision contained in these regulations, or any state or local ordinance or resolution. Upon such work stoppage, any further work upon the demolition, construction, alteration, or repair on said building or structure, and any further use of said building or structure or land, shall be deemed a violation. Each and every day such unlawful demolition, construction, alteration, or repair on said building or structure, or further use of said building or structure or land continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
10-8. - Certificate of Occupancy. 
Certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the zoning administrator in accordance with the following provisions: 
10-8.1.  Certificate of Occupancy Required. A certificate of occupancy issued by the zoning administrator is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
(1)  A building hereafter erected. 
(2)  A building hereafter altered so as to affect height, the side, front or rear yard. 
(3)  Any building or premises where a change in the type of occupancy or use will occur. 
10-8.2.  Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. Upon payment of any required fees, and completion of the application for certificate of occupancy, the zoning administrator shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or building as stated on the certificate of occupancy is signed thereto by the owner or his/her appointed agent and is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance and if the building and site plan, as finally constructed complies with the plans submitted and approved for the building permit. One copy of the certificate of occupancy issued which contains a statement for the intended use of the applicable property, floor loads, and other pertinent information, signed by the occupant or his/her agent shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator; a second copy shall be posted in a conspicuous public place on the premises. 
10-8.3.  Denial of Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance, and the structure conforms with the applicable provisions of the building code and complies with the sketches or plans submitted for obtaining the building permit. 
10-9. - House Numbering. 
It shall be duty of the building officials to assign a proper street number (an interim number system if applicable) at the time of the building permit issuance and/or to each house or building within the city and said number shall be posted prior to a residential acceptance or issuance of certificate of occupancy. A temporary building number for construction purposes shall be installed in a conspicuous place; where apartments or multi-units are involved, those numbers shall also be posted. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this code for any property owner, after being notified of such number assigned to his/her property by the building officials pursuant to this chapter, to have posted or displayed upon his/her property a number different from the number so assigned said property. If numbers are placed on the residential structure, they must be four inches in size or if on a mailbox, they must be three inches in size, and both must be reflective. 
10-10. - Coordination with Development of Regional Impact Requirements. 
The Georgia Department of Community Affairs, pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act, has established criteria for the identification of certain large-scale developments, which have the potential to cause land use impacts beyond the boundaries of the respective local government where a project might be proposed. These developments known as Developments of Regional Impact (DRIs) shall be submitted, based on established DCA standards, procedures, and format, to the CSRA Regional Commission for review and recommendation prior to issuance of any local building or development permit, utility tap, or rezoning, whichever occurs first. As such, these requirements establish an official delay in the local permitting and/or review process to allow for compliance with these requirements. 
SECTION 11. - APPEALS 

11-1. - Who May Appeal. 
Appeals to the mayor/council may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, mayor/council, or bureau of the governing authority affected by any decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeals shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of notification of the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator and with the mayor/council a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the mayor/council all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
11-2. - Legal Proceedings Stayed. 
An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator certifies to the mayor/council after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by restraining order which may be granted by the mayor/council or by a court of record on application, on notice to the zoning administrator, and on due cause shown. 
11-3. - Presentation of Evidence. 
The appellant, and any public agency or private individual shall be entitled to present evidence on matters before the mayor/council and said mayor/council may request technical service, advice, data or factual evidence from the planning commission and the governing authority for assistance in reaching decisions. 
11-4. - Extent of Mayor/Council's Power. 
The mayor/council may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator. The mayor/council may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to carry out the decisions of the mayor/council. 
11-5. - Public Hearing. 
11-5.1.  Notice of Hearing Shall Be Given. Before making its decision on any appeal, request for a variance, or any other matter within the mayor/council's purview, said council shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published for two consecutive issues of official legal organ of City of Millen, notice of such meeting shall be sent by zoning administrator. At least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such meeting shall be sent to the appellant or petitioner by US Mail to his/her last known address, and to the owners of all properties either adjoining the property with which the hearing is concerned or situated directly across a public right-of-way from said property. Such notice shall contain the name of the appellant or petitioner, the date, time, and place set for the hearing, and a brief statement of the nature of the hearing. In addition, the zoning administrator shall erect a sign on the subject property. Such sign shall be erected within ten feet of whatever boundary lines of such land abuts the most traveled road; and if no public road abuts thereon, then such sign shall be erected to face in such a manner as may be most readily seen by the public. The sign shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Application number; 
(2)  Nature of request; 
(3)  Time, place and date of hearing. 
11-5.2.  Who May Appear. Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or attorney. 
11-5.3.  Time Limit on Mayor/Council's Decision. The mayor/council shall reach a decision following a public hearing within 30 days. 
11-6. - Powers and Duties. 
11-6.1.  Appeals from Actions of the Zoning Administrator. The mayor/council shall hear and decide upon appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement of these regulations. 
11-6.2.  Request for a Variance. The mayor/council may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; provided, however, that a variance shall not be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance in the district in question. Such variance may be granted in an individual case upon a finding by the council that the following exists: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography and, 
(2)  The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; and 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of these regulations, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance; and 
(5)  A literal interpretation of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of any rights that others in the same district are allowed; and 
(6)  Provided that the mayor/council may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood; and provided, that wherever the mayor/council shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations that any of the terms, conditions, or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said council shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing. 
11-6.3.  Continuance of Nonconforming Use. The mayor/council may allow a nonconforming use to be reestablished after discontinuance for 12 consecutive months where it is deemed by the mayor/council that: 
(1)  The design, construction, and character of the building is not suitable for uses permitted in a district in which nonconforming use is situated; and 
(2)  Undue hardships to the property owner would result in not allowing the building to be reopened for a nonconforming use; and 
(3)  Adjacent property would not be unduly damaged by such use of the building; and 
(4)  The use is to be identical to the prior nonconforming use of the building. 
11-7. - Forms. 
Appeals shall be made on forms provided by the zoning administrator, and all information required on said forms shall be provided by the appellant. Forms shall be filed with the mayor/council, and the appellant shall pay the mayor/council for expenses incidental to the appeal. No form shall be accepted by the mayor/council unless it contains all pertinent information and accompanied by a fee necessary to defray expenses. The fee covers all advertising and administrative costs. 
SECTION 12. - ZONING AND TEXT AMENDMENTS 

12-1. - General Conditions. 
These regulations, including the zoning map may be amended by the Millen mayor/council (1) on its own motion, (2) on petition, (3) or on recommendation of the planning commission but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. Before creating an amendment to these regulations, the governing authority shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon as set forth in this section. 
12-2. - Application for Amendment. 
12-2.1.  General. Applications for amendment of this ordinance may be made in the form of proposals for amendments of the text of this ordinance or proposals for amendment of the zoning map. Applications for amendment shall be on forms provided by the zoning administrator, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and shall include a fee set by the zoning administrator payable to the city, to defray expenses. A pre-application meeting shall be held with development review staff prior to submittal of the application and these must be scheduled at least four working days in advance. Applications shall be submitted by the 15 th day of each month, as an established submittal deadline, in order for the application to be reviewed by the planning commission the following month, and advertised and then considered at a public hearing during a subsequent month. Only complete applications will be accepted by the established submittal deadline. No application for a zoning change affecting the same parcel of property or part thereof shall be accepted by the zoning administrator until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning request by the Millen mayor/council. 
12-2.2.  Signature of Applicant Required. All applications shall be signed by the applicant or authorized agent, and shall state his/her name and address. 
12-2.3.  Application for Text Amendment. In the case of a text amendment, the application shall set forth the new text to be added and the existing text to be deleted. 
12-2.4.  Application for Map Amendment. Applications shall include but not be limited to the following and is the responsibility of the applicant to supply: 
(1)  A legal survey plat of the lot in question, with the following data listed: 
a.  Scale of drawing should be 1" = 100' or other more appropriate scale. 
b.  Include a location map on drawing showing landmarks. 
c.  Indicate present zoning of all contiguous property. 
d.  All utility and other easements. 
e.  Depict base flood lines or note that property is not within a flood zone. 
f.  Include north arrow and a graphic scale. 
g.  The distance to the nearest fire hydrant. 
h.  The location and size of existing water and sewer facilities. 
i.  Existing and proposed zoning. 
(2)  A conceptual site plan with the following information: 
a.  All existing and proposed site improvements, including all buildings with usages, roadways with names, and all other site improvements relative to the development, whether required or not. 
b.  Name of the applicant. 
c.  The date of the drawing and revision dates as applicable. 
d.  Existing and proposed natural features, including streams and other water resources. 
e.  Any additional information as necessary to allow an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
(3)  A legal description by metes and bounds of the area proposed for rezoning. 
(4)  The area in which the lot proposed to be reclassified is located, the street address, the tax map/parcel number(s), and the location with respect to the nearby public streets; and 
(5)  The name and address of the owners of the land; and 
(6)  The area of land proposed to be reclassified, stated in square feet of less than one acre, and in acres if one acre or more; and 
(7)  The application file number, date of application, and action taken on all prior applications filed for the reclassification of the whole or part of the land proposed to be reclassified; 
(8)  A list of all current owners of record for properties located immediately adjacent to or directly across a public street or railroad right-of-way from the subject property. The list shall include the current names, mailing addresses, and tax map parcel numbers as reflected on the current tax roll of Jenkins County. 
(9)  Letter of intent which states the nature of the request and the reasons thereof. 
(10)  Letter of authorization if the applicant is not the current owner or is one of multiple owners. This shall be notarized and signed by the owner(s) authorizing the applicant to submit and be responsible for the application. 
12-2.5.  Application for Special Exception Approval. An application for a special exception approval shall include the following: 
(1)  The community or area in which is located the land proposed to be reclassified and the street number, if any, or if none, the location with respect to the nearby public roads in common use; 
(2)  A plat of the land in question, and a description by metes and bounds, bearings, and distances of the land, or if the boundaries conform to the lot boundaries within a subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the land records of the County; then the lot, block, and subdivision designations with appropriate plat reference; or the map and parcel number according to the current tax mapping system of Jenkins County; 
(3)  The present zoning classification and the proposed special exception usage proposed for the subject property; 
(4)  The names and address of the owners of the land, and the names and addresses of abutting property owners; 
(5)  The area of the land proposed to be reclassified stated in square feet if less than one acre, and in acres if one or more; 
(6)  The application number, date of application, and action taken on all prior applications filed for the rezoning or special exception use of the whole or part of the land proposed for special exception use. 
12-2.6.  Referral to Planning Commission. By the 10 th working day of each month, the zoning administrator shall transmit a copy of the completed application and accompanying materials to the planning commission staff, and other applicable local staff members, for review and recommendation. The planning commission staff shall then coordinate the review among applicable staff, and prepare a cumulative report and recommendation to the planning commission members. The planning commission shall review each application request and shall make a recommendation to mayor/council for either approval or denial. 
12-2.7.  Notice of Public Hearing. 
(1)  Posting of Property. Not less than 15 days prior to the date set for the public hearing on the application for a map amendment, and pursuant to Chapter 66 O.C.G.A., the zoning administrator shall erect at least one notification sign on the land proposed to be reclassified showing the application file number, the present zoning classification, the scheduled date, time and place of the public hearing, and the telephone number to call for more information. Said sign(s) shall be located within 10 feet of whatever boundary line of such land that abuts the street of the advertised address and readily visible to the public. The sign shall remain on the property in the proper location until the public hearing has been held and the governing body has either approved or denied the application. If the land sought to be reclassified lies within more than one block as shown on a plat recorded in the land records of Jenkins County, then a sign shall be erected on the land in each such block. In the case of two intersecting street frontages (corner lot), a single sign may be placed at or near the corner of the intersection at the zoning administrator's discretion. In the case of two or more non-intersecting street frontages, a notification sign shall be placed along each non-intersecting street frontage. 
(2)  Notification of Adjacent Property Owners. In the case of a map amendment, the zoning administrator shall prepare a "notice of public hearing" letter and send a copy by certified mail to each adjacent property owner as described above. The notice shall include the application file number, a map depicting the location of the subject property, the present zoning classification, the proposed zoning classification, the scheduled date, time, and place of public hearing, and the telephone number to call for further information. These notices shall be postmarked not less than 15 days prior to the scheduled date of public hearing. The application shall include an additional fee to defray the expense of preparing and mailing these notices. The accuracy and completeness of the list of property owners shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(3)  Newspaper Advertisement. Not less than 15 days prior to the scheduled date of public hearing, and pursuant to Chapter 66 O.C.G.A., a notice of public hearing shall be published for at least two consecutive issues in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Millen. Such notice shall state the application file number; and shall contain a summary of the proposed amendment in the case of a text amendment; and the location of the property, its area, owner, or tax assessors map and parcel numbers, the current zoning classification; and the proposed classification in the case of a map amendment. 
12-2.8.  Public Hearing Process. 
(1)  Notice to Interested Parties. A notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be given by the zoning administrator to the applicant and the planning commission. All application files shall be placed in the custody of the zoning administrator, and shall be open to public inspection during regular office hours 
(2)  Hearing Procedure. All public hearings on zoning matters shall be placed on the mayor/council agenda under a section entitled "Public Hearings". After an initial staff presentation of a specific zoning and/or annexation/zoning request by the mayor/council or their designated staff, citizens' comments will be heard in an orderly fashion. The mayor, mayor pro-tem or designated council member will ask for those citizens speaking against the request first, followed by those in favor of the issue. All speakers will be asked to provide his or her name and address for the public record. Citizens are requested to keep their comments as brief as possible so that all who wish to be heard will have adequate time. When there are a large number of citizens wishing to testify at a given hearing, the presiding officer may invoke time limitations on speakers. In such cases, these time limits shall apply to both sides of the issue equally, and shall be a minimum of ten minutes per side. Citizens may address their comments to the mayor/council as a whole. Individual attacks or cross examination of council members, city employees, or other citizens will be ruled out of order. After all citizen comments have been received, all further discussion of the specific application is reserved for the mayor/council. The council retains the privilege to ask any questions of staff or any citizen present for clarification. The mayor/council will then vote on the application. 
When in the opinion of the mayor/council, the official public hearing has brought forth substantial new evidence not available to the planning commission at the time of their hearing, or should the mayor/council desire to request further study by the planning commission of a particular aspect of an application request, it is the policy of the mayor/council to table the matter and request the planning commission to restudy the request and affirm or amend its recommendation, which action shall be reported to the mayor/council prior to making a final decision. 
12-2.9.  Standards for Exercise of Zoning Powers. In order to promote the public health, safety, morality and general welfare of the City of Millen against the unrestricted use of property, the recommendation of the planning commission, the following standards, and any other factors relevant to balancing the above stated public interest, will be considered by the mayor/council in making any zoning decision: 
(1)  The existing land use pattern; 
(2)  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
(3)  The existing population density pattern and the possible increase of the load on public facilities; 
(4)  Whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed amendment reasonable; 
(5)  Whether the proposed change will adversely influence existing conditions in the neighborhood or the community at large; 
(6)  Potential impacts on the environment, including but not limited to drainage, wetlands, groundwater recharge areas, endangered wildlife habitats, soil erosion and sedimentation, floodplains, air quality, and water quality and quantity; 
(7)  The costs required of the public in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and public safety necessities when considering the proposed change; 
(8)  Whether the proposed change will be a deterrent to the value or improvement of development of adjacent or nearby property in accordance with existing regulations; 
(9)  Whether the proposed change is out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or the City of Millen; 
(10)  Whether the proposed change will constitute a grant of special privilege to the individual owner as contrasted with the adjacent or nearby neighborhood or with the general public; and 
(11)  The extent to which the zoning decision is consistent with the adopted local comprehensive plan as determined by the planning commission. 
12-2.10.  Standards for Special Exception Review. In addition to the standards enumerated in subsection (e) above, the following additional standards shall be considered for special exception requests: 
(1)  Is the type of street providing access to the use adequate to serve the proposed special exception use? 
(2)  Is access into and out of the property adequate to provide for traffic and pedestrian safety, the anticipated volume of traffic flow, and to allow access by emergency vehicles? 
(3)  Are public facilities such as schools, water, sewer or other public utilities and police and fire protection adequate to serve the proposed special exception use? 
(4)  Are refuse, service parking and loading areas on the property located or screened to protect other properties in the area from such adverse effects as noise, light, glare and other negative impacts? 
(5)  Will the hours and manner of operation of the special exception use have no adverse impacts on other properties in the area? 
(6)  Will the height, size or location of the buildings or other structures on the property be compatible with the height, size or location of buildings or other structures on neighboring properties? 
(7)  Provided that the mayor/council may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhoods. 
12-2.11.  Public Hearings Records Standards. The city/clerk shall mechanically record the proceedings of all zoning public hearings. If requested by any party, copies of mechanical or electronic recordings, not written verbatim transcripts, can be prepared, but only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party. The record of the public hearing and all evidence (e.g., maps, drawings, traffic studies, etc.) submitted at the public hearing shall be noted as such and shall become a permanent part of the particular zoning amendment's file. 
12-3. - Conditional Zoning. 
In certain cases where it is deemed that a proposed use is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood but the required zoning would allow uses that are too intensive to mix compatibly with the surrounding area, the mayor and council of the City of Millen may, upon recommendation by the planning staff and/or the planning commission, or on its own initiative, apply certain conditions to a rezoning request in order to allow the proposed use while preserving the purpose and intent of this ordinance. In such cases where conditional zoning is approved, the approval shall be noted as follows: R-1A(c), P-1(c), B-1(c), etc. Any uses would be subject to the conditions applied to the rezoning. 
12-4. - Administrative Map Corrections. 
In the event that an error is discovered with the official zoning map, the planning director, zoning administrator, or their representative, may correct the error administratively, provided that the error can be proven and documented. A file must be created including all evidence and documentation as well as a map depicting the zoning prior to and after the correction. Such error correction shall not be considered an amendment. 
SECTION 13. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

13-1. - Conflict with Other Laws. 
All previous zoning ordinances of the City of Millen are hereby repealed. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances not specifically in conflict herewith are hereby continued in force and effect, but all such ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require greater restrictions than those required by this ordinance, such ordinances or parts of ordinances shall govern. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require lesser restrictions, the requirements here within shall govern. 
13-2. - Separability. 
If any portion or provision of this ordinance is found unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect any other portion of this ordinance. 
13-3. - Effective Date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be enforced from and after its adoption and passage by the mayor and council. 
  
____________________________________ 
 Date of Adoption 
  

 Mayor, City of Millen, Jenkins County, Georgia 
  
;sigl;  ____________________________________ 
 Clerk, City of Millen, Jenkins County, Georgia 
  
(SEAL) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1992 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1992 Code, as updated through August 2, 2011, which are included herein. Sections of the 1992 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 