THE CODE OF GREENE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Board of County Commissioners 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of 
GREENE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Dene Channell 
Chairperson 
____________ 
Marion Rhodes 
W.L. "Bud" Sanders 
Gerald Torbert 
Titus Andrews, Sr. 
County Commission 
____________ 
Byron Lombard 
County Manager 
____________ 
Michael S. Green 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Sylvia Hill 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Greene County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1998 Code, as updated through November 17, 2009. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1998 Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Byron Lombard and the law firm of Runyan and Green, LLC, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Greene County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Greene County, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Greene County, Georgia. 2010. 
PART I - LOCAL CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS AND LOCAL ACTS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1925 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 197), p. 653, which created a board of commissioners for the county. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the title, enactment date, severability, repealer, transitional language, ratification date, publication date or effective date of the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The section number designations of the original act have been retained. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Board created.] 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues in and for Greene County, Georgia, is hereby created. Said board shall consist of five members who shall be [ ] qualified voters of said county and otherwise eligible to hold county office. 
(1961 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 66), p. 2223, § 1; 1964 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 583), p. 2170, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - [Election.] 
(a)  The chairman of the board of commissioners may reside anywhere within Greene County and shall be elected by the electors of the entire county. 
(b)  (1)  Those members of the Board of Commissioners of Greene County who are serving as such on December 31, 2001, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4, as they exist on December 31, 2001, shall continue to be designated as Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and on and after January 1, 2003, any members of the board serving from those former commissioner districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this section. 
(2)  For purposes of electing members of the board of commissioners, other than the chairperson, Greene County is divided into four commissioner districts. One member of the board shall be elected from each such district. The four commissioner districts shall be and correspond to those four numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan Name: greenework1 Plan Type: Local User: Angela Administrator: Greene. 
(3)  When used in such attachment, the terms 'Tract' and 'BG' (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a 'BG' heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Greene County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Greene County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any commissioner district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(c)  One member shall be elected to the board of commissioners from each district by the electors residing within the district. Each candidate seeking election from a district must reside within the district at the time the candidate qualifies to seek such position. Any member elected to the board from a district shall remain a resident of the district from which he or she was elected. If a member moves his or her residence outside the district from which he or she was elected or if the chairman moves his or her residence outside the county during his or her term of office, the position shall be declared vacant at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  (1)  The board members representing commissioner districts 1 and 3 on January 1, 1993, shall complete their terms of office which will expire December 31, 1994, and when their successors are elected and qualified. 
Their successors will be nominated in the primary election in 1994 and elected in the November general election in 1994, and take office on the first day of January in the year following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be elected quadrennially and take office on the first day of January in the year following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(2)  The chairperson and the members representing commissioner districts 2 and 4 on January 1, 1993, shall complete their terms of office which will expire December 31, 1996, and when their successors are elected and qualified. Their successors will be nominated in the primary election in 1996 and elected in the November general election in 1996, and take office on the first day of January in the year following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be elected quadrennially and take office on the first day of January in the year following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(e)  All elections shall be governed by the general laws of this state and the majority vote requirements of Code Section 21-5-201 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall apply to all elections under this section. 
(f)  Vacancies in the office of chairman of the board or in the office of any member of the board shall be filled as provided in this subsection. 
(1)  If there are less than two years remaining in the term of the person whose position is vacant, the remaining members of the board shall appoint a duly qualified person to fill such vacancy within 60 days after the vacancy occurs and the person so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. 
(2)  If there are two or more years remaining in the term of the person whose position is vacant, the remaining members of the board shall appoint a duly qualified person to fill such vacancy within 60 days after the vacancy occurs, and the person so appointed shall serve until a person is elected as provided in subparagraph (A) or (B) of this paragraph to fill such position and such person assumes office. 
(A)  If such a vacancy occurs prior to the opening of qualifying for the regularly scheduled primary and general election next following the vacancy, a successor to such appointed member shall be nominated and elected at such primary and general election in the same manner as members are regularly nominated and elected. The person so elected to fill the vacancy shall take office immediately after certification of his or her election for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. 
(B)  If such a vacancy occurs after the opening of qualifying for the regularly scheduled primary and general election next following the vacancy, a successor to such appointed member shall be elected in a special election to be called and conducted by the [Board of Elections] of Greene County pursuant to the general laws of the State of Georgia. The cost of such special election shall be borne by Greene County. Any person elected in any such special election shall take office immediately after certification of his or her election for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. 
(3)  In any regular or special election to fill a vacancy in the office of chairman, the electors of the entire county may vote. In any regular or special election to fill a vacancy in the office of a member from a district, only the electors residing in such district may vote. 
(1961 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 66), p. 2224, § 2; 1964 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 66), p. 2174, § 2; 1986 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 808), p. 3684, § 2; 1993 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 42), p. 3812, §§ 1—2; 1995 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 219), p. 4325, § 1; 1998 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 932), p. 4524, § 1; 2001 Ex. Sess. Ga. Laws (HB 29 EX2), p. 698, § 1) 
Editor's note— The attachment referred to in subsection (b) of the above section was not included in the text of this recodification at the discretion of the editor. The attachment is identified as "Plan Name: greenework1 Plan Type: Local User: Angela Administrator: Greene," and describes the composition of the commission districts for Greene County. It may be found at 2001 Ga. Laws (HB 29EX2), p. 698, § 4. 
Sec. 3. - [Section repealed by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 808), p. 3684, § 3.] 
Sec. 3A. - [Section repealed by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 808), p. 3684, § 3.] 
Sec. 3B. - [Section repealed by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 808), p. 3684, § 3.] 
Sec. 3C. - [Chairperson.] 
(a)  A majority of the commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, the chairman shall be counted in determining a quorum. The chairman shall be entitled to vote in the same manner as other members of the board and a majority vote of the members present shall be required to approve any matter before the board, provided the members present constitute a quorum. 
(b)  The chairperson of the board of commissioners of Greene County shall not be required to devote full time to the duties of the office. The chairperson shall be the administrative and executive official of the board. All five members of the board, however, shall have an equal vote in all matters pertaining to the affairs of Greene County. The chairperson and the board of commissioners are authorized, in accordance with O.C.G.A. Sections 36-5-22 and [36-5-24], to delegate to a county manager administrative duties, powers, and responsibilities, including but not limited to those duties, powers, and responsibilities of the chairperson listed in subsection (c) of this section which are administrative in nature. 
(c)  (1)  The chairman shall carry out, execute, and enforce the ordinances, policies, rules, and regulations of the board when such ordinances, policies, rules, and regulations become effective. Other members of the board shall deal solely through the chairman in all matters concerning the operation, supervision, and administration of the various departments, offices, and agencies of the county government. No member of the board shall directly or indirectly order, instruct, or otherwise attempt to control the actions of county personnel subject to the administrative and supervisory control of the chairman. 
(2)  Subject to the approval of the board, the chairman shall have the power to change, consolidate, or abolish any departments, agencies, or offices over which the chairman exercises supervision and control. Subject to the approval of the board, the chairman may create other departments, agencies, and offices, which departments, agencies, and offices, when created, shall be under the supervision and control of the chairman. 
(3)  Subject to budgetary limitations and any Greene County merit system regulations, the chairman shall have exclusive authority to appoint, remove, and fix the compensation of all employees and officials of the county, except employees of the board, and except that deputies and employees of the elected county officers of Greene County shall be subject to appointment, removal, supervision, and control of the respective elective county officers. The appointment, removal, and compensation of persons filling offices and positions created by state statutes, when not otherwise prescribed by such statutes, shall be made and fixed by the chairman within budgetary limitations. 
(4)  The chairman may convene special meetings of the board when deemed necessary, but all members shall be notified at least 24 hours in advance of any such special meeting. 
(5)  The chairman shall have power to investigate the affairs, records, and expenditures of the various authorities, boards, councils, commissions, committees, and similar bodies or agencies, whether created by ordinance of the board or by Acts of the General Assembly, relating to the affairs of the county and to report thereon to the board. 
(6)  The chairman shall represent the county in inter-governmental matters and shall seek to promote and improve the government of the county and encourage the growth of the county and promote and develop the prosperity and well-being of the citizens of the county. 
(7)  The chairman, within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year, shall prepare and submit to the board a complete annual report on the financial affairs and activities of the county for the immediately preceding fiscal year. The annual report shall show all income from all sources, including state, county, and federal funds, and all expenditures. The chairman shall cause a summary of said annual report to be published in the official organ of Greene County. Said published summary shall state that a copy of the full report is available from the office of the chairman. The chairman shall also make financial reports during the year as may be required by the board. 
(8)  The chairman may recommend, at any time, to the board for its formal consideration such measures or proposals as are deemed necessary or desirable to improve the administration of the affairs of the county. 
(1961 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 66), p. 228, § 6; 1964 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 66), p. 2174, § 5; 1984 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1044), p. 4629, § 2; 1998 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 932), p. 4524, § 2) 
Sec. 3D. - [Section stricken in its entirety by 1998 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 932), p. 4524, § 3.] 
Sec. 4. - [Oath of office; bond.] 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That before entering upon their duties, each of said Commissioners shall take and subscribe to the following oath before the ordinary or acting ordinary of said county: 
I, ____________ , do solemnly swear or affirm that I consider myself reasonably competent to discharge the duties of Commissioner of Roads and Revenues in and for Greene County, and promise to faithfully discharge and perform such duties to the best of my liability and knowledge, having in mind the welfare of the entire county, and without fear, favor, or affection. 
Each Commissioner shall further give bond in a good and solvent surety company, approved by the ordinary of said county, in the sum of five thousand dollars, conditioned for the faithful performance of his duty as Commissioner, so long as he holds such office or discharges any of the duties thereof; which bond shall be recorded by said ordinary in the book kept by him for the record of bonds of county officers. The premiums of such bonds shall be paid by Greene County out of county funds. 
Sec. 5. - [Powers and duties.] 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That said Board of Commissioners shall have exclusive jurisdiction over all county affairs; and full and exclusive jurisdiction, power and authority in directing and controlling all the property of said county, in levying and collecting taxes, in providing for the revenues of said county and in collecting and disposing of the taxes and revenues. Said Board of Commissioners shall have exclusive control and jurisdiction over all roads, bridges and ferries of and in said county with the power to alter, establish, and abolish roads, ferries and bridges; to establish, abolish or change election precincts in militia districts in said county; to supervise the books and lists of the tax collector and tax receiver of said county; to examine and audit the accounts of all officers having the control, management, collecting or disbursing of money belonging to the county, and to bring such officers to account and settlement; to control and manage the convicts of said county; to regulate the management and control of the poor of said county; to regulate peddling; to name or elect all minor officials of said county not otherwise provided for by law, such as wardens, guards, district road overseers, etc., to name and pay a county attorney and county physician; to audit and settle all claims against said county. Said Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction over all subject matters enumerated in section 4796 Code of Georgia of 1910. Said Board shall be vested with all powers and duties conferred by the laws of this State upon ordinaries when sitting for county purposes, and all powers and authority heretofore possessed by other Boards of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues in and for said county; and such as are generally conferred upon county authorities; together with such other powers and rights and duties as are incident to or indispensable to the discharge of the duties above enumerated and indicated. 
[Text omitted as superseded by Georgia Constitution and general statutes.] 
Sec. 6. - [Court.] 
[Section omitted as superseded by subsequent state legislation] 
Sec. 7. - [Compensation.] 
[a.]  The compensation provided for the Chairman of the Greene County Board of Commissioners is set at $1,000.00 per month as a base pay rate, and each member of the Greene County Board of Commissioners is set at $700.00 per month as a base pay rate; and 
[b.]  The expense reimbursement provided for the Chairman of the Greene County Board of Commissioners is set at $400.00 per month, and each member of the Greene County Board of Commissioners is set at $400.00 per month; and 
[c.]  The expense reimbursement for the Chairman and members of the Greene County Board of Commissioners shall continue to be reimbursed in full for expenses incurred while performing official county-business that requires travel outside of Greene County; and 
[d.]  The Chairman and members of the Greene County Board of Commissioners shall continue to receive any existing compensation adjustments currently established pursuant to Georgia Law, or any such compensation adjustments that may be established by Georgia Law. 
(1958 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 43), p. 2205, § 1; 1961 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 66), p. 2229, § 8; 1968 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 846), p. 2615, § 1; 1984 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1044), p. 4631, § 3; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1120), p. 6329, § 1; 1995 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 141), p. 3957, § 1; 1998 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 932), p. 4524, § 4; Res. No. 2008.4.25(c), 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 8. - [Section repealed by 1998 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 932), p. 4524, § 5.] 
Sec. 9. - [Clerk.] 
Editor's note— The county clerk is hired by the county manager pursuant to the Greene County Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual. 
Sec. 10. - [Section repealed by 1998 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 932), p. 4524, § 6.] 
Sec. 11. - [Provisions held invalid not to affect remainder.] 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That should any provision of this Act for any reason prove invalid, such does not affect the portions of the Act which are not so proven. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX COMMISSIONER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1953 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 632), p. 2506 which created the position of tax commissioner for the county. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the title, enactment date, severability, repealer, transitional language, ratification date, publication date or effective date of the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The section number designations of the original act have been retained. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Consolidated position.] 
Effective January 1, 1957, the office of Tax Receiver and the office of Tax Collector of Greene County are hereby consolidated into the office of Tax Commissioner of Greene County. The rights, duties and liabilities of the said office of tax commissioner shall be the same as those imposed upon tax receivers and tax collectors by the laws of this State, so far as the same are applicable. 
Sec. 2. - [Election and term.] 
The first election for the office of tax commissioner, created herein, shall be held at the same time the election for other county officers is held in 1956 and the person so elected shall take office on January 1, 1957, for a term of four years. Likewise, all future elections for tax commissioner shall be held at the same time as other county officers are elected, and the tax commissioner shall likewise have a term of office of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified. Should any vacancy occur in the office of tax commissioner, the vacancy shall be filled as vacancies are now filled in the office of tax collector. Until January 1, 1957, the Tax Receiver and the Tax Collector of Greene County shall continue in office and perform all of their respective duties. 
Sec. 3. - [Outstanding taxes.] 
All taxes due and payable at the time the tax commissioner takes office, and all tax fi. fas. therefore issued by the Tax Collector of Greene County, shall have full force and effect and be collectible as issued. 
Sec. 4. - [Compensation.] 
The compensation of the tax commissioner of Greene County is placed on a salary basis only in lieu of a fee basis. Effective January 1, 1993, the tax commissioner shall not be entitled to receive the 10 percent commission provided in paragraph (1) of subsection (c) of Code Section 48-5-180 of the O.C.G.A. If the person who is serving as tax commissioner on January 1, 1993, is reelected as tax commissioner for the term beginning January 1, 1993, and ending December 31, 1996, then, effective January 1, 1993, such tax commissioner shall be compensated in the amount of $40,000.00 per annum which shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Greene County. Any person other than the person serving as tax commissioner on January 1, 1993, who is elected tax commissioner of Greene County for the term beginning January 1, 1993, and for all terms thereafter, shall be compensated in the amount of $25,000.00 per annum which shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Greene County plus any supplements, longevity bonuses, or state mandated cost-of-living adjustments allowed by law, except the 10 percent commission provided in paragraph (1) of subsection (c) of Code Section 48-5-180 of the O.C.G.A. Such compensation shall be in lieu of all fees, costs, percentages, fines, forfeitures, commissions, penalties, and other perquisites of whatever kind as are now or may hereafter be allowed by law to be received or collected by the tax commissioner, except that he shall continue to receive the fees allowed him for being tag agent in Greene County for the sale of motor vehicle license tags. All such fees, costs, percentages, fines, forfeitures, commissions, penalties, and other perquisites shall be received and collected by the tax commissioner for the sole use of Greene County and shall be the property of Greene County. Such funds shall be held as public funds belonging to Greene County and shall be accounted for and paid to the fiscal authority of Greene County on or before the last day of each month in which they are collected, accompanied by a statement, under oath, showing the collections and sources from which collected. The fiscal authority of Greene County shall not pay monthly compensation to the tax commissioner until such funds are received by said authority. 
(1961 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 55), p. 2180, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 824), p. 5610, § 1) 
Sec. 4A. - [Section stricken in its entirety by 1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 824), p. 4524, § 2.] 
Sec. 5. - [Office.] 
The tax commissioner shall be furnished an office in the Greene County courthouse and shall keep said office open for the transaction of business as other county officers do. The tax commissioner shall not be required to leave his office or make rounds for the purpose of receiving or collecting taxes. 
Sec. 6. - [Employees.] 
Editor's note— The county commission has established an annual budget to provide funds and salaries for the provision of the tax commissioner's office. 
Sec. 7. - [Commissioner ineligible.] 
The tax commissioner shall be ineligible to serve as a member of the board of tax assessors or as clerk of said board. 
Sec. 8. - [Oath, bond.] 
The tax commissioner, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath now prescribed by law for the tax collector and shall give bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which bond shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties and shall be made payable to the Ordinary of Greene County for the use of Greene County. 
Sec. 9. - [Death or resignation.] 
Any other provisions of this Act to the contrary notwithstanding, in the event the tax collector or the tax receiver shall die or resign, the office of tax commissioner shall be immediately created and the surviving one shall become the tax commissioner, and this Act shall become of full force and effect as of that date. 
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the local amendment to the 1945 state constitution which created the Development Authority for the county. Local amendments to the state constitution were repealed effective July 1, 1987, unless continued by local ordinance or act prior to such date. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ iv. The editor's note indicates the portion of the state constitution amended. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the title, enactment date, severability, repealer, transitional language, balloting procedures, ratification date, publication date or effective date of the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The section number designations of the original act have been retained. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Created; members; property; purpose; sales and leases.] 
Article V, Section IX, of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
"There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the `Greene County Development Authority' which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, its scope and jurisdiction to be limited to the territory embraced by Greene County. The County of Greene may contract with the Authority as a public corporation as provided by the Constitution of Georgia. 
The members of the Authority, their qualifications, terms, and method of election or appointment, shall be prescribed by law by the General Assembly. The Authority shall have such duties, power, and authority as shall be prescribed by law and the General Assembly may pass all other necessary legislation for the implementation of this amendment. 
All lands and improvements thereon, the title to which is vested in the Authority, and all debentures and revenue bonds issued by the Authority, and all income earned therefrom by the holders of said evidences of indebtedness shall be exempt from State and local taxation. 
The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the Authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations and the interest of the obligations of Greene County. 
Said Authority is created for the purpose of developing, promoting, and expanding for the public good and general welfare, industry, agriculture, commerce, natural resources, and vocational training and for the making of long-range plans for the coordination of such development, promotion and expansion, within its territorial limits. The Authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt as against the State of Georgia and the County of Greene. The Authority is created for non-profit purposes and all property acquired by the Authority and any funds realized by the Authority shall be used continually and exclusively for the purposes for which the Authority is created. 
No building or facility acquired hereunder shall be operated by the Authority but shall be leased or sold to one or more persons, firms or corporations. If sold the purchase price may be paid at one time or in installments falling due in not more than 30 years from the day of transfer of possession. The lessee or purchaser shall be required to pay all cost of operating and maintaining the building or buildings and to pay rentals or installments sufficient, together with other revenues which may be pledged for the purpose, to retire all indebtedness both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which the Authority may have incurred in connection with the undertaking." 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 193), p. 985, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. XI, was continued in full force and effect by 1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 258), page 4246. See Ga. Const. art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. 
DIVISION 2. - COMPOSITION, TERMS, COMPENSATION, ETC.[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1963 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 300), p. 3005 which created the Development Authority for the county. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the enactment date, severability, repealer, transitional language, ratification date, publication date or effective date of the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The section number designations of the original act have been retained. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Short title.] 
This Act shall be known as and may be cited as the "Greene County Development Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - [Definitions.] 
As used herein, the following words and terms shall have the following meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  The word "Authority" shall mean the "Greene County Development Authority," created hereby. 
(2)  The word "Governing Authority of Greene County" shall mean the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Greene County, their successors or such other Authority that may be hereafter provided for the administering of the affairs of Greene County. 
Editor's note— Subsections (3) and (4) of section 2 were stricken in their entirety by 1980 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 733), p. 3105, § 1. 
Sec. 3. - [Created.] 
Pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Georgia there is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Greene County Development Authority" which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, its scope and jurisdiction to be limited to the territory embraced by the County of Greene. 
Sec. 4. - [Members.] 
(a)  Effective July 1, 1986, the authority shall consist of six members to be appointed in the manner set forth in this section. Two members of the authority shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Greene County, one of whom shall have an initial term of office of two years and one of whom shall have an initial term of office of four years. Two members of the authority shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Greensboro, one of whom shall have an initial term of office of two years and one of whom shall have an initial term of office of four years. Two members of the authority shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Union Point, one of whom shall have an initial term of office of two years and one of whom shall have an initial term of office of four years. All terms of office shall begin on July 1 of even-numbered years. Following the initial terms of office provided in this section, each term of office shall be for four years and until a member's successor is appointed and qualified. The five members of the authority who are in office on April 1, 1986, shall continue in office as members of the authority until June 30, 1986, at which time the terms of office of such five members shall expire and the new six-member authority shall take office. 
(b)  All members who have served on the authority shall be eligible for reappointment to succeed themselves if they are reappointed by the governing authority designated by this Act to appoint them. 
(c)  Members of the authority shall be citizens of the United States who have attained the age of 21 years and shall have been citizens of this state for two years and residents of Greene County for one year immediately preceding their appointment as members of the authority. 
(d)  Should any member resign, be unable to serve, or move beyond the territorial limits of Greene County, as it is now situated or may be hereafter situated, or should there be a vacancy for any reason, a successor shall be appointed to serve the remaining term of such member by the respective appointing authority. 
(e)  Prior to taking office, the members shall subscribe to the following oath, to wit: "I do solemnly swear that I will fully and fairly perform the duties as a member of the Greene County Development Authority, So Help Me God." 
(f)  The members of said authority shall be entitled to no compensation. 
(g)  Any three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of ordinary business of the authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the authority must be approved by not less than three affirmative votes. No vacancy shall impair the power of the authority to act. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 807), p. 3681, § 1) 
Sec. 5. - [Purposes.] 
Except as specifically provided otherwise in this Act or in the amendment to the Constitution creating the Greene County Development Authority ratified at the 1962 general election (Ga. Laws 1962, p. 985), the powers, duties, rights, responsibilities, and obligations of the Greene County Development Authority shall be the same as those of an authority created by the Act known as the "Development Authorities Law," approved March 28, 1969 (Ga. Laws 1969, p. 137), as now or hereafter amended; and the pertinent provisions of said "Development Authorities Law" are hereby incorporated into this Act by reference and made applicable to the Greene County Development Authority. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 733), p. 3105, § 1) 
Sec. 6. - [Gifts, etc.] 
If the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall be in the County of Greene and/or any incorporated city or town in said county, the Governing Authorities of the County of Greene and of said municipalities, respectively, are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, without cost, to the Authority. Said county and/or said municipalities may donate to said Authority, real estate, personal property and services for any such project. Any such land, improvements, or personal property so conveyed or donated to the Authority may be mortgaged, conveyed, or pledged to secure obligations of the Authority. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 733), p. 3105, § 1) 
Sec. 7. - [Property.] 
The Authority is created for non-profit purposes and all property acquired by the Authority and any funds realized by the Authority shall be used continually and exclusively for the purposes for which the Authority is created, unless the Authority for any reason is dissolved. Then in that event, the funds and property of the Authority shall be conveyed as hereinafter provided. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 733), p. 3105, § 1) 
Sec. 8. - [Same.] 
Should said Authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the Authority at the time of such dissolution, shall be conveyed to Greene County subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property. No private interest shall exist in the property of the Authority. The Authority shall hold title only for the benefit of the public. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 733), p. 3105, § 1) 
Sec. 9. - [Audits.] 
The books and records of the Authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the Authority, by a competent independent auditor; and the minutes and records of the same shall be filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners of roads and revenues of said county, and shall be available for public inspection. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 733), p. 3105, § 1) 
Sec. 10. - [Powers.] 
The Authority shall exist and have all of said powers, and the right to exercise the same for its corporate purposes, regardless of whether or not it shall issue revenue anticipation obligations hereunder. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 733), p. 3105, § 1) 
ARTICLE IV. - AIRPORT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1978 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 832), p. 3223 which created the airport authority for the county. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the severability, repealer, transitional language, ratification date, publication date or effective date of the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The section number designations of the original act have been retained. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act may be cited as the "Greene County Airport Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Greene County Airport Authority. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Greene County Airport Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by the name, style and title and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents and employees of the authority. The authority shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 3. - Membership. 
The Greene County Airport Authority shall be composed of five members appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Greene County. Within thirty days after the effective date of this Act, it shall be the duty of the Board of Commissioners of Greene County to appoint the initial members of the authority. Initial members of the authority shall serve for terms of office ending December 31, 1978; December 31, 1979; December 31, 1980; December 31, 1981; and December 31, 1982, as designated by the Board of Commissioners of Greene County. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for terms of two years, and the persons so appointed shall assume office on January 1 following their appointment and serve until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. No person shall be appointed to membership on the authority unless he is a freeholder in Greene County and qualified and registered to vote for members of the General Assembly in Greene County. 
Sec. 4. - Meetings. 
The authority shall hold its first meeting within forty-five days after the effective date of this Act at which time the authority shall elect one of its members as its chairman and one member as secretary-treasurer. The authority shall meet at such rimes as may be necessary to transact the business coining before it, but not less than quarterly. At its first meeting in January of each year thereafter, the authority shall elect one of its members as its chairman and another member as secretary-treasurer. Only one person shall hold the office of secretary-treasurer. These officers shall be elected for a term ending on December 31 of the year in which they were elected or until their successors are elected and qualified. Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business coming before it. 
(2009 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 294), p. 4139, § 1) 
Sec. 5. - Vacancies in office. 
In the event of a vacancy on the authority by reason of death, resignation or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority and the person so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
Sec. 6. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act the following words and terms have the following meanings: 
(a)  The words "appointing authority" shall mean the Board of Commissioners of Greene County, Georgia. 
(b)  The word "authority" shall mean the Greene County Airport Authority as created by the provisions of this Act. 
(c)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, improving and operation of public airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, and related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property, both real and personal, and the lease and sale of any part or all such facilities, including real and personal property so as to insure the efficient and proper development, maintenance, and operation of such airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft deemed by the authority to be necessary, convenient or desirable. 
Sec. 7. - Powers. 
The authority shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(b)  To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease, dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchise necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contract with respect to the use of or disposition of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority; 
(d)  To appoint, select and employ, officers, agents and employees including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(e)  To make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient including contracts for construction of projects or leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and any and all persons, firms and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the State are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as it may deem advisable; the said authority is further granted the authority to make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient with the United States Government or any agency or department thereof concerning the projects of the authority; 
(f)  With the consent of the appointing authority to construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from funds provided by the appointing authority or other funds of the authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(g)  To accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or material or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality or other source may impose; 
(h)  To accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof or from any other source upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision or any other source, may impose; 
(i)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this State; 
(j)  With the consent of the appointing authority, the authority is specifically authorized from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real or personal, or any interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the authority was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in Section 2 hereof; 
(k)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers especially given in this Act. 
Sec. 8. - Monies received considered trust funds. 
All monies received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 9. - Purpose of the authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this Act the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, improving and operating airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, including any related building and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and to lease or sell any or all of such facilities including real property and to do any and all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
Sec. 10. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
With the consent of the appointing authority, the authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls and charges and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or subleases of its lands or facilities. 
Sec. 11. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed or operated under the provisions of this Act, including the basis on which airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft shall be furnished. 
Sec. 12. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing Sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Sec. 13. - Transfer of title. 
After the passage of this Act, the Board of Commissioners of Greene County may transfer title of the land comprising the Greene County Airport to the authority or said board may elect to vest control of the airport property to said authority for the purpose of operating, managing and regulating the same. Said board shall signify its choice by a proper resolution duly entered on its minutes. 
Sec. 14. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act being for the purpose of promoting the health, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the United States, of the State of Georgia and of Greene County, shall be liberally construed to effect the purpose hereof. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2007 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 78), signed by the Governor on May 16, 2007, which created an elections board for the county. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the title, enactment date, severability, repealer, transitional language, ratification date, publication date of the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The section number designations of the original act have been retained. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Board created.] 
Pursuant to subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A., there is created the Board of Elections and Registration of Greene County, hereinafter referred to as "the board." The board shall have the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the judge of the probate court of Greene County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," and the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the board of registrars of Greene County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
Sec. 2. - [Definitions.] 
The terms "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," and "public office" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act, and the term "commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of Greene County and "county" means Greene County. 
Sec. 3. - [Composition.] 
(a)  The board shall be composed of three members who shall be appointed as provided in this section. 
(b)  One member of the board shall be appointed by the county executive committee of the political party which received the highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for Governor in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of such member. One member of the board shall be appointed by the county executive committee of the politics party which received the second highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for Governor in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of such member. In the event that there is no county executive committee of a political party entitled to make an appointment under this subsection, the appointment on behalf of such political party shall be made by the state executive committee of such party. 
(c)  One member of the board shall be selected by the governing authority of Greene County. 
(d)  All appointments to the board shall be promptly certified by the appointing authority of Greene County to the clerk of the Superior Court of Greene County. 
(e)  The initial appointees to the board shall take office on July 1, 2007. Each initial member shall serve a term of office beginning on July 1, 2007, and ending on December 31, 2010, and until his or her respective successor is duly appointed and qualified. Successors to each such member shall thereafter be appointed by the appropriate appointing authority to serve a term o office of four years beginning January 1,2011, and until his or her respective successor is duly appointed and qualified. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed to serve four-year terms of office. 
(f)  The member of the board appointed by the county governing authority shall serve as chairperson of the board. Such chairperson shall preside over all meetings of the board and shall be entitled to vote on all matters coming before the board. 
Sec. 4. - [Election supervisor.] 
There shall be an election supervisor who shall generally direct and control the administration of the affairs of the board pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board. The election supervisor shall not be a member of the board. The appointment of the supervisor shall be made by the board of commissioners, which will consider the recommendation of the board of elections and registration. The supervisor shall be appointed and removed by the board of commissioners in the same manner as department heads. The compensation of such election supervisor shall be established by the board of commissioners in the same manner as department heads. The election supervisor shall provide daily employee supervision, serve as staff support for the board, attend all meetings of the board, carry out the duties of voter registration and elections as required by law, and be an employee of Greene County. 
(2016 Ga. Laws (H.B. 1067, May 3, 2016)) 
Sec. 5. - [Member powers.] 
Each member of the board shall: 
(1)  Be eligible to be reappointed to succeed such member; 
(2)  Have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of such resignation to the governing authority of Greene County and to the clerk of the superior court; and 
(3)  Serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. 
Sec. 6. - [Certification.] 
(a)  The appointing authority shall certify the appointment of each member of the board by filing an affidavit with the clerk of the superior court no later than 30 days preceding the date upon which such members are to take office, stating the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifying such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act 
(b)  The clerk of the superior court shall record each of such certifications on the minutes of the superior court and shall certify the name of each such appointed member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members within the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for registrars. 
Sec. 7. - [Vacancy.] 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any member before the expiration of his or her term, by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the appointing authority which is required under Section 3 of this Act to make the appointment to the office upon the expiration of the term shall appoint a successor to serve the remainder of the unexpired term as provided for in Section 3 of this Act. If the vacancy in office is not filled within 60 days after it occurs, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term by the governing authority of Greene County. The clerk of the superior court shall be notified of such interim appointments and record and certify such appointments in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. 
Sec. 8. - [Initial members; oath.] 
(a)  The first members of the board under this Act shall be appointed as provided in this Act to take office on July 1, 2007. The board shall take no official action until all members have been certified to the clerk of the Superior Court of Greene County. 
(b)  Before entering upon the member's duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
Sec. 9. - [Qualifications.] 
(a)  No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member of the board during the term of such elective office, and the position of any member of the board shall be deemed vacant upon such member's qualifying as a candidate for elective public office. 
(b)  Members of the board must be residents of Greene County and must have been registered voters in Greene County for a period of at least one year prior to the date of appointment to this board. 
Sec. 10. - [Contracting authority.] 
The board shall have the authority to contract with any municipality or governmental authority located within Greene County for the holding by the board of any primary or election to be conducted within such municipality or governmental authority. The full costs of any such election shall be paid for by the requesting municipality or governmental authority along with a fee established by the board to offset operational costs of the office of the Greene County Board of Elections and Registration. 
Sec. 11. - [Board powers.] 
(a)  The board shall be authorized and empowered to organize itself, elect from among its members a vice chairperson, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate to the management of its affairs; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with state law. 
(b)  Action and decision by the board shall be by a majority of the members of the board. 
Sec. 12. - [Meetings; records.] 
(a)  The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall hold meetings at the office of the Greene County Board of Elections and Registration or at the place of meeting of the commissioners. Any specially called meetings held pursuant to the bylaws adopted by the board shall be held only after notification of the time and place of the holding of such special meeting has been communicated in writing to the election supervisor to provide public notice of the meeting as required by law. All meetings of whatever kind of the board shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. 
(b)  The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions amended to include additions or deletions. Such written records shall be made available for the public to review pursuant to Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. 
Sec. 13. - [Compensation.] 
Compensation for the members of the board shall be fixed by the Board of Commissioners of Greene County. All amounts payable under this section shall be paid from the funds of Greene County. 
Sec. 14. - [Assistants.] 
(a)  The board may employ, subject to funding by the Greene County Board of Commissioners additional clerical assistants as needed to efficiently carry out the duties and functions of the board on either an independent contract basis or as county employees entitled to all benefits as other county employees, to be determined by the board of commissioners. The compensation of all clerical assistants shall be established by the board of commissioners in the same manner as for other county employees. Any such assistants shall be at-will employees of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The board of commissioners, at their legislative discretion, shall provide suitable offices and equipment and funding sufficient to employ the staff and other employees as may be necessary. 
Sec. 15. - [Poll workers.] 
The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers. 
Sec. 16. - [Preclearance.] 
The Board of Commissioners of Greene County shall cause, through its legal counsel, this Act to be submitted for preclearance under Section 5 of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, within 45 days after the date on which this Act is approved by the Governor or otherwise becomes law without such approval. 
Sec. 17. - [Effective date.] 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval for purposes of making initial appointments to the board only. This Act shall become fully effective on July 1, 2007. Upon this Act becoming fully effective or upon such later date determined by the board of commissioners, the superintendent of elections of Greene County and the board of registrars of Greene County shall be relieved of all powers and duties to which the board succeeds by the provisions of this Act and shall deliver to the board all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities pertaining to such powers and duties. Nothing contained herein is intended to prevent the appointment of members of the board, the hiring of an election supervisor, the hiring of clerical staff, or any necessary training for the members of the board, the election supervisor, and clerical assistants. 
LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the local acts of the Georgia General Assembly that the county has elected to include, as well as any amendments to those acts. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Greene County, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Greene County Code." 
(Code 1998, § 1-101) 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board: 
(1)  General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(2)  Gender/singular and plural. Every word in any Code provision or ordinance importing the masculine gender shall extend to and be applied to females as well as males; and every word importing the singular number only shall extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; and every word importing the plural number only shall extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
(3)  Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future when applicable. 
(4)  Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to two or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority. 
(5)  Delegation of authority. 
a.  Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or other officer of the county to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
b.  The primary responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this Code, both civil and criminal, is hereby delegated to the county sheriff's department. 
(6)  Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
(7)  Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restriction upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
(8)  Names of officers, and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the county" were added thereto. 
(9)  Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or" the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either…or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
(Code 1998, § 1-102) 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this Code shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Advice and consent. The term "advice and consent," when applied to the board, means an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire board. 
Board, board of commissioners, commissioners. The term "board," "board of commissioners" or "commissioners" means the county board of commissioners. 
Chairperson or chairman. The term "chairperson" or "chairman" means the chairperson or chairman of the board. 
City. The term "city" may be used following the specific identification or designation of any incorporated city within the county. 
City council, council. The term "city council" or "council" may be used to further refer to the governing body of any incorporated city within the county following the identification or designation of a specific city. 
Code. The term "Code" means "The Code of Greene County, Georgia," as designated in section 1-1. 
County. The term "county" means Greene County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means a specific court following identification of said court (i.e., small claims, magistrate, probate, or superior court). 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the board. 
Judge. The term "judge" means the judge of a previously identified court of the county. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
Misdemeanor. The term "misdemeanor" means a violation of the law punishable by a fine not in excess of $1,000.00 or confinement in a county or other jail for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. See O.C.G.A § 15-10-60. 
Municipality. The term "municipality" is synonymous with the term "city," "town," or "municipal corporation," existing within the boundaries of the county. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" or "sworn." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the board of a general and permanent nature, duly adopted and recorded. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or to land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" means a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means every specie of property except real property, as hereinafter defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" means real, personal, mixed estates and interests. 
Real property. The term "real property" means lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or notice. The term "reasonable time or notice" means only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the board of a specific or temporary character, duly adopted and recorded. 
Road. The term "road" means any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge and the approaches thereto within the county. 
Shall. The term "shall" shall mean mandatory and not permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or " subscription" includes a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. See Road. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or to land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Town. See Municipality. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Writing or written. The term "writing" or "written" means printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year, unless specifically designated to be a fiscal year. 
(Code 1998, § 1-103) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(b)  History notes, editor's notes and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 1-104) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of Code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section. 
(a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
(Code 1998, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amended Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as the Code and subsequent ordinances omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of Ordinances of Greene County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Ordinances of Greene County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or subsection or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:…." The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, chapters or provisions sought to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, chapter, or provision number as the case may be. 
(Code 1998, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board. 
(Code 1998, § 1-107) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-8. - Penalty where no penalty provided. 
(a)  In this section the term "violation of such provision of this Code or any ordinance" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided thereof, the violation of such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall subject the person committing the violation to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and costs or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or to both such fine and imprisonment. Any or all of such penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the judge of the magistrate court. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to other violations, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the county Charter or Code. 
(Code 1998, § 1-108) 
State Law reference— Violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, unenforceability or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections, of and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the county. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts or ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to this Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in this Code). 
(6)  Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the county relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary of any county officer or employee, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing employment and personnel policies and procedures; 
(6)  Any right of franchise granted by the county to any person, firm, or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, widening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the county; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the county; 
(9)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution accepting or adopting a comprehensive master plan for the physical development of the county; 
(13)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto; 
(14)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; 
(15)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the county or annexing property to the county; 
(16)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(17)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(18)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(19)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; 
(20)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing the emergency management director's position, duties and responsibilities, or establishing the positions of the emergency management coordinators and deputies; and 
(21)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)  Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule power of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; general authority of counties to legislate, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Exercise of governmental authority. 
The corporate governmental powers of the county shall be exercised by the chairman and board in the manner provided by law and by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 3-101) 
Sec. 2-2. - Administrative policy and procedures. 
(a)  Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the charter, and this Code, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the county manager. 
(b)  Department heads. All department heads shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsive to the county manager for the effective administration of their respective department and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the county manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Submit quarterly and annual reports to the county manager of the activities of their respective department; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and form a basis for the periodic reports to the county manager; 
(5)  Have the power, when authorized by the county manager, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all county property and equipment used in their respective department. 
(c)  Departments. Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the county manager, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
(d)  Records. All county records, except those which by order of a state court or by law are prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by any citizen of the state during the hours of operation of the administrative service prescribed in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Operation of administrative service. All units in the administrative service shall: 
(1)  Office hours. Be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays and shall be closed on Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays; 
(2)  Make daily deposit. Make a daily deposit of any monies received directly from the public. 
(3)  Payment of monies. Pay out monies belonging to the county only in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Code 1998, § 3-103) 
Sec. 2-3. - Oaths. 
All officers and employees required by this Code or some other provision of law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths: 
"I, ____________ , do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Charter and ordinances of the county of the; and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of ____________ during my continuance therein, so help me God." 
(Code 1998, § 3-104) 
Sec. 2-4. - Bonds. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the board may require any department head, county official, or employee, before entering upon the discharge of his duties to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the board. Said bond shall be payable to the county for the faithful performance of said duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriation, or unlawful expenditures in office. Said surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the board. The premiums thereon shall be paid by the county. 
(Code 1998, § 3-105) 
Sec. 2-5. - Compensation. 
Each officer and employee of the county shall receive such compensation as may be provided from time to time by resolution, or by law. 
(Code 1998, § 3-106) 
Sec. 2-6. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless service. 
(1)  9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(2)  Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(3)  Administrative provisions. The clerk of the county is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of the ordinance from which this section derived and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten days of enactment of this section. 
(4)  Depositing of funds; use of funds. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this section shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(e), 
(Ord. of 7-19-2011, §§ 1—4) 
Secs. 2-7—2-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 2-29. - Rules. 
The rules of order, rules for the conduct of business, scheduling of meetings, and order of business of the board of county commissioners shall be as established by the governing authority, from time to time. 
Sec. 2-30. - Sessions; meetings. 
(1)  The board of commissioners will conduct one meeting each month. 
(2)  The meeting will be held on the second Tuesday of the month and will begin at 5:00 p.m. 
(3)  During the meeting, the board will discuss each agenda item and receive information relevant to the issue being considered. Agenda items will be openly discussed by the board, and commissioners shall provide input on the respective agenda items only. Questions should be limited to those questions necessary to gain information and should be addressed to the chairman, though to the greatest extent possible, questions and research should be conducted in advance of the meeting. 
(4)  Called meetings will be held in accordance with the provisions of local legislation and the Open Meetings Act. Additionally, any time two commissioners request a called meeting, the chairman will direct the county manager to schedule the meeting to be held on the first available day that satisfies the provisions herein within five business days of the request. Every effort shall be made to accommodate the schedules of all five members of the board such that each member will be able to attend any called meetings. If a majority of the board requests that a meeting be held on a specific date and time, the county manager shall schedule the meeting accordingly and notify all members of the board, provided, however, that any such called meeting must be posted in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, and, either the chairman or vice-chairman must be available to preside over the meeting. The board will not generally convene a called meeting if any board member us out of town, unless such board member(s) consents to the meeting taking place in their absence, or if the chairman, exercising his/her own discretion, believes the meeting must take place given the nature of the purpose of the called meeting and a quorum is available. 
(5)  A quorum shall consist of at least three board members and actions taken will be by majority vote of the members present at any meeting in which a quorum exists. All members must cast a vote, including the chairman and any abstention shall be counted as a no vote. A board member shall be required to recuse himself when faced with an action that directly involves any member of his family with the relationship of cousin twice removed or closer, or where a personal and/or professional conflict exists. Any board member faced with an action that requires him to recuse himself shall vacate his seat during any discussion and vote on such action. A recused member shall not be counted toward a quorum for that particular action. After action has been taken on the matter, the recused member will resume his seat for the remainder of the meeting. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2003, § I; Amend. of 11-17-2009, § I; Ord. of 3-14-2016, § I; Amend. of 12-8-2016, § I ) 
Sec. 2-31. - Agenda. 
(1)  Requests for items to be on the agenda for consideration during the regularly scheduled monthly meeting must be submitted in writing to the commissioner's office during office hours at least one week before the first Tuesday of the month. The county manager will have the agenda packages for the commissioners prepared no later than the first Tuesday of the month, unless unusual circumstances make such prohibitive. Agenda items for called meetings will be determined by the basis for the called meeting. In either case, regular monthly meetings or called meetings, if two commissioners request a particular item appear on the agenda, the chairman is required to include such item unless such item has already been acted upon by the current seated board, in which case a majority of the board must request the item in order for it to be included on the agenda. 
(2)  The chairman may add an item to the agenda if in his/her discretion it is determined that delaying action on the item is not in the best interest of the county. If an item is added to the agenda, any supporting information should be provided to the commissioners as far in advance of the meeting as possible. 
(3)  The tentative agenda will be posted at the office of the board of commissioners and as otherwise required by the Open Meetings Act. 
(4)  It shall be the responsibility of the individual commissioners to obtain the packages, review the information, ask questions, and take whatever other steps may be necessary to prepare for meetings in advance of the meetings. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2003, § II; Amend. of 11-17-2009, § II; Ord. of 3-14-2016, § II; Amend. of 12-8-2016, § II ) 
Sec. 2-32. - Appearances on agenda items. 
(1)  All citizens desiring to address the board of commissioners concerning a published agenda item must sign up with the county clerk before the meeting begins. Input must be regarding the agenda item under consideration at the time. 
(2)  All citizens addressing the board shall come to the front and state his/her name when recognized by the chairman. 
(3)  Statements and comments will be addressed to the board. Questions from the board members shall be directed to the chairman who shall recognize the person for a response. 
(4)  A statement shall be limited to five minutes. No portion of a person's time may be given to another speaker. 
(5)  When a person finishes their statement, the person shall sit down. 
(6)  A person shall not speak more than once on the same matter unless that person is directly involved in the matter before the board. 
(7)  A group or association shall designate a spokesman. 
(8)  The board may fully address questions and/or comments received from citizens as they deem necessary and after being recognized by the chairman. 
(9)  Any person addressing the board shall not be engaged in a debate of any kind. 
(10)  When the chairman has called for the vote, no further discussion from the audience will be permitted. 
(11)  The chairman of the board can terminate discussion of any item or statement at any time it is deemed irrelevant or repetitious. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2003, § III; Amend. of 11-17-2009, § III; Ord. of 3-14-2016, § III) 
Sec. 2-33. - Ordinances and resolutions. 
(1)  Any requested resolution shall be presented at the commissioners' office in writing no later than one week prior to the first Tuesday of the month. 
(2)  Any resolution or ordinance that is to become law shall be in written ordinance form. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2003, § IV; Amend. of 11-17-2009, § IV; Ord. of 3-14-2016, § IV; Amend. of 12-8-2016, § IV ) 
Secs. 2-34, 2-35. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-36. - Commissioner's reports. 
(1)  Each commissioner shall be given the opportunity to make a report to the board. 
(2)  The reports should be of an informative nature to share information concerning events of the district the commissioner represents, information from an authority, board, or committee the commissioner serves on, and/or general county information of interest to all the citizens of the county. 
(3)  A commissioner's report should not be used as an opportunity to ask questions of the chairman, county attorney, county manager or other commissioners. All questions should be conducted between the individuals privately. However, if information provided during a report generates questions, then such questions are permissible. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2003, § VII; Amend. of 11-17-2009, § V; Ord. of 3-14-2016, § V) 
Sec. 2-37. - Legislative authority. 
The board shall exercise the legislative functions of the county, and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems appropriate for the government of the county in the manner set forth in this chapter; provided that the same is not in conflict with the charter of the county, the constitution or laws of the state, or the Constitution or laws of the United States. 
(Code 1998, § 3-203; Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 3-203) 
Sec. 2-38. - Compensation. 
Any member of the Greene County Board of Commissioners who is appointed by the Greene County Board of County Commissioners to serve on any authority, board or committee, because of his position as a serving commissioner, shall not receive any compensation normally paid by said authority, board or committee to its members for service on said board. 
(Ord. of 1-17-2012) 
Sec. 2-39. - General policy for appointment to boards and authorities. 
(a)  General statement: This policy is established by the Greene County Board of Commissioners to provide guidelines for use by the board in the appointment process to all of the various boards and authorities where appointments are made by the board of commissioners. 
As a general statement and underlying principle, people invited to serve the county by becoming members of its important non-elected boards and authorities should: 
•  Be people of competence, good will and sound, objective judgment; 
•  Be drawn from new and long-time residents alike; 
•  Be truly interested in the welfare of Greene County and all its residents; 
•  Be sensitive to the long-term as well as immediate impact of their decisions and recommendations; 
•  Be willing and able to devote the time and energy necessary to fulfill their responsibilities; 
•  Have some relevant background, involvement, education, and/or interest in the role of the respective board or authority. 
(b)  Eligibility: It is the intention of the board of directors to appoint Greene County citizens to represent Greene County on all boards and authorities. Any individual appointed to a board or authority is expected to maintain residency in Greene County. The board of commissioners must approve any exception made for an individual who does not reside in Greene County at the time of the appointment or thereafter. Should their residency change at any time a letter of notification shall immediately be sent to the county manager by the appointed person and the board will determine if a resignation shall be requested. 
(c)  Attendance: Although recognizing and appreciating that members of the various boards and authorities are generally citizen volunteers, the board of commissioners deems it essential that members of all county boards and authorities attend meetings regularly for the prompt and efficient transaction of public business. It is the board of commissioners' policy to require attendance at 75 percent of regularly scheduled board and authority meeting during a calendar year, and that no appointee miss more than three consecutive meetings. The chairman and/or responsible party of any board or authority shall notify the county manager of any attendance deficiency, who shall in turn bring the matter to the board of commissioners for consideration. Additionally, should any member of the board of commissioners, through staff or otherwise, become aware of attendance deficiency by a board-appointed individual, then such matter shall be brought to the board of commissioners for consideration. 
(d)  Limitations: No person shall serve on more than two appointed boards and/or authorities at one time as appointees of the board of commissioners. No person shall be appointed (including reappointments) to any board or authority if such person owes delinquent taxes or fees that are past-due to Greene County. 
(e)  Modification of requirements: Because of the need for flexibility, the board of commissioners may, by a simple majority vote, decide to waive, vary, or otherwise modify the requirements of this policy on a case-by-case basis. Unless otherwise specified in law or County Code, the board of commissioners may, in its discretion, at any time remove any members of any boards or authorities. 
(f)  Required questionnaire: The board will only consider candidates for appointment who have completely, property, and accurately completed a "candidate questionnaire." Current appointed members being considered for reappointment shall not be required to complete the candidate questionnaire. 
(g)  Effective date and application: This policy shall become effective upon adoption, and shall supersede and prevail over any other county policy. In addition, this policy shall supplement ordinance provisions and Georgia Law in cases where such application does not constitute a conflict. The board shall consider this policy when making appointments and reappointments. 
(Ord. of 3-14-2013) 
Secs. 2-40—2-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CHAIRPERSON 

Sec. 2-63. - General authority. 
The chairman shall be the chief executive officer of the county government, shall enforce the laws of the county, and shall require the faithful performance of all duties. 
(Code 1998, § 3-301) 
Sec. 2-64. - Duties. 
The chairperson shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Presiding at meetings. To preside at all meetings of the board, and the chairman shall vote. 
(2)  Appointment of standing committees. To appoint at the first meeting each year, or as soon thereafter as expedient, standing committees for that year; but the chairman may at any time alter the committees and make such changes as the interest of the county may require. 
(3)  Executing legal documents. To sign and execute all contracts, deeds, and bonds of the county duly authorized by the board. 
(Code 1998, § 3-302) 
Sec. 2-65. - Powers. 
The chairperson shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Rule making. To prescribe such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to his authority, and to revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of administrative service by whomever prescribed. 
(2)  Investigation. To investigate and to examine or inquire into, either by himself or by any officer or person designated for the purpose by him, the affairs or operation of any department, including the power to employ consultants and professional counsel when so authorized by the board to aid in such investigations, examinations or inquiries. 
(3)  Overriding. To set aside any action taken by a department head and to supersede him in the functions of his office. 
(4)  Delegation. To direct any department to perform the work for any other department, and to authorize any department head or officer responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates serving under such person. 
(Code 1998, § 3-303) 
Sec. 2-66. - Vice-chairman. 
During a temporary absence or disability of the chairman, the board shall elect one of its members to act as vice-chairman who, during such absence or disability, shall possess the powers of chairman. 
(Code 1998, § 3-304) 
Secs. 2-67—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COUNTY CLERK 

Sec. 2-91. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the county clerk shall give a good and sufficient bond, payable to the board, such bond to be fixed, approved, and paid for by the board. 
(Code 1998, § 3-403) 
Sec. 2-92. - Duties. 
The county clerk shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Attend all meetings of the board. 
(2)  Keep correct and full minutes of the proceedings of the board, together with all ordinances and resolutions passed by it, in a properly indexed book or register kept for that purpose. 
(3)  Receive all applications or petitions made to the county and to place them before the board at the meeting of the board next succeeding the receipt thereof. 
(4)  Issue all licenses, and keep a record thereof, and all badges and permits authorized by the board. 
(5)  Be the custodian of the county seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required. 
(6)  Carefully preserve the records and documents belonging to the county which are not assigned to the custody of some other office, and to maintain a proper index to all such records and documents so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had. 
(Code 1998, § 3-404) 
Secs. 2-93—2-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COUNTY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-113. - Position created. 
There is hereby created the office of county manager. The county manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. In addition to the duties contained herein, the manager shall assume all such other duties as assigned by the board from time to time and as contained in any job description or contract for the position as may be adopted by the board and as same may be amended. 
Sec. 2-114. - Qualifications. 
The county manager shall be chosen by the board of commissioners upon the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with specific reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of the office as set forth in this article or as further defined by the board. 
Sec. 2-115. - Functions. 
The chairperson of the board of commissioners shall continue to be the chief executive officer of the county and the board shall continue to be the executive entity of the county. It shall be the duty of the board to set overall executive policy and procedures for the county. The county manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the county. The county manager shall: 
(1)  Serve as chief administrative officer of the county; 
(2)  Manage operations and services of the county; 
(3)  Serve as liaison to the board of commissioners; 
(4)  Develop and propose policy initiatives and recommendations for board consideration; and 
(5)  Serve as department director of the administration department. 
Sec. 2-116. - Duties. 
The board of commissioners shall be the executive entity of the county. It shall be the duty of the board to set overall executive policy and procedures for the county. The county manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the county and head of the administrative branch of county government. The manager shall be responsible to the board for the proper and efficient administration of all affairs of the county over which the manager has jurisdiction. It shall be the duty of the manager to perform the following: 
(1)  Supervise, direct and evaluate assigned staff, processing employee concerns and problems, directing work, counseling, disciplining and completing employee performance evaluations; 
(2)  Work with finance officers, department heads, and constitutional officers in the development of the annual operating budget and coordinate preparation of proposed budget for presentation to the board of commissioners; 
(3)  Develop/review budget amendments as necessary; 
(4)  Oversee daily operations of county departments to ensure compliance with adopted county policies and procedures and applicable state and federal laws; 
(5)  Ensure county departments are run efficiently, effectively, economically, and courteously; 
(6)  Oversee administration of operating budget, capital improvements program, purchasing activities, personnel management system, employee benefits program, and financial management systems; 
(7)  Coordinate intra-departmental programs and projects; 
(8)  Provide technical support to department heads in complying with new and revised laws, statutes, and regulations affecting county operations and services; 
(9)  Work with county attorney, county clerk, finance officer and other staff in preparing and executing bid proposals, service contracts, letters of agreement, and other documents; 
(10)  Propose and administer management policies and procedures related to personnel, finance, budgeting, and general administration; 
(11)  Coordinate road projects with the state department of transportation; 
(12)  Oversee the awarding of bid projects by participating in review of bid proposals, construction schedules, and contracts; 
(13)  Serve as liaison to the general public, business community, the news media, nonprofit organizations, state and federal agencies and others regarding county operations and services; 
(14)  Review and approve final disciplinary actions and coordinate the resolution of employee grievances and appeals; 
(15)  Maintain knowledge of local government management policies, principles and practices by attending professional conferences as approved by the board, and by reading journals and other professional literature; 
(16)  Attend county meetings (commissioners, planning commission, public hearings, etc.) as may be necessary; 
(17)  Establish and maintain effective working relationships with elected officials, county personnel, government agencies, and the general public; 
(18)  Research and develop ordinances and resolutions for board consideration; 
(19)  Work with developers, utilities, builders, contractors, engineers, and others regarding development activity throughout the county to ensure compliance with subdivision regulations and development policies; 
(20)  Work with volunteer fire departments to assist in the coordination and delivery of fire services; 
(21)  Attain and maintain NIMS training and certification to facilitate decision making for EMA emergencies; and 
(22)  Perform other related duties as required by board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-117. - Additional responsibilities. 
The board of commissioners shall have full authority to assign additional responsibilities to the county manager or to restrict or modify the responsibilities previously assigned. The modifications in responsibilities as contemplated herein may be established by the board of commissioners by ordinance, contract amendment or modification, written directives to the manager, modification of job description or by such other method as may be determined by the board consistent with good management practices. 
Sec. 2-118. - Term of office. 
The county manager shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners, shall be an at-will employee, and may be terminated by majority vote of the board. 
Sec. 2-119. - Employment contract. 
The board of commissioners may enter into a written employment contract with the county manager which, among other things, may provide for the terms of employment, duties, compensation, benefits, termination and the rights of the parties upon termination of the agreement. 
Sec. 2-120. - Political activities. 
The county manager shall not engage in or be concerned with any partisan politics or any political campaign. The manager shall not contribute to any campaign fund or solicit funds for political purposes for any person, nor shall the manager appoint any relative as an employee of the county unless such relative shall qualify and become eligible for appointment under the rules of the board of commissioners and be recommended by the board of commissioners. The county manager shall not be eligible for election as a member of the board of commissioners for a period of two years after termination of his service as county manager. 
Sec. 2-121. - Full-time devotion to duties of office; determination of office hours. 
The county manager shall devote full working time to the duties of the office, and shall maintain his office at the county facilities provided therefor as determined by the board of commissioners. The office hours of the county manager shall be determined by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-122. - Powers reserved to board of commissioners. 
Nothing in this article or any section thereof shall infringe in any manner upon the powers and duties of the board of commissioners or its chairman as set forth in this Code or state law. 
Secs. 2-123—2-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-145. - County attorney. 
(a)  Appointment and qualifications. The county attorney shall be appointed by the chairman, by and with the advice and consent of the board, and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. No person shall be so appointed unless he is a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and has been actively engaged in the practice of law for at least three years preceding his appointment. 
(b)  Oath. Before entering upon the duties of the office, the county attorney shall take the oath prescribed by this Code for county offices. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The county attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the county, and in such capacity shall: 
(1)  Advise the board, its committees or any county officer, when thereto requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of county business; 
(2)  Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the board or any committee thereof, and keep the Code of Ordinances of the county up to date and properly indexed; 
(3)  Give his opinion upon any legal matters or question submitted to him by the board or any of its committees, or by any county officer; 
(4)  Upon request of the chairman, attend board meetings for the purpose of giving the board any legal advice requested by its members; 
(5)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the county is a party and approve, as to form, all bonds required to be submitted to the county. 
(d)  Compensation. 
(1)  The county attorney shall submit to the board a monthly bill for his services, itemizing the type of work performed for the county and the number of hours engaged in each type of work during the month. 
(2)  In the event a retainer fee is agreed upon as acceptable by the board and the county attorney, the monthly bill shall indicate the services rendered under retainer and those rendered in excess of retainer. 
(Code 1998, § 3-501) 
Sec. 2-146. - Personnel policies and procedures. 
The most current version of "The County Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual," as approved by the board of county commissioners, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein, as if set out fully. 
Sec. 2-147. - Use of county-owned vehicles. 
(a)  The board, as fiscal authority for the county, is responsible for the levying of taxes for the purpose of purchasing equipment for the county and for ensuring that all county property is used for authorized county purposes. 
(b)  From time to time, the board authorizes the purchases of motor vehicles to be utilized by county employees in performing the duties associated with their positions. 
(c)  O.C.G.A. § 40-2-37 requires that political subdivisions, when registering motor vehicles with the commissioner of revenue, attest that such vehicles are bona fide owned by the political subdivision and that such vehicles are used exclusively for governmental functions. 
(d)  The policy of the county is that county employees shall use motor vehicles exclusively in performing the duties associated with their positions. 
(e)  In determining whether the proposed use of a county-owned motor vehicle is authorized as in performance of the duties associated with the county employee's position, the county employee shall review such proposed use with the county manager on a case-by-case basis. 
(f)  It is presumed that no county employee is required to drive a county-owned motor vehicle between the county employee's place of work and place of residence; provided, however, that upon a determination by the county manager, on a case-by-case basis, the county employee may be authorized on specific occasions to utilize the county-owned vehicle in traveling between the county employee's place of work and place of residence, so long as such travel is necessary and incident to fulfilling the responsibilities and duties of the county employee's position. 
(g)  The county sheriff and the county sheriff's department are specifically excluded from coverage under this section. 
(Code 1998, § 3-504) 
Sec. 2-148. - Travel policy. 
(a)  Introduction. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of these travel policies, rules and general procedures is to provide the fundamental features to promote economy and efficiency in county government and to set the standard in which all employees are treated fairly and equitably. 
(2)  The travel guidelines outlined in this document are effective on October 1, 2010. These regulations, along with any subsequent updates, are available online at www.greenecountyga.gov. 
(3)  All departments within Greene County government are required to follow the minimum guidelines outlined in this manual. However, departments are also authorized to establish policies that further restrict an employee's travel if the department determines that stricter policies are necessary. No department is allowed to set more lenient policies than those authorized by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Anyone with questions concerning the travel regulations should contact the board of commissioners office prior to traveling. 
(b)  Definitions. 
County board member means any member of a board established by the board of commissioners or required by law to be filled by the board of commissioners. This definition includes, but is not limited to, the following boards: Board of assessors, board of elections and registration, board of equalization, and the planning and zoning commission. 
County employee means an employee of any department operating under the fiscal control of the Greene County Board of Commissioners. For the purposes of this policy, this includes any person receiving a paycheck directly from the Greene County Board of Commissioners, and all persons seeking reimbursement from public funds of the board of commissioners, including county commissioners and the chairman. This policy shall not apply to the constitutional officers themselves who shall be bound by the provisions promulgated by the general assembly. 
Employee travel expense statement means the accounting document used as the basis to reimburse an employee or board member for travel and miscellaneous expenses incurred while traveling on official business. 
Lodging means a hotel, motel, inn, apartment, or similar entity that furnishes lodging to the public for pay. 
Miscellaneous travel expense means a necessary and reasonable expense incurred by an employee or board member while traveling on official business. This term does not apply to meals, lodging, mileage or other transportation costs. This term does include parking fees and toll roads. 
Per diem meal allowance means the maximum amounts that an employee or board member is allowed to receive as an advance or reimbursement per meal per day. 
Personal motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that is owned or leased for personal use by an employee or board member. 
Travel exception means written authorization for travel reimbursement of expenses generally not allowable under this manual. The county manager is the only person authorized to sign and approve a travel exception. 
Travel expenses means meal, lodging, mileage, transportation, and miscellaneous expenses. 
(c)  General provisions. County employees and board members may be reimbursed for reasonable travel-related expenses incurred while on official business for the county. Subject to the provisions outlined in these travel regulations, the board of commissioners has authorized reimbursement for the following expenses associated with employee travel: 
Meals associated with overnight lodging and in certain circumstances where there is no overnight lodging; 
Lodging expenses; 
Mileage for certain uses of a personal motor vehicle; 
Transportation expenses, including parking and toll fees; and 
Certain miscellaneous expenses associated with travel. 
The specific policies regarding the reimbursement of travel expenses, as well as expense limits and required documentation are outlined in the following chapters. Note that in all cases involving members of the board of commissioners where the provisions of this policy require exercise of application by the county manager, such exercise of application shall be the responsibility of the chairman of the county commission. Any dispute involving county commission member travel shall be addressed by the full board if necessary. 
(d)  Out-of-state travel. Out-of-state travel requests must be made directly to the county manager for approval. Generally, out-of-state travel is prohibited; however, in rare circumstances it may be allowed. In order to qualify for out-of-state travel, the employee or board member must provide information to the county manager showing that the travel is required by statute and that no other option exists to obtain this training within the State of Georgia. The county manager will review each request for travel out-of-state and will make decisions on a case-by-case basis. 
(e)  Exceptions to travel regulations. Situations may arise in the course of performing job duties that may require employees to incur travel expenses that are generally not reimbursable. The county manager is authorized to grant exceptions for unusual circumstances. A meeting must be set up with the county manager to discuss any exceptions to travel regulations prior to actual travel. 
(f)  Authorization required for employee and board member travel. Employees and board members who are required to travel on official county business and are eligible for travel reimbursement should receive authorization from their department head prior to performing the travel. If required training is available through online delivery options, it is encouraged that such online method be utilized. 
Individual departments should analyze training options in advance to determine which sessions offer the most beneficial and cost-effective travel arrangements throughout the year. Employees and board members should make every attempt to obtain training at the location closest to the county. Multiple people in one department should only attend the same conference/training session if it is required by state law. If the session is not required by state law, but is still deemed necessary, only one person from the department should attend the conference/training session unless it is deemed necessary by the department head or the constitutional officers within their respective offices. This employee or board member should bring back the information learned at the conference and share it with other members of the department. 
However, if multiple people within a department are required by law to attend certain training sessions, these employees or board members need to make every effort possible to attend the same training in order to minimize the cost of each training session. 
Each department shall maintain records detailing the annual training requirements for each employee or board member. Each department should be able to communicate the number of hours that each individual has attended and is required to attend each year whenever questioned by the county manager. Each department shall also have on file the statute that requires this training. Failure to maintain these records will result in disciplinary action. 
(g)  Meals: 
(1)  Meals associated with overnight travel. 
Employees and board members traveling overnight will be paid a per diem amount designed to cover the cost of meals, based on the number of meals per day for which the employee is eligible. 
Employees and board members traveling overnight are generally eligible for per diem amounts designed to cover the cost of three meals per day for all days on travel status other than the day of departure and the day of return. There are specific instances in which an employee may be eligible for the three-meal per diem rate on departure/return days (see discussion below). 
There are also instances in which an employee may not receive per diem for the normally eligible number of meals: If any meal is included as part of the cost of conference registration, etc., such meal(s) should not be considered eligible in the calculation of per diem. For example, if conference registration includes breakfast and lunch, the employee will only receive per diem for the dinner meal. Because most conferences, etc., accommodate a variety of dietary needs/restrictions, employees are expected to participate in such meals. 
(2)  Day of departure and return. Employees and board members may only receive per diem for meals occurring while officially on travel status. Time for any personal trips should not be included. For example, if an employee departs at 9:00 a.m. on the day of departure, but the conference does not start until the next morning, the employee is not eligible for breakfast or lunch per diem amounts for the day of departure. 
Employees and board members must be required to leave by the following times to be eligible for the following meals on the day of departure: 
Breakfast - Prior to 6:30 a.m. 
Lunch - Prior to 11:00 a.m. 
Dinner - Prior to 5:30 p.m. 
Employees must not be able to return by the following times to be eligible for the following meals on the day of return: 
Breakfast - Before 6:30 a.m. 
Lunch - Before 1:30 p.m. 
Dinner - Before 7:30 p.m. 
(3)  Per diem rates. The current per diem rates for meal advances/reimbursements are as follows: 
Breakfast - $7.00 
Lunch - $10.00 
Dinner - $22.00 
(4)  Meals not associated with overnight travel. Employees and board members who are required to travel on official county business and do not stay overnight may receive per diem allowances for certain meals under the following situations: 
Employees and board members acting as official representatives for their department may receive per diem for meals that are an integral part of a scheduled, official meeting. Per diem is only authorized, however, if the meeting is with persons outside the employee's department and if the meeting continues during the meal. 
Employees and board members on official county business who are required to travel outside of the county, but do not stay overnight, are eligible for the per diem for lunch when they leave prior to 11:00 a.m. and do not return until after 1:30 p.m. 
(5)  Meals while taking leave. Employees who take annual leave while on travel status are not authorized to receive per diem for any meal during the period of leave. 
(6)  Documentation required for per diem meal allowances/reimbursements. 
NO MEALS ARE TO BE CHARGED TO THE COUNTY CREDIT CARD UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCE. 
Employees and board members must turn in the per diem meal allowance request form. Conference itineraries/agendas must be attached to show the beginning and ending dates, locations, times, and any meals provided. If an itinerary is not available, persons traveling need to make every effort to contact someone associated with the conference to obtain an itinerary. This information is required to determine the amount of per diem the employee or board member is eligible to receive. If the itinerary still cannot be obtained, the employee or board member is required to provide information showing the beginning and ending dates, locations, times, and any meals provided to the best of his or her knowledge with an explanation of all efforts made to obtain additional information. 
All requests for per diem allowances/reimbursements must be turned in to the personnel director for review. (These requests may be turned in prior to or after travel.) Any questions arising from the review will be directed back to the employee or board member prior to payment. If these questions cannot be answered satisfactorily, the issue will be brought to the attention of the county manager. The county manager will examine the documentation and will decide on any future actions. 
All requests for per diem allowances/reimbursements need to be turned in to the personnel director prior to 5:00 p.m. on Monday of the week that the check is required. Checks are printed each Wednesday, but cannot be guaranteed for pickup prior to 12:00 p.m. on Friday afternoons. These deadlines need to be considered in order to ensure that requests are paid when needed. Late submittal of per diem request forms will not result in an emergency check run. Instead, the checks will be cut on the following Wednesday. 
(h)  Lodging: 
(1)  General provisions. Employees or board members who travel more than 65 miles from their residence or workplace may incur lodging expenses associated with approved overnight travel. Employees are not allowed to incur expenses for any lodging in Augusta, Macon, Forsyth, or Gainesville without prior approval of the county manager or the constitutional officers within their respective offices. Neither the county manager or the constitutional officer shall permit overnight lodging in the above named locations if the training, conference, or meeting begins at 9:00 a.m. or later, or ends at 9:00 p.m. or earlier unless exceptional circumstances, as determined by the county manager, warrant deviation from this provision. 
All lodging expenses should be placed on the county credit card, when possible. The county currently maintains six separate credit cards in order to ensure that employees and board members should not have to pay out-of-pocket for any major expenses relating to county business. 
All lodging charges should be reasonable and should exclude all taxes. Employees and board members are required to utilize the most affordable option when staying overnight. Employees and board members are allowed to stay in the hotel/motel that is hosting the conference or event, as long as the employee or board member stays in the basic room. Any upgrades that are requested (ocean-view, larger room, etc.) will be paid by the employee or board member. 
(2)  Reservations. In order to ensure that no upgrades are requested without the county's knowledge, all reservations to hotels will need to be made by the county clerk. Employees and board members should submit the reservations request form, which provides the details necessary to make reservations. This form includes an e-mail address to which your confirmation number/paperwork will be sent. This information will be necessary to check in the hotel. 
(3)  Taxes associated with lodging expenses. Employees and board members should review hotel/motel receipts to ensure that taxes have been applied correctly to their lodging expenses in accordance with state tax laws and regulations. Employees and board members should attempt to resolve any problems with the billing prior to checkout or will be held responsible for these amounts. 
Local government officials and employees traveling within the state on official business are exempt from paying county or municipal excise tax on lodging and are exempt from local sales and use taxes. These amounts will only be removed when the lodging is paid by county credit card and when the proper forms are submitted to the hotel/motel. If the lodging is paid by the employee or board member, the room will not be exempt from sales and use taxes. 
(4)  Resort and other fees. Some hotels include a charge for "resort" or other fees. These are not tax-exempt fees, and should be paid, regardless of the method of payment. 
(5)  Lodging expenses incurred while taking leave. Employees who take annual leave while on travel status may not be reimbursed for lodging expenses incurred during the period of leave. Board members who extend their stay beyond the training conference or course will not be reimbursed for the additional lodging expenses incurred immediately before or after the training session. These amounts should not be included on the government credit card and are not exempt from any taxes. If an employee or board member chooses to extend a stay for personal reasons, the employee or board member must check out of the room with the county credit card and must check back in using a personal credit card to ensure that personal stays are not included on the county credit card. 
If personal stays are included on the county credit card, the matter must be resolved immediately. Failure to notice the error and failure to resolve the problem will result in the revocation of rights to use the county credit card for a period of not less than one year and could result in disciplinary action as determined by the county manager. 
(5)  Required documentation of lodging expenses. Detailed receipts for lodging expenses incurred must be turned in to accounts payable as soon as possible. A check must accompany each receipt to cover any incidentals (room service, phone charges, etc.) that were charged to the county credit card. Failure to do so will be documented, turned over to the county manager for review, and could result in disciplinary action. 
(i)  Travel by county-owned or personal vehicles. 
(1)  General provisions. Whenever possible, employees and board members should utilize county-owned vehicles for any travel for official county business. If a particular county-owned vehicle is assigned to an employee or department, that vehicle should be used for any travel. If no county-owned vehicle is assigned to an individual or department, please contact the county manager to obtain an available vehicle. 
No driver shall operate a county vehicle after alcohol intake of any quantity. The driver must wait until the effects of the alcohol have cleared their system, or at least eight hours, whichever is longer. 
County vehicles shall be filled up at the county fueling center prior to travel in order to minimize the fuel cost. If a gasoline purchase is necessary while out of the county, the employee or board member shall fill up the car using cash, a personal credit card, or county credit card. 
If a county-owned vehicle is not available for use and the use of a personal vehicle is required, the employee or board member shall be reimbursed at the same rate as the Internal Revenue Service. The mileage reimbursement encompasses all expenses associated with the operation of a personal motor vehicle, with the exception of tolls and parking expenses, which are reimbursed separately. 
In instances where a county-owned vehicle is available, but a personal vehicle is used instead, mileage will be reimbursed for business miles traveled at 30 percent of the Internal Revenue Service standard mileage rate. 
To the greatest extent possible, employees and board members are expected to travel together in the same vehicle to minimize expenses to the taxpayers when traveling to the same destination. 
Citizens serving on boards and committees of the county will not be entitled to reimbursement of in-county mileage, and, instead, will receive the per diem established for meetings to cover their incidental expenses associated with their service. Likewise, magistrates will not be entitled to reimbursement of in-county mileage. 
(2)  Determination of business miles traveled. Employees and board members may be reimbursed for the mileage incurred from the home or workplace, whichever is closest to the destination, using the most direct route available. The total mileage reimbursement request should be reduced by the amount of personal miles traveled during the same trip. In order to compare the reasonableness of any reimbursement request or travel log, the county will use MapQuest, or a similar mapping website, to determine the reasonable amount of mileage that should be charged. 
(3)  Prohibited mileage reimbursement. Employees and board members are not entitled to mileage reimbursement for travel between their place of residence and their official workplace of the county or any personal mileage incurred while on travel status. 
(4)  Use of county-owned vehicles. Employees and board members traveling outside of the county on official county business are required to maintain a travel log documenting the total miles used while in the county vehicle. If any personal mileage is traveled in a county-owned vehicle, the employee or board member will be required to document and reimburse the county for these miles at the IRS Tier 1 Rate. 
(5)  Required documentation of mileage, parking, and toll expenses. All requests for reimbursement of mileage, parking and toll charges must be documented on an employee travel expense statement. The total miles traveled, less any personal miles traveled, should be indicated on the expense statement. This form should also include the travel purpose and destination. Employees and board members are required to claim the mileage on the most direct route from the point of departure to the destination. Deviations from the most direct route need to be detailed on the expense statement. Failure to adequately explain these deviations may result in a reduction in the total amount paid. 
Mileage reimbursement requests will be reviewed for reasonableness, using MapQuest or another similar mapping internet site as a guide. When it is determined that the mileage is not reasonable, the matter will be turned over to the county manager for review. Additional information may be requested regarding the route used, etc., to determine how reasonable the mileage is prior to payment. The county manager has the final authority to determine the amount of mileage that the county shall reimburse. 
Requests for reimbursement of parking fees and tolls paid should also be recorded on the travel expense statement. Employees are expected to obtain receipts for these expenses. If it is not possible to obtain a receipt, then a written explanation should be included on the expense statement. 
(6)  Other methods of travel. Other methods of travel should only be used in rare circumstances and should be approved by the county manager in advance of travel. 
(j)  Miscellaneous items. 
(1)  Miscellaneous travel expenses. Employees or board members may be reimbursed for work-related FAX messages, postage expenses, copies or other supplies that may be necessary in order to facilitate county business while away from the office. These items should be documented on the travel expense report as miscellaneous travel expenses and receipts (if available) should be attached. 
(2)  Registration fees. Registration fees required for participation in workshops, seminars, or conferences that an employee is directed and/or authorized to attend should be paid directly by the county. In the event that these fees are paid directly by the employee or board member, these expenses may be reimbursed. Paid receipts should be turned in for reimbursement. 
When an employee or board member wishes for the spouse or other family member to attend a conference, the employee or board member is responsible for all of the expenses incurred by the family member. If additional fees are required to be paid with the registration fee in order for a family member to attend, these fees should be paid directly by the employee or board member. The employee or board member should attach a personal check to the registration information that is turned in to accounts payable. The check should be made directly to the agency responsible for the conference/training. Do not make these checks payable to the Greene County Board of Commissioners. Any personal checks turned in to accounts payable will be sent with the county's payment and the registration information. 
(3)  Unallowable expenses. The following expenses are not reimbursable unless specific legal authority has been established: 
Laundry 
Tipping for maid service 
Valet services for parking, when self-parking options are available 
Theater 
Entertainment 
Alcoholic beverages 
Bank charges for ATM withdrawals 
Room service charges 
Personal expenses, including those of a spouse or family member 
(4)  Travel advances. The purpose of travel advances is to minimize the financial burden on employees while traveling on behalf of the county. This objective can be accomplished by offering employees and board members use of a county credit card and providing per diem allowances for meals in advance of travel. 
(5)  County credit cards. Employees and board members have access to county credit cards in order to cover lodging costs. Use of a county credit card ensures that the transaction is exempt from taxes and allows minimal out-of-pocket expenses for the traveler. 
Employees or board members may check out a county credit card by contacting the finance department. Due to minimal credit balances maintained on each credit card, the only travel expenses allowed on the county credit card are lodging expenses and gasoline purchases for county-owned vehicles. No meals are to be charged. Detailed receipts are required to be turned in to accounts payable as soon as the credit card is checked in to the finance department. Failure to do so will result in revocation of credit card privileges and/or disciplinary action. 
(6)  Review. All travel-related expenditures will be reviewed closely by the board of commissioners office. Any questions regarding travel expenditures will be directed to the employee/board member involved and/or the county manager. No payments will be made until the matter is resolved. Continued, questionable travel-related expenditures may result in the denial of any future travel requests. 
This policy shall reflect, and be superseded by, any changes mandated by state or federal legislation that are in conflict with the rules and regulations prescribed herein. Any such changes shall be limited to the conflicting language/provision and shall preserve the intent of the board of commissioners to the fullest extent possible. The board of commissioners reserves the right to change or modify this policy at any time and advance notice may not always be possible. As changes or modifications do occur, they will be communicated through standard communication channels. 
This policy shall supersede and prevail over any previously adopted policy where conflict exists. In any such case, the county manager shall be responsible for preserving the intent of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-14-2013) 
Secs. 2-149—2-177. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 2-178. - Creation of bodies by the board. 
Boards, commissions, and authorities may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners to aid them in lawfully effecting and exercising local government functions in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Code 1998, § 3-806) 
Secs. 2-179—2-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ETHICS AND CODE OF CONDUCT 

Sec. 2-210. - Code of ethics. 
(a)  Prohibited conduct. Public officials and employees of the county shall treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness, and equality under the law, and shall avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. Prohibited conduct of each such official and employee shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Granting or making available to any person any special consideration, treatment, advantage, or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large; 
(2)  Requesting, using, or permitting the use of any publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor, or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or any other person, except as otherwise allowed by law; 
(3)  Participating in the deliberation of or voting on any matter involving his financial or personal interest; 
(4)  Engaging in private employment with, or rendering services for, any private person who has business transactions with the county, unless he has made full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such employment or services; 
(5)  Appealing on behalf of any private person, other than himself, before any public body in the county; 
(6)  Accepting any gift, whether in the form of money, thing, favor, loan, or promise, that would not be offered or given to him if he were not an official or employee; 
(7)  Disclosing any confidential information concerning any official or employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the county without prior formal authorization of the governing body; 
(8)  Using or permitting the use of confidential information to advance the financial or personal interest of himself or any other person; or 
(9)  Appointing or voting for the appointment of any person related to him by blood or marriage to fill an office, position, employment, or duty, when the salary, wages, pay, or compensation is to be paid out of public funds. 
(b)  Hearings and determinations. Upon the sworn complaint of any person alleging facts which, if true, would constitute a violation of this section, the board shall conduct a public hearing at which the accused shall be given an opportunity to be heard, either personally or through counsel. At the conclusion of said hearing, the board shall, in written findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, make a determination concerning the propriety of the conduct of the official or employee in question. 
(Code 1998, § 3-102) 
Secs. 2-211—2-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-229. - Adoption of state rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations promulgated by the state election board which pertain to county elections, together with the provisions of the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), are hereby adopted as the rules, regulations and provisions that shall govern the conduct of general and special elections in the county. 
(Code 1998, § 2-101) 
Sec. 2-230. - Expenses. 
Such funds as are necessary for the conduct of elections and for the performance of the duties that are specified by the rules and regulations cited in section 2-229 shall be budgeted and appropriated annually, and from time to time, as required. 
(Code 1998, § 2-102) 
Secs. 2-231—2-253. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - COURTS 

Sec. 2-254. - Magistrate court. 
The magistrate system, as established by the laws of the state, is adopted as the primary court of jurisdiction concerning the enforcement of this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 5-101) 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-255—2-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - COUNTY-OWNED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted by the board of commissioners on Jan. 27, 2010, amended chapter 2 by changing the name of Art. XI from Fleet Management to County-owned vehicles. 

Sec. 2-276. - Purpose. 
(a)  The Greene County Board of Commissioners possesses a large inventory of vehicles, motorized equipment and supporting items. These items constitute a substantial investment on the part of the community we serve. Therefore, it is the responsibility of all county employees to ensure that this equipment is properly maintained in order for all departments to function properly and be used efficiently to provide services to the community. 
(b)  This article sets forth the procedures, mechanisms, and protocols necessary for the proper care and operation of the county's motorized fleet. Where this article conflicts with any other ordinance, this article supersedes all previous written and verbal instructions concerning the Greene County Fleet and its operations. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2009; Ord. of 1-27-2010, § (a)) 
Sec. 2-277. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Call out means a directive to an employee to report to a work site during off-duty time or day, and to respond to emergencies, which require immediate response to protect life and property. 
Constitutional officer means the tax commissioner, sheriff, probate judge, and clerk of superior court. 
County employee means an employee of any department operating under the fiscal control of the Greene County Board of Commissioners. For the purposes of this article, this includes any person receiving a paycheck directly from the Greene County Board of Commissioners, and all employees of the constitutional officers, as well as any eligible driver of a county vehicle. 
County fleet means all vehicles owned by the Greene County Board of Commissioners providing governmental services, and/or supporting the delivery of governmental services. This shall include all vehicles listed on the county's fixed asset inventory, and all vehicles included under the county's property and liability insurance coverage unless such coverage is authorized pursuant to contract. 
County vehicles means all vehicles that are a part of the county fleet. 
"De minimis" use means personal use such as lunch or an occasional stop for a personal errand on the way between a business location and the employee's home, or taking a child to school on the way to work. 
Department managers shall include all employees that manage and/or supervise one or more employees in positions providing services, and/or supporting the delivery of governmental services. They shall include, but not be limited to, the public works director, the senior center manager, the EMS director, the 911 director, the chief building official, the GIS director, the road superintendent, the animal control officer, the governmental properties supervisor, the building and grounds maintenance superintendent, and the chief appraiser. This shall also include the sheriff, clerk of superior court, tax commissioner, and probate judge. 
Drivers means any person driving and/or operating a county vehicle. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2009; Ord. of 1-27-2010, § (b)) 
Sec. 2-278. - Policy. 
(a)  Responsibilities of drivers. 
(1)  Drivers must wear seat belts at all times while operating the vehicle as directed in the Greene County Personnel Policy. 
(2)  Drivers must confirm that the vehicle assigned to them complies with O.C.G.A. § 40-8-92 that requires all vehicles utilizing emergency lights must have a permit unless the vehicles are clearly marked on each side as being law enforcement. 
(3)  Drivers shall not operate a county vehicle after alcohol intake of any quantity for at least eight hours. If an amount of alcohol has been consumed that might potentially impair the driver, then the driver must wait until the effects of the alcohol have cleared their system, or at least eight hours, whichever is longer. 
(4)  Drivers must not smoke while in a county vehicle and must take steps to prevent any passenger from smoking while in the vehicle. If a passenger fails to comply with the request of the driver, then the driver shall notify their immediate supervisor for further action. 
(b)  Vehicle replacement policy. 
(1)  All vehicles and equipment will be replaced as deemed necessary by the county manager. Department managers must adequately document justification for new purchases prior to discussion with the county manager. This justification must include age of vehicle; mileage; and an explanation of anticipated repairs and/or excessive prior repair costs. Planned vehicle replacement will be a function of the budget preparation and adoption process. 
(2)  In special or extenuating circumstances such as major component failure, the county manager, subject to budgetary limitations, may approve the early retirement and replacement of a particular vehicle. 
(3)  As a vehicle nears its retirement age, the department manager will be required to justify the following: 
a.  Is a vehicle still needed? 
b.  Is the type and style of vehicle still well suited for the task required? 
c.  Determine if any features of the vehicle need to be changed when ordering a replacement vehicle. 
(4)  Once the need for a replacement has been established, the public works department, through the governmental properties supervisor, will order the new vehicle based on the needs of the requesting department or office. Public works will pick up the vehicles when they are ready from the vendor, ensure the vehicle is prepared as ordered, ensure the vehicle complies with the provisions of the fleet management policy, issue a fuel key, add the vehicle to the county inventory, provide the necessary documentation to the county clerk to obtain a license plate, and add the vehicle to the county's insurance. No newly purchased vehicle will be added to the county's insurance unless such vehicle is titled as noted below. 
(5)  An exception will be made for vehicles employed in covert or secret investigatory police functions authorized by resolution of the board of commissioners authorizing the vehicle to be covered under the county's insurance coverage. In order to maintain the covert integrity of undercover vehicles, such vehicles will not be permitted to utilize the county fueling center and must utilize alternate means for fuel using allocated funding from their respective budgets. 
(6)  All vehicles will be ordered like for like unless additional features are fully justified. 
(7)  Requests for specialty vehicles (SUVs, large sedans, and 4×4s) must include documentation justifying the request. These requests will be handled on a case-by-case basis. 
(8)  All vehicles will be titled in the name "Greene County Board of Commissioners" as the local governing authority of the county and have vehicle registration and license plates in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-2-37. 
(c)  Vehicle maintenance and repair. 
(1)  Repairs and maintenance will be coordinated through the public works department. The procedures for billing and charges will be as follows: 
a.  All departments will be charged actual costs for routine maintenance and repairs including, but not limited to, tires, preventive maintenance, towing, road failures, breakdowns, and routine maintenance. Consequently, there is no benefit to defer or avoid any vehicle/equipment maintenance requirements. 
b.  These charges will be calculated based on the actual costs incurred by the public works department for the vehicle. 
c.  Each department will be responsible for any costs associated with accidents, abuse, or neglect of a vehicle or piece of equipment. 
d.  The public works department will not perform any type of maintenance work or assistance for vehicles not titled to the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Major body damage cannot be repaired at public works. A claim must be filed on the county's insurance, and the vehicle must be taken to a repair shop. 
a.  The driver involved in an accident needs to obtain an accident report from an appropriate law enforcement agency and go directly to the hospital for a drug and alcohol test. 
b.  The department head must notify the county clerk of the accident and provide the accident report and other necessary information and documentation. 
c.  General administration, through the county clerk, will submit all claims to the county's insurance provider. No other employee of any agency, department, division, or office is permitted to submit claims directly to the county's insurance company. 
d.  Any estimates received by an outside repair shop must be submitted to the insurance company for review. 
e.  The insurance company may send an adjuster out to assess the damage. No vehicle should be fixed prior to approval by the insurance company. 
(d)  Vehicle pool. 
(1)  The general administration receptionist is responsible for coordinating the vehicle pool. 
a.  When a pool vehicle is needed, the department manager, or other eligible user, shall contact the receptionist with the request. The receptionist will maintain sign-in/sign-out sheets. Although a particular vehicle may be requested, the receptionist cannot guarantee that the vehicle will be assigned. 
b.  Vehicles will be made available on a first come first serve basis unless an emergency situation arises. However, departments that do not have vehicles currently assigned will be given priority over departments that do have vehicles currently assigned to ensure that use of privately owned vehicles is minimized. 
c.  The county's insurance provider requires that the county have a motor vehicle report (MVR) on any person that drives a county-owned vehicle. The personnel director currently runs MVRs on all new employees. Members of any boards or committees will need to sign a waiver for an MVR prior to driving a county vehicle. Other individuals are not allowed to drive county vehicles. 
d.  Each month, fuel usage for the pool vehicles will be charged based on the number of miles driven by each department when using a vehicle from the pool. These amounts will be calculated as follows: 
# of miles per dept × average miles per gallon × cost per gallon 
e.  Each department's fuel usage for pooled vehicles will be charged to account number 53.1130 of that department. All repairs and preventative maintenance for the pool vehicles will be charged to general administration. 
(e)  Take-home vehicles. 
(1)  The county wishes to restrict the number of county-owned vehicles being used by employees to commute to and from work and to ensure the proper use of public funds with regard to the county practice of allowing employees to commute to and from work in county-owned vehicles. Assignment of a county vehicle is neither a privilege nor a right of any county employee and shall not be made based on employee merit or employee status. 
(2)  County vehicles may be assigned to drivers as take-home vehicles only when it is found to contribute significantly to the efficiency and effectiveness of Greene County, is cost effective on its own merit, and is in the best interest of the citizens of Greene County. Take-home vehicle use shall be strictly controlled by all aspects of this article. The following conditions will be evaluated in making a determination for overnight vehicle assignment: 
a.  The residency of the employee. To be eligible for a take-home vehicle, the employee must reside inside Greene County. Any vehicle violating this provision shall be surrendered to the administrative office of the board of commissioners upon written request from the county manager. In any case where a vehicle is not immediately surrendered, the fuel key serving the vehicle will be disabled and the insurance will be canceled on the vehicle. 
b.  The driver is on 24-hour call out, which may require the driver to respond to a location other than their normal duty station, and where special tools, materials, or supplies required for or associated with the position must be carried in the vehicle. In such cases, the terms of section "a." above must be met. 
c.  The employee is assigned to a position which is responsible for responding to an emergency situation related to public health or safety and protection of property on a 24-hour basis. In such cases, the terms of subsection a., above, must be met. 
d.  Employees who are assigned on-call duties on a rotational basis shall only take a county vehicle home on those days the employee is assigned the on-call duty. In such cases, the terms of section a. above, must be met. 
(3)  Every effort should be made to ensure the safety and security of the county vehicle. During off-duty hours, all vehicles not utilized as take-home vehicles shall be parked at the county building that serves as the primary work location of the office to which it is assigned. 
(4)  Subject to the provisions of this section, the county manager shall be responsible for determining which employees are assigned take-home vehicles, provided, however, that the constitutional officers, subject to the provisions of this article, shall be responsible for take-home vehicle assignments for vehicles issued to their office for official use. 
(f)  Disposal of surplus vehicles and equipment. 
(1)  The public works director will be responsible for disposing of all surplus vehicles, equipment, and other county property. 
(2)  All vehicles and equipment purchased under a lease or total cost program will be disposed of in accordance with the terms and conditions of the related agreement. 
(3)  The proceeds from the sale of any vehicle purchased with asset forfeiture funds will be deposited into the asset forfeiture account. 
(g)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  All department managers shall ensure that appropriate management steps are taken such that fuel costs do not exceed the expense line item in their respective budgets allocated by the board of commissioners. It is incumbent upon all department managers to properly manage their fuel consumption and vehicle usage such that expenses remain within the adopted budget amounts. Any department that expends all funds allocated for fuel usage shall be prohibited from utilizing the fueling center until additional funds are allocated by the board of commissioners. Additionally, no expenses will be paid for fuel when funds are not available within the appropriate departmental line item budget for such costs. 
(2)  County vehicles are not to be used by any driver, employee, or elected official for personal use except for "de minimis" use. Any elected official or employee of any elected office that performs work outside of county business is prohibited from using the county vehicle in performance of such work. This provision specifically applies to work performed for compensation where the employee is being paid directly or indirectly by a third party. To ensure appropriate fiscal equity to the taxpayers, any business requesting services must contract for such services through the board of commissioners. Any driver, employee or elected official found violating this provision will forfeit the use of the vehicle during non-working hours, and the fuel key for the vehicle will be disabled. 
(3)  This article shall reflect, and be superseded by, any changes mandated by state or federal legislation that are in conflict with the rules and regulations prescribed herein. Any such changes shall be limited to the conflicting language/provision and shall preserve the intent of the board of commissioners to the fullest extent possible. The board of commissioners reserves the right to change or modify this article at any time and advance notice may not always be possible. As changes or modifications do occur, they will be communicated through standard communication channels. 
(4)  This article shall supersede and prevail over any previously adopted ordinance where conflict exists. In any such case, the county manager shall be responsible for preserving the intent of the board of commissioners. 
(5)  Any item or procedure not defined in this section shall be addressed in writing directly with the county manager. 
(h)  Sample seatbelt policy. 
(1)  The Greene County Board of Commissioners has declared that any and all passengers, including the driver, riding in a vehicle owned by Greene County, are required to properly wear installed seat belts when operating a Green County vehicle. 
Exceptions are as follows: 
a.  Tractors/equipment without a "roll-over protection system" (ROPS). 
b.  Specialized construction equipment. 
c.  Prisoner/suspect of law enforcement officers being transported for short distances in the back seat of the vehicle when restraining devices or other documented circumstances prevent the proper wearing of seat belts. 
d.  Other exceptions must be requested in writing giving a full justification. Requests will be addressed to the county manager for approval. 
(2)  Failure to use your seat belt is a serious safety violation and is not to be taken lightly. It is a known fact that seat belts can and do help reduce the severity of injuries when they are properly used. Proper use constitutes proper adjustments as well as proper latching of the unit. Employees who receive reimbursement for mileage for use of their personal vehicle while on county business, or any employee that for any other reason may be operating their personal vehicle on county business are required to wear their seat belts in their personal vehicles as well as those in county vehicles. To bring employees into compliance with this policy: 
First offense will result in a written warning. 
Second offense will result in a two-day suspension without pay. 
Third offense will result in termination. 
Offense for those who receive reimbursement for mileage will be the forfeiture of that reimbursement. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2009; Ord. of 1-27-2010, §§ (c)—(e); Ord. of 1-18-2011, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— Ordinance of 11-17-2009, contained an attachment titled "Attachment A: Background." This attachment has not been included in this printing at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-279—2-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - COUNTY-ISSUED PURCHASING CARDS AND CREDIT CARDS 

Sec. 2-291. - Intent and scope. 
This article is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of county-issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(Res. of 12-14-2015, § I) 
Sec. 2-292. - Definitions. 
Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the board of commissioners to receive a county-issued government purchasing card or credit card for temporary or permanent use. 
Card administrator means the purchasing card and credit card administrator designated by the Greene County Board of Commissioners. 
County means Greene County and/or the board of commissioners. 
County purchasing card, county p-card or county credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, either for temporary or permanent use, and used by an authorized elected official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of the county and/or the official's office. 
Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
User agreement means the required agreement between the board of commissioners and an authorized elected official which restricts the use of a county purchasing card or county credit card. 
(Res. of 12-14-2015, § II) 
Sec. 2-293. - Designated elected officials. 
The Greene County Board of Commissioners ("county"), in its discretion, may authorize specific county elected officials to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
No authorized elected official may use a county purchasing card or credit card until and unless he or she has executed the county's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this article or for any purchases that are not authorized by this article. 
Res. of 12-14-2015, § III) 
Sec. 2-294. - Card administrator. 
The board of commissioners designates the finance manager of the Greene County Board of Commissioners as the county purchasing card and credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator include: 
(a)  Manage county-issued purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(b)  Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and credit card issues. 
(c)  Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
(d)  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
(e)  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
(f)  Assist authorized elected officials to dispute transactions when necessary. 
(g)  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this article, county procurement ordinances and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organizations, financial institutions, or any duly authorized agent of such organizations or institutions issuing county purchasing cards, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(h)  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of county purchasing cards. 
(i)  Audit and reconcile transactions at least annually. 
(j)  Maintain credit card administration records for at least seven years as provided by the county's record retention policy. 
(k)  Maintain credit card purchase records and credit card statements for at least five years as provided by the county's record retention policy. 
(Res. of 12-14-2015, § IV) 
Sec. 2-295. - Use of cards. 
(a)  Authorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this article, the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, county procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
The authorized elected official shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the county purchasing card account number, expiration date and security code. 
Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority or established in the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: 
Per transaction: $1,500.00 
Per month: $6,000.00 
(b)  Unauthorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the county's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement. The following uses are prohibited in all circumstances: alcoholic beverages; tobacco; cash advances; entertainment; gift cards; campaigning activities; personal purchases; and purchases with no budget funds available. 
(c)  Receipts and documentation. Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained by the authorized county elected official and transferred to the card administrator, where records will be maintained for five years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. Copies of all credit card and purchasing card statements for cards issued under the county's federal tax identification number and paid directly by the county finance office shall be maintained in the finance office to ensure that all purchases are included in the annual review and audit. Any charges incurred on county purchasing cards and credit cards not paid directly by the finance office may be redacted on the statements submitted. 
(d)  Public records. All receipt and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(Res. of 12-14-2015, § V) 
Sec. 2-296. - Review of purchases and audit. 
Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection of misuse or abuse of county purchasing cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the county. 
(a)  Review of purchases. All purchases shall be reviewed according to the following procedure: 
(1)  Credit cards (temporary use): The county maintains credit cards for travel and other miscellaneous expenditures. County credit cards are checked out from the county finance office for each use. After usage, all receipts should be turned in to accounts payable when the county credit card is signed back in. Authorized elected officials are responsible for verifying budget funds are available prior to usage. Travel expenditures must follow travel policy approved by the board. For constitutional officers that are exempt from the travel policy, all travel expenditures should be reasonable and exclude all taxes. Documentation of meals purchased with a county credit card shall be provided to the card administrator and must include the government purpose and the names of all persons for whom such meals were purchased. Documentation of meals associated with economic development projects shall be provided to the card administrator and shall include the project name and the initials of all attendees with the receipt. Additional information, include full names of attendees, must be provided by the authorized elected official to the economic development director. Detailed receipts for meals are required to ensure unauthorized purchases (i.e., alcoholic beverages) are not purchased. All receipts will be reviewed by the finance office for accuracy and purpose. Any purchases not fitting the criteria will reimbursed by the elected official from non-governmental funds. The authorized elected official has the option to request that the full board of commissioners approve any denied purchases in an open meeting. 
(2)  Credit cards (permanent use): County credit cards that are issued directly to an authorized elected official shall only be used by the person whose name appears on the card. All receipts should be turned into the card administrator prior to month-end. Travel and meals must follow the same requirements as included in (a) above. All receipts will be reviewed by the finance office for accuracy and compliance with this article. Any purchases not fitting the criteria will be reimbursed by the authorized elected official from non-governmental funds. The authorized elected official has the option to request that the full board of commissioners approve any denied purchases in an open meeting. 
(3)  Purchasing card (p-card): The county currently utilizes five p-cards countywide. Any authorized elected official that is issued a county p-card must utilize the Bank of America "works" program to account for his or her expenditures. These county p-cards are issued directly to one person, who is the only authorized user on the card. All receipts must be turned into the card administrator prior to month-end. All transactions must be approved by cardholder, supervisor, and accountant to ensure that all transactions are thoroughly vetted. Any issues must be resolved by a cardholder prior to approval. The purpose of each purchase must be included in the comments section of the works program. 
(4)  Personal credit card purchases: County credit cards or p-cards shall be used whenever possible. However, in the event that a county credit card is not available, authorized elected officials can utilize a personal credit card and be reimbursed by the county. Reimbursement is not guaranteed. All reimbursements for personal credit card purchases will follow the same review procedures as a county credit card. Purchases must have a government purpose, be reasonable, and must have budget funds available. Reimbursements will not be made if any of these requirements are not met. The authorized elected official has the option to request that the full board of commissioners approve any denied purchases in an open meeting. 
(5)  Credit cards for constitutional offices: Credit cards issued by constitutional officers for use by themselves and/or their employees are required to follow the same documentation requirements as other county purchases. All charges that are paid directly by an account handled or administered by the finance office of the board of commissioners shall follow this policy. For purchases made with accounts handled directly by the constitutional offices, elected officials of those offices have the option to follow this purchasing card and credit card ordinance for Greene County or may create a policy dedicated to their respective offices. Any policy created for their respective offices must be compliant with O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 and shall include a requirement that the constitutional officer sign a document that includes all substantive provisions included in the user agreement applicable to county-issued purchasing cards. Any changes to the policy must be forwarded to the county's card administrator immediately. All purchases are still subject to open records laws, shall be maintained by the constitutional officer for the proper time periods, and the constitutional officer shall cause such purchases to be audited as directed by O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24. 
(b)  Audits. The card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Authorized elected officials and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(Res. of 12-14-2015, § VI) 
Sec. 2-297. - Violations. 
(a)  An authorized elected official shall reimburse the county, from non-governmental funds, for any purchases made with a county-issued purchasing card or credit card in violation of this article or the user agreement. 
(b)  In the discretion of the county governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this article may result in: 
(1)  A warning; 
(2)  Suspension of the authorized elected official's authority to use a county purchasing card or credit card; or 
(3)  Revocation of the authorized elected official's authority to use a county purchasing card or credit card. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall preclude the county governing authority from referring misuse of a county purchasing card or credit card to the appropriate authorities for potential prosecution. 
(Res. of 12-14-2015, § VII) 
Chapter 4 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Governing authority has power to enact legislation to restrict operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or these image-producing devices are maintained to show images for five or fewer persons per machine at any one time where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau, introduction services means any business, agency, or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes, or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified anatomical areas includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities includes any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral intercourse, anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicting human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Code 1998, § 14-401(A)) 
Sec. 4-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulations cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this chapter represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Code 1998, § 14-401(B)) 
Sec. 4-3. - Violations. 
Any person violating the provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable, upon conviction, as provided in this Code. In addition to such file or imprisonment, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Code 1998, § 14-401(O)) 
Secs. 4-4—4-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-23. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
The following regulations shall apply to erotic dance establishments: 
(1)  No person shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(3)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with, as a dancer, a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(4)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(5)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to open on Christmas Day. 
(6)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(7)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this chapter. 
(8)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(9)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(10)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(11)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(12)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(13)  If any portion of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portion of this chapter and its application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Code 1998, § 14-401(C)) 
Sec. 4-24. - Certain activities prohibited. 
(a)  Public display or exposure. No person shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a fully opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion in an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct on premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on such premises within the unincorporated areas of the county: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, and genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in ubsection (b)(1) of this section or where such person performs acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
b.  The caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals. 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals. 
d.  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsection (b)(2)a. and b. of this section. 
(3)  Provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theater which derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1998, § 14-401(D), (E)) 
Sec. 4-25. - Admission of and sales to minors unlawful. 
(a)  Admission of minors unlawful. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(b)  Sales to minor unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any services, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor, adult dancing establishment, or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Code 1998, § 14-401(F), (G)) 
Sec. 4-26. - Location. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(b)  No adult business or use restricted in this chapter shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes. 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located. 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined in this chapter is located. 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement for property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. 
(Code 1998, § 14-401(H)) 
Sec. 4-27. - Employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include, as well, work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the licensing officer of his intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and shall receive approval of such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the licensing officer requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular county or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the licensing officer for a hearing. The decision of the licensing officer after hearing may be appealed to the board, which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances of the county, laws and regulations of the state or the rules and regulations of the county shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 1998, § 14-401(I)) 
Secs. 4-28—4-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PREMISES 

Sec. 4-58. - Declared nuisance and abatement. 
(a)  Unlawful operation declared nuisance. Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provision of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this chapter, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted under this chapter. 
(b)  Abatement of sanitary nuisance. A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Code 1998, § 14-401(J), (K)) 
Sec. 4-59. - Cleaning of premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Code 1998, § 14-401(L)) 
Sec. 4-60. - Self-inspection of premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Code 1998, § 14-401(M)) 
Sec. 4-61. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his finding of a violation of this chapter resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "unclean" or "unsafe," as the case may be. 
(Code 1998, § 14-401(N)) 
Secs. 4-62—4-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - APPLICATION AND PERMITTING 

Sec. 4-83. - Permit required; operation of unlicensed premised unlawful. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the unincorporated area of the county any of the adult entertainment establishment defined in this chapter without a permit to do so. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business, or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this chapter, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Code 1998, § 14-402(A), (B)) 
Sec. 4-84. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the county. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the county, no new licenses shall be issued. 
(Code 1998, § 14-402(C)) 
Sec. 4-85. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the county administrator or his designated representative. Prior to submitting each application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the board, shall be paid to the county clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The county clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or copy thereof shall be supplied to the county administrator at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 1998, § 14-402(D)) 
Sec. 4-86. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of applicant. 
(3)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(4)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. 
(5)  The business license history of the applicant and whether each applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business removed or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(7)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or Charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(8)  Such other identification and information as the sheriff's department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(9)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any. 
(10)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(11)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right. 
(12)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business regulated under this chapter. 
(13)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual. 
b.  If a partnership, the manager or general manager. 
c.  If a corporation, the president of the corporation. 
d.  If any other organization or association, the chief administrative official. 
(Code 1998, § 14-402(E)) 
Sec. 4-87. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the county commissioners of the county and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the board, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Code 1998, § 14-402(F)) 
Sec. 4-88. - Application investigation. 
The county shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the board may grant the permit if they find: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this county or any other county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(6)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire, and safety requirements and standards. 
(7)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(8)  That the applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder, or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined in this chapter to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined in this chapter openly occur. 
(9)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required in this chapter commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(10)  That the proposed premises is not to be located within 1,000 feet of any church, school, library, governmental building, or site of any other business restricted under this chapter. 
(11)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the county, state, or the United States. 
(12)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the county to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Code 1998, § 14-402(G)) 
Sec. 4-89. - Refusal; appeal. 
If the county, following the investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, it shall notify the county clerk of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the county clerk. The county clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the board. 
(Code 1998, § 14-402(H)) 
Sec. 4-90. - Renewal. 
Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittee continue to meet the requirements set out in this chapter. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the board. 
(Code 1998, § 14-402(I)) 
Sec. 4-91. - Nontransferable; exception. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit shall be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such saie, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the county, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Code 1998, § 14-402(J)) 
Sec. 4-92. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the county commissioners, has been deposited with the county and approval has been obtained from the county administrator and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 14-402(K)) 
Secs. 4-93—4-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - APPEALS 

Sec. 4-113. - Procedure. 
(a)  Notice of appeal; placement on agenda. 
(1)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the board. 
(2)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the board and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision, or receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested by the board and the name and address of the applicant. 
(3)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next board meeting occurring not less than five or more than 30 days after receipt of the application for board action. 
(b)  Board to determine procedure. When an appeal is placed on the board agenda, the board may take the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the county clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
(3)  If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 14-402(L), (M)) 
Sec. 4-114. - Hearing. 
(a)  Board of commissioners' hearing. Whenever the county clerk has scheduled an appeal before the board of commissioners, at the time and date set therefor, the board shall hear all relevant testimony and shall examine evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from county staff. The board may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the board shall be final. 
(b)  Rules of evidence inapplicable. The board and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearing conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(c)  Hearing officer—Powers. The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this chapter may receive and rule on the admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(d)  Same—Report. 
(1)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the board. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the county clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee or appellant the same day it is filed with the county clerk, with additional copies furnished to the sheriff of the county. 
(2)  The county clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda for the next regular board meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee or appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting, unless the permittee or appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(e)  Action by board. The board may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the board of commissioner does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Code 1998, § 14-402(N)—(R)) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 22, 2016, amended ch. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 6 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from the 1998 Code; and an ordinance of 2007. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; county governing authority given power to regulate alcoholic beverages permitting and licensing, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 et seq. and 3-5-80 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of wine, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-40 et seq. and 3-6-60 et seq.; local government may authorize issuance license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises where sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - General policies and purpose. 
(a)  In accordance with the laws of the state, it is necessary and expedient for the county to establish and promulgate certain standards and regulations in regard to the sale, tax and control of alcoholic beverages in the unincorporated areas of the county. The rules, regulations, licenses, taxes and standards shall be effective commencing at midnight on June 1, 2016. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the county only after the issuance of a license for such sale by the county and only in the manner permitted by said license. Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the county only by a licensee who complies with the rules and regulations of this chapter, and with the licensing, regulatory and revenue requirements of the state. 
(c)  All licenses granted by the county for the sale of alcoholic beverages are a mere grant or privilege subject to all terms and conditions imposed by county ordinance and state law and subject to being revoked by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Each licensee of the county shall display the license prominently at all times at the outlet for which the license is issued. A separate license must be issued for each outlet of sale and a separate application must be made for each outlet. 
(e)  The purposes of this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with state law. 
(2)  Guarding against monopoly and concentration of the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in one group. 
(3)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons. 
(4)  Promotion of appropriate land use planning and zoning in accordance with the county's comprehensive zoning policies. 
(5)  Protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions. 
(6)  Protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(f)  If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Applicant means any one or more persons and the responsible officer or employee applying for a license in the county or renewal thereof. 
Application means those forms required by the county to be completed by persons applying for an original license or a renewal license under this chapter. 
Beer and malt beverage mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product or any combination of such products in water, containing no more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The terms do not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. The term "beer" is used interchangeably with "malt beverage." 
Brew pub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36. 
Church means any place of permanent public religious worship. In addition to existing church facilities, a church shall be deemed to exist if a building permit therefor has been obtained and construction of the church has commenced or substantial materials, or supplies for its construction, have been moved to the site. 
County manager means the individual occupying the position of county manager of Greene County, Georgia, or his/her designee. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Eating establishment means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food; provided, however, that when determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales, barrels of malt beverages sold to licensed wholesale dealers, as authorized pursuant to subparagraph (D) of paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36, or to the public for consumption off the premises, as authorized pursuant to subparagraph (D) of paragraph (2) and paragraph (4) of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36, shall not be used. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation, or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Growler means a large container made of either glass or plastic that may be considered as a bottle that is filled with beer from a keg by a licensee, or employee of a licensee, and sealed/capped for consumption off the premises. Each growler must be sanitized, may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler and must be securely sealed before being removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. 
Hotel means every building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, including cottages or dwellings kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public in association with a place where food is actually served and consumed, sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay or other consideration to travelers and guests, and in association with one or more public dining rooms where meals are regularly served to such guests. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels, shall be classified as hotels for the purpose of this chapter. 
Immediate family includes the spouses, parents, children, brothers and sisters, related by blood or marriage. 
License means the formal approval granted or issued by the county to a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the county. 
Licensee means the individual licensee and in the case of a partnership, corporation, private club, or nonprofit tax exempt organization, includes the partnership, corporation, private clubs, or nonprofit tax exempt organization and the named licensee. 
Outlet means the definite structure, whether a room, ship, store, building, restaurant, golf cart or other mobile device used for the purpose of serving alcoholic beverages on golf courses, tent, catering location or club and immediately adjacent premises in which activities permitted by this chapter are conducted. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Premises means not only the location wherein an outlet for sale of alcoholic beverages is operated under a county license, but shall include all of the lot whereon said outlet is located, except where such outlet is located in a hotel, golf course or shopping center. The term "premises" also means the area immediately adjacent to the location where a catering license has been granted. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retailer or retail dealer means, except for distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term "retailer" or "retail dealer" shall have the same meaning as the term "retail package liquor store." 
Retail package liquor store means a retail business establishment owned by an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other business entity: (a) primarily engaged in the retail sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine in unbroken packages, not for consumption on the premises, except as authorized under this chapter; and (b) which derives from such retail sale of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages at least 75 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of a combination of distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by fermentation, or natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition of wine. 
Zoning means the zoning classifications as approved for the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages in the unincorporated limits of the county without first complying with this chapter. A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-8 of the County Code. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-4. - Compliance with chapter. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of this chapter, each licensee doing business in the county under this regulation shall comply with all federal laws, laws of the state and rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state. 
(b)  All licensees shall keep on the licensed premises a copy of chapter 6 of the County Code and appropriate state statutes and regulations and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof and all shall be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of his employees in violation of this article or the laws of the state or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-5. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. 
The county will not issue any license or permit contemplated in chapter 6 of the County Code prior to receiving from the applicant the affidavit contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Secs. 6-6—6-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATION AND LICENSING 

Sec. 6-23. - Qualifications for issuance of a license. 
Any person who desires to obtain a license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or by the package must meet the minimum qualifications set forth in this section. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner must meet the qualifications of any individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the application process. If the applicant is a corporation having as its principal business the sale of alcoholic beverages, the majority stockholder and each principal officer of the corporation, and the corporation must meet the qualifications of any individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the application process. If the applicant is a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, the officer or employee of the corporation responsible for the operation of the licensed premises, and the corporation must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as a part of the application process. If the applicant is a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or corporation which is organized and operating in the county as a mutual benefit membership group, such club or corporation may be licensed without reference to the financial interest qualifications of this section if no officer, director, trustee, manager, member, or stockholder therein can, in any event, derive any financial gain from the sale of alcoholic beverages by such club or corporation. The individual being primarily responsible for the club or corporation's compliance with this section must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the application process. If the applicant is a private club, each member of its governing body must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the application process. The specific qualifications are as follows: 
(a)  No license shall be issued to an applicant who is under 21 years of age. 
(b)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages may be issued to an applicant under the following circumstances: 
(1)  An applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of a felony, particularly, but not limited to, those offenses involving alcoholic beverages, pornography, gambling, tax law violations or violations relating to the Georgia Controlled Substances Act (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.). 
(2)  An applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of a misdemeanor involving alcoholic beverages, pornography, gambling, tax law violations or violations relating to the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, if such conviction indicates to the board of commissioners that the applicant will not maintain the outlet for which he is seeking a license in conformity with the federal, state or local laws, rules, and regulations. 
(3)  Any applicant convicted of a felony who served any part of a criminal sentence, including probation within the ten years immediately preceding the date of receipt of submission of the application. 
(4)  Any applicant who has been convicted of a misdemeanor who served any part of a criminal sentence, including probation within the five years immediately preceding the date of receipt of submission of the application. 
(5)  An applicant who has been held in civil or criminal contempt by any federal, state or local court if such citation indicates to the board of commissioners that the applicant will not maintain the outlet for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules, and regulations. 
(6)  An applicant for a license to sell distilled spirits by the package or an applicant for a consumption on the premises license who has been denied or has had revoked for cause within five years of the date of his application any license issued to him by the county and/or any other city, county and/or state to sell alcoholic beverages or an applicant for a package beer and wine license at an outlet in the county at which the license at that outlet has been revoked for cause within five years of the date of the application. 
(7)  An applicant as determined by the board of commissioners, by reason of such applicant's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, records of arrests, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, who is not likely to maintain the outlet for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state, or local laws. 
(8)  A location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the board of commissioners due to one or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Evidence of detrimental traffic conditions caused by insufficient parking or insufficient means of ingress and egress for vehicles to the establishment; 
b.  Evidence that the location or the type of structure would create difficulty in law enforcement supervision or cause law enforcement to respond to a substantial increase in complaints; or 
c.  Evidence that a license at the location would be detrimental to the property values in the surrounding area. 
(9)  A location that is not in compliance with any federal, state or local regulation, including, but not limited to, a state certificate of occupancy or state fire marshal certificate of approval if the noncompliance has not been remedied by the applicant within a period of three months from the date of the application. 
For purposes of subsections (b)(1) through (b)(3) of this section, a conviction under this chapter shall include any plea of guilty or admission of guilt and subsequent sentence under the First Offender Act of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60, or any similar sentencing provision for first offenders of any other state or of the United States. A plea of nolo contendere for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States, or any municipal ordinance, except traffic violations, or the forfeiture of a bond (except traffic offenses) when charged with a crime is also considered a conviction under this chapter. 
(c)  The applicant, whether it be an individual, a partnership, a corporation, a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic, or social club, or a private club, shall be the owner of the premises for which the license is held or the holder of the lease thereon for the period covered by the license. If the premises are leased, a copy of the lease will be furnished to the county manager's office with the application. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, it shall be unlawful for a licensee to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for the licensed premises is based in whole or in part on the volume of sales of alcoholic beverages by the licensed business or whereby the lessor otherwise shares in the profits or receipts from the licensed business's sale of alcoholic beverages, unless the board of commissioners grants a licensee an exemption from this provision. This subsection, however, shall not apply when the primary business of a package license is an activity other than the package sale of alcoholic beverages, for example, a grocery store selling package beer and wine. 
(d)  The named licensee(s) shall be active in the operation of the outlet and personally present on the premises sufficiently to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the owner of the outlet is a corporation, the corporation and its principal officers shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If the owner of the outlet is a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If the owner of the outlet is a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or a private club, the entity and its principal officers and/or governing body shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(e)  No license for the retail sale of distilled spirits shall be issued to a person if that person, or a member of his/her immediate family, has any interest in more than two retail dealer licenses for the sale of distilled spirits, regardless of the degree of such interest. No person shall be issued a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits if that person, or a member of his/her immediate family, owns any interest in a liquor distillery, or wholesale distributorship. 
(f)  No license to engage in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or in the original package shall be granted or issued unless the location is, at the time such application is made, located within one of the zoning designations permitting such use as prescribed by the zoning ordinance or uniform development code of the county. Private clubs shall be exempt from the zoning classification requirements of this subsection and need not obtain such designations in order for a license to issue. 
(g)  Distance restrictions are as follows: 
(1)  There shall be no such distance restriction on the issuance of a license for the sale of any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises with respect to the proximity of the premises to a school building, educational building, school grounds, college building or church. 
(2)  With the exception of grocery stores as defined by the state alcoholic beverage code, no license shall be issued for the sale of wine or malt beverages by the package where the outlet for such sales is located within 100 yards of the property line of any church building, school building, educational building, school grounds, or college building existing at the time of the application. 
(3)  The provisions of subsection (g)(2) of this section do not apply to renewal of a license or to applicants seeking a new license if the location was licensed by the county to sell alcoholic beverages at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(4)  For the purpose of this chapter, the schools or colleges referred to herein, shall include only such state, county, city, church, private, or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state and expressly exclude buildings used by school officials solely for administrative purposes in which school children are not regularly taught. For purposes of this chapter, school and educational buildings shall also include day care centers if the day care centers receive state or federal funding for an educational program at the time of application. Distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground according to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21(c). 
(5)  Unless waived by the county manager out of recognition of the absence of any school or church buildings in proximity to the outlet, all applications for a license shall have attached thereto a current certificate from a registered surveyor of this state showing a scaled drawing of the premises, the location or premises where the applicant desires to operate an alcoholic beverage outlet, and the distance in linear feet measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground from the subject applicant's structure to the nearest property line of each tract on which is located a church building, school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus building defined in subsection (g)(2) of this section. 
(h)  No license shall be issued to any person who fails to comply with all the rules and regulations regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages contained in this chapter. 
(i)  No license shall be issued to any person who owes any delinquent taxes, and/or assessments to the county. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-24. - The application process. 
(a)  Any person desiring to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink or by the package shall make written application to the county manager for the appropriate license on forms required by the county and filed with the county manager's office. All applications shall be fully completed by the applicant and sworn to and signed by the applicant in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a partnership, then each partner shall sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a limited liability company, then each member shall sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a corporation having as its principal business the sale of alcoholic beverages, the majority stockholder and each principal officer of the corporation must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises who is also the named licensee must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or corporation which is organized and operated in the county as a mutual benefit membership group, the individual being primarily responsible for the club or organization's compliance with this chapter must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a private club, then each member of its governing body must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. All applications shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  The current certificate from a registered surveyor of this state as required by subsection 6-23(g)(5). 
(2)  If the outlet is to be located on leased premises, then a copy of the lease shall be attached. 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, a copy of the partnership agreement, including amendments, shall accompany the application. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, a certificate of good standing or certificate of existence shall accompany the application. 
(5)  If the applicant is a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic or social club or corporation which is organized and operating in the county as a mutual benefit membership group, a copy of the Charter or articles of incorporation, as well as sufficient proof of the organization's tax exempt status shall accompany the application. 
(6)  If the applicant is a private club, a certified copy of the certificate of good standing shall accompany the application. 
(7)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license, the applicant shall secure from any state, county, municipal, or federal court, or any police department and/or law enforcement agency, his/her or its criminal history and civil history. The applicant shall submit a complete set of fingerprints for all persons required to sign the application to the agency conducting the criminal history and civil history check. The fingerprints shall be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as specified under state law. The criminal history and civil history report shall be submitted to the county for each person required to sign the application for an original license. In addition to the history report, each person required to sign the application for an original license and/or renewal license shall sign a consent form authorizing the county or its designated representatives to secure from any state, county, municipality or federal court, any police department and/or law enforcement agency his or its criminal history and civil history and further authorize the county, its officers and employees to use such information in determining whether or not an alcoholic beverage license will be issued to the applicant. Further, the applicant shall authorize the county, its officers and employees to use such information in a public hearing if necessary, to determine whether or not the applicant's license should be denied, voided, cancelled and/or revoked. Each applicant waives any rights he or it may have under state or federal law, statute and/or court ruling to preclude the county from securing such criminal and/or civil history from any source and waives and right he or it may have to preclude the county from using such information publicly in determining whether the license will be issued to such applicant. 
(8)  The application shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check in such amount as is set forth on the current fee schedule adopted by the board of commissioners from time to time for an investigative fee. If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded to the applicant. All other fees paid to the county which were submitted as part of the application, including, but not limited to, the investigative fee, the sign fee, and any employee application permit fee shall be retained by the county. 
(9)  All applications for licenses shall contain a full and complete statement of all material facts which tend to show whether the applicants, or any members of their immediate families, own a financial interest in any other alcoholic beverage outlets, or any interest in a wholesale alcoholic beverage entity, and/or distillery or brewery, and what interest they and each of them will have in the alcoholic beverage outlet being requested from this county. 
(10)  The county manager may require any additional information and records he reasonably deems necessary. Failure to furnish such data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for denying a license or revoking an issued license, and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. 
(11)  Each applicant shall certify that the applicant has read this chapter and if the license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the premises and shall require each of the licensee's employees to be familiar with this chapter. 
(12)  If the application is for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, the applicant shall attach to such application a representative menu or bill of fare of prepared food or meals offered by the eating establishment to the public. 
(b)  Once an application, the accompanying documents described in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(12) of this section, and the required license fees are filed with the county manager's office, the county manager shall review the criminal investigation report concerning all information relating to the fingerprinting, criminal history, arrest data, prior alcohol violations, and other matters pertaining to law enforcement. If the fingerprinting information later reveals that the applicant fails to meet the requirements set by this chapter, this may be grounds for denying the application or revoking a license, despite an otherwise satisfactory written report. Upon production of the criminal investigation report, the county manager shall assemble the application forms and all accompanying documents relating to investigation and processing of the application. If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant meets the requirements set by this chapter and the county manager believes that the applicant may meet all other qualifications of this chapter, then the county manager shall schedule the application for a hearing at the next regularly scheduled board of commissioners' meeting and shall so inform the applicant of this fact before such meeting. If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant fails to meet the requirements set by this chapter, or if the county manager finds that the applicant fails to meet all other qualifications outlined by this chapter, then the county manager shall inform the applicant, in writing, that the application has been denied, and shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his right to appeal; said appeal to be before the board of commissioners in accordance with section 6-32. If an applicant desires to appeal a denial by the county manager, the applicant must file a written request for an appeal hearing with the county manager within five business days of the date of the written notice informing the applicant of the denial by the county manager. 
(c)  Any application which the county manager determines to satisfy all the qualifications outlined in this chapter, including character requirements as contained in the criminal investigation report arranged by the county manager, shall be scheduled for review at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. At that meeting, the applicant and any persons opposed to said application have the right to present to the board of commissioners any information that the board of commissioners determines is relevant to the licensing decision. In making its determination on whether to approve or deny the application, the board of commissioners shall look to the qualifications set forth in this chapter and consider the public interest and welfare. The board shall have the sole discretion to grant or deny the application based on the information presented. A decision by the board of commissioners shall be made within 30 days from the date of the board of commissioners' meeting unless the decision is postponed for purposes of the board obtaining additional information deemed necessary for consideration of the application. Notice of the decision by the board of commissioners shall be mailed to the applicant. In the event the application is denied, such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his right to appeal; said appeal to be in accordance with section 6-32. 
(d)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may not reapply for the same type of license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(e)  Upon the issuance of a license, the licensee shall have and continually maintain a registered agent upon whom any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter may be served. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the county manager in such form as he may prescribe. 
(f)  Upon approval by the board of commissioners of the application for a license, the county manager shall issue a license in accordance with the approved application. If the applicant is an individual, the license shall be issued in the name of the individual. If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company having as its principal business the sale of alcoholic beverages, the license shall be issued in the name of the corporation/limited liability company and in the name of the majority stockholder or a principal officer of the corporation or the managing member of the limited liability company. If the applicant is a corporation having its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, the license shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises. If the applicant is a partnership, the license shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one of the partners. If the applicant is a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or corporation which is organized and operated in the county as a mutual benefit membership group, the license shall be issued in the name of the club or corporation and in the name of the individual primarily responsible for the club or corporation's compliance with this chapter. If the applicant is a private club, the license shall be issued in the name of the private club and in the name of one of the members of the private club's governing body who shall be the named licensee. All licenses issued shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a license before July 1, shall pay the full license fee without proration. License fees for licenses granted on or after July 1, will be one-half the annual license fee. License fees are not refundable once the license is granted by the county. 
(g)  In the event the board of commissioners denies the application for a license, the applicant may appeal to the board of commissioners for reconsideration of the denial by filing a written request for an appeal hearing with the county manager within five business days of the date of the written notice informing the applicant of the denial. Any such appeal hearing concerning a denial shall be conducted according to the procedures set forth in section 6-32. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-25. - Renewal of license. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file a renewal application, accompanied by the requisite license fee and investigative fee in such amount as is set forth on the current fee schedule adopted by the board of commissioners from time to time, with the county manager's office upon forms prescribed by the county on or before December 31 of each year without penalty. Persons holding a license for more than one establishment and desiring to renew the license for such establishments shall pay only one investigative fee charge. Applications for renewal filed 90 days after the due date and any outstanding amounts due 90 days after the due date shall be subject to a late charge of ten percent of the license fee and interest at a rate of one and one-half percent per month. 
(b)  Each application for renewal will show the date of the original application and state there have been no changes in any of the information and data contained in and/or furnished with the original application and that the applicant for the renewal is familiar with applicable state laws and regulations and with the rules and ordinances of the county. The renewal application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. In the event it is discovered by the county that changes have occurred, which are in any way different from those facts shown in the original application and the documents furnished with the original application, the renewal shall be void. The applicant may be required to file a new application if changes have occurred in the information and data furnished with the original application. The applicant will furnish all information required by the renewal application and failure to furnish the information will be grounds for denying the application. A false statement made on the renewal application will void the application and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-26. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except upon the death of a licensee, at which time such license may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or lawful adult heirs of such deceased person. If the legal representatives of such deceased licensee cannot meet all the requirements of this chapter when the time arrives to renew the license, it shall not be renewed. 
(b)  Whenever a licensee doing business as a sole proprietorship loses his license as a result of the provision of this chapter, the licensee's successor in interest, upon filing an application for a new license, may continue to operate under the terms of the prior license until such time as the new application is approved or denied by the board of commissioners; provided, however, no such continued operation shall be authorized until such time as a new application for license is made and the required fees paid to the county manager's office. Payment of fees shall not be required of a corporation whose predecessor in interest remains the named licensee under the new lease. 
(c)  Alcoholic beverage licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable or assignable to new owners, but where there is a change in the ownership of a business, the new owner shall file an application as for a new license as provided by this article. Changes of business interests from one party at interest named in the original application to another party at interest named in the original application and changes from one employee or manager of a social club to his successor shall not be deemed a transfer of a license. In each instance, however, the licensee shall notify the county manager in writing of such change and make a complete disclosure of all of the facts in connection therewith, such notification to be made within three days from the date of such change. Informational changes which do not require a new license shall be made with no charge if done at the time of renewal. Changes requested after the license has already been renewed for the year will be charged an administrative fee of $25.00 per license. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-27. - Restrictions and prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distribute, sell, or possess for the purpose of sale, any alcoholic beverage when such person does not have a license from the county to sell or possess or manufacture for sale such beverage, provided that this subsection shall not be interpreted to preclude the otherwise illegal practice of private production of beer as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4 or the private production of wine as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-6-3 for private use and consumption or to require the procuring of a license for a private party conducted at a private home, business, or other private establishment for which alcoholic beverages are provided at no charge. 
(b)  Except as otherwise authorized by law, no licensee, or employee of the licensee, shall sell or permit to be sold alcoholic beverages to any person under the legal drinking age as prescribed by state law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
(c)  No licensee, or employee of the licensee, shall permit on the licensed premises the sale, barter, exchange, giving, providing or furnishing alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication as prescribed by state law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22. 
(d)  The sale of alcoholic beverages is permitted on election days in outlets not located within 250 feet of a polling place. 
(e)  No licensee, or employee of the licensee, permitted to sell distilled spirits by the package shall permit any person under the legal drinking age as prescribed by state law to be in, frequent, or loiter about the licensed premises unless this person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to persons who are employees under the terms of this chapter. 
(f)  In any case where a reasonable and prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or employee of the licensee, to see and to be furnished with proper identification in order to verify the age of such person. The term "identification" in this subsection means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person or the person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth, and including, but without being limited to a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or state department of public safety identification card as prescribed by state law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(g)  No licensee, or employee of the licensee, authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the package shall permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises as prescribed by state law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 
(h)  No licensee, or employee of the licensee, authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall permit any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverage sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises. This specifically prohibits the use of "to go" cups or any device permitting any person to remove the alcoholic beverages from the licensed premises. 
(i)  No person employed or working in any capacity at any licensed outlet shall solicit or encourage patrons to purchase drinks to be consumed by or otherwise disposed of by any such person so employed or working as prescribed by state law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42. 
(j)  No licensee, or employee of the licensee, shall add to the contents of a bottle or refill an empty bottle or in any other manner misrepresent the quantity, quality, or brand name of any alcoholic beverage provided that this subsection shall not apply to the refilling of growlers. No retail licensee shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person, firm or corporation other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful for any delivery to be made to and/or sales be made outside of the outlet; provided that this subsection shall not prohibit the sale of alcohol on the premises of a golf course which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. The consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in open areas and patios, provided that the licensee is in compliance with all other appropriate regulations as to the safe and orderly operation of such outlet, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(l)  The licensee shall keep the premises clean, and in proper sanitary condition, and in full compliance with provisions and regulations governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(m)  No licensee shall permit on the premises any gambling, betting, games of chance, punch boards, vending machines, slot machines, pinball machines, video machines, or similar machines which are in violation of the gambling provisions of the state; provided, however, that this subsection shall not prohibit the lawful playing of bingo by establishments licensed to operate a bingo game under O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-50 through 16-12-62. No games of any type are allowed in outlets licensed for the sale of distilled spirits by the package. Pool tables, pinball, electronic, or similar machines not in violation of the gambling laws of the state are permitted in outlets authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
(n)  When a change occurs in the relationship of a person, or in the status of any property or license, or any change in payment of rents, ownership of the lease, or buildings or land on which the outlet is located, any change in corporate ownership or management, any loss or damage to goods which result in a claim against an insurance policy and any change in the division of profits, any change in any division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever, and any change in facts stated or claimed in any application or report herein required, a sworn statement of such change in all material facts relating hereto shall be filed with the county manager's office, and failure to do so within 14 days after such change shall, unless such time limit is extended for good cause, be reason for cancellation of a license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. In the event that a licensee seeks to change the named licensee of an establishment, the application shall be amended by attaching a new personal statement along with an investigative fee in such amount as is set forth on the current fee schedule adopted by the board of commissioners from time to time. The new named licensee shall satisfy the qualification requirements as set forth in this chapter and be subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. 
(o)  Any violation of the provisions contained under this section may result in the suspension or revocation of the license held by the licensee and criminal penalties for the licensee or employee as provided for under state law and otherwise provided for in section 6-28. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-28. - Regulations as to employees. 
The licensee is responsible for the conduct or actions of its employees in its employment. An act or omission of a licensee, owner, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment that is willingly or knowingly performed, and that constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this chapter, shall subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of its license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Criminal penalties may also apply to the licensee or owner when it is determined that the act or omission did occur, and the acts or omissions of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee or owner, were condoned by the licensee or owner, or where the licensee or owner has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring as prescribed under state law. It shall be the duty of the licensee hereunder to maintain a copy of this chapter at the outlet and to instruct each and every employee engaged in the sale and/or handling of alcoholic beverages of the terms hereof. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-29. - Regulations on pricing and display. 
A licensee authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the package shall affix to each bottle or container, or to the edge of the shelf whereon such bottles or containers are located directly beneath such bottles or containers, a tag showing the prices of individual bottles or containers. Products sold in multipacks containing more than one bottle or container shall have the price for the multipack affixed to the packaging, or the pricing for such multipacks shall be indicated on a tag on the shelf whereon such multipacks are located. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-30. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
Any suspension, revocation, or forfeiture of a license by the board of commissioners shall occur only after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the board of commissioners consistent with the procedures set forth in section 6-32, and upon the following occurrences: 
(1)  Any licensed outlet that is found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to license revocation or suspension and shall also be subject to criminal citation and prosecution as outlined in section 6-31. 
(2)  Every license issued by the county for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be immediately revoked in case of bankruptcy, receivership, levy of legal process, or failure to promptly account for and pay the excise tax levied on the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Except as provided for under section 6-26, any change in ownership of any entity owning a licensed outlet shall cause the board of commissioners to immediately revoke any license issued under this chapter. 
(4)  All licensees must, within six months after the approval of said license, open for business the outlet referred to in the application for license, and begin the sale of the products authorized by the said license. Failure to open the outlet and begin the sales referred to within the six-month period shall cause the board of commissioners to immediately revoke the license and no refund of any fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be made. 
(5)  If a licensee shall, for a period of three consecutive months, cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized in the said license, the board of commissioners shall, after said three-month period, immediately revoke the license, and no refund of any fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be made. 
(6)  A license may be immediately suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners upon learning that a licensee furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license, or omits information required in the application for a license, or fails to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the county license shall thereupon be immediately revoked. 
(8)  Any licensed outlet for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink and any licensed outlet engaging in the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays shall be subject to immediate license revocation by the board of commissioners if said outlet fails to meet the appropriate percentage requirements regarding the sale of food on the premises for two consecutive months. 
(9)  The board of commissioners shall immediately suspend or revoke the license of any outlet which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter at any time such knowledge becomes known to the board. 
(10)  The board of commissioners shall immediately revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(11)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee or any employee or agent of the licensee or licensed establishment to permit any person to engage in any activity on the premises for which the license is issued or within the place of business, which is in violation of the laws or regulations of any federal, state, county, or municipal governing authority or regulatory agency. A violation of this subsection shall subject the license to immediate suspension or revocation. 
(12)  An act or omission of a licensee which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or regulation, relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, taxes, gambling, violation of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, or constitutes a crime of moral turpitude, shall subject the license to immediate suspension or revocation. 
(13)  Any license shall automatically expire on December 31 of each year unless renewed in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-31. - Enforcement of this chapter. 
(a)  Progressive actions by board. 
(1)  Any violation of this chapter shall subject the licensee to the following progressive actions by the board of commissioners, except for those violations and occurrences set forth in section 6-30 that provides for immediate suspension or revocation upon notice and hearing: 
a.  The first violation shall result in a warning or a license suspension for a period of up to 30 days. 
b.  The second violation within a consecutive 24-month period shall result in license suspension for a period of not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days. 
c.  The third violation within a consecutive 24-month period shall result in license suspension for a period of not less than 90 days nor more than six months. 
(2)  Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to preclude the board of commissioners from suspending a license for a period exceeding 30 days or 90 days, respectively, or from revoking the license if the board determines in its discretion that such action is necessary and in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare of the county. 
(3)  In the case of a violation under this subsection by an employee, the suspension period may be mitigated by the board of commissioners upon presentation of evidence that the licensee established practices and procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(b)  In addition to the available actions to be taken by the board of commissioners, individuals who violate this chapter shall be subject to criminal citation and prosecution by the sheriff's office. 
(c)  Sworn officers of the sheriff's office and the county manager shall have the authority to inspect the outlet and premises licensed under this chapter during the hours when the outlet is open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other county, state or federal officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of law. 
(d)  In order to ensure that the licensed premises are kept clean, and are in full compliance with all other ordinances and regulations of the county and the state, the additional following representatives are authorized to inspect regularly the licensed premises: 
(1)  Representatives of the county health department shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed outlet and premises to determine if the licensed outlet is in compliance with all the county and state health rules and regulations and report any violations to the county manager. 
(2)  The county building official shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed outlet and premises to determine if the licensed outlet is in compliance with all the county and state fire regulations and report any violations to the county manager. 
(3)  The county has the right to have an inspector inspect regularly the licensed outlet and premises to determine if the licensed outlet is in compliance with all technical codes of the county and report any violations to the county manager. 
(e)  Every licensee shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold by the licensee in gross daily figures. The records shall be kept for a period of three years from the date of purchase and sale and should at all times be open to audit and/or inspection by the county manager or any designated employee or any outside agents for the county upon approval of such outside agents by the county manager. Further, all licenses for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink and for the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays shall keep and preserve records of all food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased and sold by said licensees. Such records shall be kept for three years from the date of purchase and sale and shall be at all times open for audit and inspection by the county manager and the county sheriff, and/or any designated county and sheriff's office employee and/or any outside agents of the county upon approval of said outside agents by the county manager. In the event an audit is called for by the county manager, the county manager shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-32. - Hearing on denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a timely appeal of a denial of a license, upon presentation of evidence to the county manager of a violation of this chapter, or upon a showing to the county manager of any of the other occurrences set forth in section 6-30 as grounds for suspension or revocation, the county manager shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners or their appointee and provide written notice to the adverse party of the time, place and date of the scheduled hearing. The county manager shall also state in the written notice in reasonable detail basis for the denial or the violation or occurrence alleged that forms the basis for the denial or potential suspension or revocation. After notice of hearing, matters scheduled for hearing may only be continued by agreement of the county manager and the adverse party and/or counsel for the adverse party. 
(b)  The board of commissioners or its appointee shall have the duty of conducting hearings concerning the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license. The standard of proof on all issues in the hearing shall be a preponderance of the evidence and a determination will be made on the basis of the competent evidence presented at the hearing. At its discretion, the board of commissioners may appoint a special master to conduct said hearing and make findings of fact and conclusions of law and report such findings and conclusions to the board of commissioners and to the county manager. 
(c)  At the hearing, after presentation of the case against the adverse party, the adverse party will have an opportunity to present his case, to rebut the allegations made against him, and present whatever defense he has. The adverse party shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the adverse party, and to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the findings and conclusions of the board of commissioners shall be forwarded to the county manager and it shall be the duty of the county manager to provide written notification to the adverse party of the actions of the board of commissioners, which actions shall comport with section 6-31. 
(e)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final unless appealed to the superior court of the county by petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the county manager providing written notification to the adverse party of the board's decision. 
(f)  For purposes of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered (1) when personally served or (2) when served by certified mail, postage prepaid, three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
Secs. 6-33—6-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MALT BEVERAGE AND WINE, ORIGINAL PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 6-78. - License fees. 
The license fee for a license to sell malt beverages and wine by the package shall be paid to the county manager by certified or cashier's check in the amount of $500.00 at the time of the filing of the original application and upon renewal thereof, provided however that renewal licenses may be paid by business check. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-79. - Type of retail outlets where package sales are permitted. 
Beer and wine may be sold at retail, by the package, only in: 
(a)  Outlets duly licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package; and 
(b)  Outlets maintaining 75 percent of the floor space and storage area in a manner which is devoted principally to the retail sale of other foods, groceries, and general merchandise. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-80. - Hours of sale. 
Retail package outlets shall engage in the sale of beer and/or wine only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sundays. The sale of beer and wine is allowed on election days provided the outlet is not located within 250 feet of a polling place. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-81. - No consumption on premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises licensed for the sale of malt beverages or wine by the package and it shall be unlawful for any licensee by the package to open for, or break the package for, a purchaser and/or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises. This subsection shall not prohibit the sale of growlers, in compliance with this subsection, by a licensee, or employee of the licensee, authorized to sell alcoholic beverages, excluding distilled spirits, by the package. Furthermore, the filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or this section. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Secs. 6-82—6-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISTILLED SPIRITS, ORIGINAL PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 6-136. - License fees. 
A license fee for the sale of distilled spirits in the original package shall be paid by certified or cashier's check to the county manager by the licensee in the amount of $3,000.00, payable at the time of the application for the license. A renewal fee in the amount of $1,500.00 shall be payable upon each annual renewal of said license and may be paid by business check. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-137. - Types of outlets where package sales are permitted. 
(a)  Distilled spirits by the package may be sold at retail, only in: 
(1)  Outlets duly licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package; and 
(2)  Outlets which are devoted exclusively to the retail sale of distilled spirits, beer and wine by the package with ingress and egress provided directly to and only to the exterior of the building in which the facility is located and not to any other enclosed part of the building or adjoining building, except in hotels and motels where every public entrance to this outlet shall be from a lobby, hallway, or other interior portion of the primary use structure. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the retail sale within these outlets of liquid commodities and mixes normally used in the preparation and serving of distilled spirits. It is the intention of this section to allow the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package only in outlets devoted exclusively to the sale of distilled spirits, beer, and wine, and to prohibit such sales in outlets that sell groceries, food, gasoline, and other such commodities. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-138. - Hours of sale. 
The sale of distilled spirits by the package shall occur only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sundays. All customers shall be out of the licensee's establishment by 12:15 a.m. The sale of distilled spirits by the package is permitted on election days provided the location of the outlet is not within 250 feet of a polling place. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-139. - No consumption on the premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the sale of distilled spirits by the package and it shall be unlawful for any licensee authorized to sell distilled spirits by the package to open for, or break the package for, a purchaser, and/or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Secs. 6-140—6-183. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-184. - Locations where prohibited. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises, except in eating establishments regularly serving prepared food, with a full service kitchen (a full service kitchen will consist of a four-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health department and the building official) prepared to serve food every hour they are open, pursuant to the applicable building, fire and safety codes in effect for the county. Outlets shall derive a minimum of 50 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. An audit may be required at any time to ensure compliance with these provisions. If such outlet provides a bar or counter service for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, the seating for such bar shall not exceed ten percent of the total seating capacity of the outlet; provided, however, that this limitation of seating capacity shall not apply to hotel bars that are available for the use of hotel guests. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit hotel room service of alcoholic beverages or to prohibit a hotel from maintaining a bar separate from the restaurant facility, provided access to said bar shall be from a public lobby, hallway, mall, or other publicly used interior portion of the hotel. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a facility hosting cultural arts or performing arts events from maintaining an outlet for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a golf course is defined as being a 70-, 71-, or 72-par course and being a recognized member of the Georgia State Golf Association and United States Golf Association, may be issued an on-premises consumption license without meeting the requirement that 50 percent of its gross annual sales be derived from the sale of prepared meals or food. Bowling alleys consisting of at least ten working lanes, and being a part of a commercial for profit business, may be issued an on-premises consumption license without meeting the requirement that 50 percent of its gross annual sales be derived from the sale of prepared meals or food. Movie theaters consisting of at least eight separate movie viewing screen rooms with a total collective seating capacity of at least 1,000 people, provided that each movie viewing screen room seats at least 100 people, may be issued an on-premises consumption license without meeting the requirement that 50 percent of its gross annual sales be derived from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-185. - License fees. 
The licensee shall pay by certified or cashier's check a license fee for the sale of distilled spirits, beer, and wine for consumption on the premises to the county manager's office in the amount of $3,500.00 to be paid at the time of application for said license and the amount of $2,000.00 for each annual renewal thereof, provided however that renewal licenses may be paid with a business check. The licensee shall pay by certified or cashier's check a license fee for the sale of distilled spirits only for consumption on the premises to the county manager in the amount of $3,000.00 to be paid at the time of application for said license and the amount of $1,500.00 for each annual renewal thereof, provided however that renewal licenses may be paid with a business check. The licensee shall pay by certified or cashier's check a license fee for the sale of beer and wine only for consumption on the premises to the county manager in the amount of $500.00 to be paid at the time of application for said license or renewal thereof, provided however that renewal licenses may be paid with a business check. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-186. - Hours of sale. 
Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises on Monday through Saturday except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. All patrons on those days must have exited the licensee's establishment within 30 minutes of the time which alcoholic beverages may no longer be sold, thus setting such exit time at 2:30 a.m. on Monday through Saturday. Alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises on election days provided the outlet for such sale is not located within 250 feet of a polling place. 
Alcoholic beverages may be sold on Sunday for consumption on the premises from 12:30 p.m. until Midnight in any licensed establishment that derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. All Sunday patrons must have exited the licensee's establishment within 30 minutes of the time which alcoholic beverages may no longer be sold, thus setting an exit time of 12:30 a.m. for Sunday patrons. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-187. - Consumption sales only. 
Licensees of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages by the package at that outlet and shall not permit a purchaser to remove from the premises any alcoholic beverage. This specifically prohibits the use of "to go" cups or any other device permitting any person to remove alcoholic beverages from the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-188. - Patios and open areas. 
The consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in open areas and patios, provided that the licensee is in compliance with all other appropriate regulations, as to the safe and orderly operation of such establishment, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress, and egress. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-189. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-190. - Adequate parking. 
Each licensee shall ensure and make provision for adequate parking for licensee's patrons on or in close proximity to the licensed premises and shall take such action as is necessary and required to ensure that vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and from licensee's business premises does not unduly disrupt normal traffic flow on the public roadways in the vicinity of the business premises and neither the public nor private property is obstructed by parking by patrons of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-191. - Bring your own bottle "brown bagging" prohibited. 
No person may bring alcoholic beverages (brown bag) into any establishment, whether that establishment is licensed or is not licensed to serve alcoholic beverages, for the purpose of consuming alcohol on the premises during regular business hours of the establishment and/or while the establishment is open to the public. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing shall prohibit "brown bagging" one bottle of wine for consumption with the purchase of a meal at an establishment licensed to sell alcohol beverages. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-192. - Organizations exempt from food service requirement. 
Nationally recognized and chartered organizations such as veterans' organizations, fraternal organizations, and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the Georgia Income Tax Law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food in order to sell alcoholic beverages. Such organizations shall be subject to all county ordinance regulations and general licensing application requirements for licensees; provided, however, any applicants for temporary licenses may be exempted from certain ordinance regulations and application requirements if the county manager, after consultation with the sheriff's office, determines that such exemption will not violate the purposes of this chapter as set forth in section 6-1. Any applicant requesting a temporary license must qualify for said license by submitting an application on a form provided by the county to the county manager and by tendering a certified or cashier's check to the county manager in such amount as is set forth on the current fee schedule adopted by the board of commissioners from time to time per each day alcoholic beverages are sold. Said temporary license will be granted to the same applicant a maximum of six days per year. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-193. - Hotel/motel in-room service. 
In-room service is the provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel/motel guestroom which contains beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits and which is provided upon written request of the guest and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of the beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits contained therein is final at the time requested except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. Any hotel/motel that acquires this in-room service shall also be required to obtain a consumption on the premises license and meet all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(a)  No hotel/motel shall be authorized to provide in-room service until it has been issued a special license to do so. A license fee in such amount as is set forth on the current fee schedule adopted by the board of commissioners from time to time shall be imposed to provide only beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits. 
(b)  The sale of beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits by in-room service shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations relative to the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages, except as provided otherwise in this chapter. 
Keys for in-room service shall only be sold to guests between the hours of 9:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and Midnight Sundays. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-194. - Nude dancing; findings; public purpose. 
(a)  Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia; and Fort Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences the county believes are relevant to the problems faced by Greene County, Georgia, the county takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the finding of the board of commissioners that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "adult entertainment," begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
(b)  The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcohol beverages for consumption on such premises within the unincorporated area of the county: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcohol beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (b)(1) of this section or where such persons perform acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
b.  The caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section; provided, however, that nothing herein shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theater. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Secs. 6-195—6-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRIVATE CLUBS 

Sec. 6-231. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include a commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. Tips or gratuities, which are added to the bills under club regulations, shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of the state which; 
(a)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(b)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(c)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members and guests with: 
(1)  Suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
(2)  A sufficient number of staff employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(3)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-232. - License fees. 
A license fee authorizing a private club to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages shall be paid by certified or cashier's check to the county by the licensee in such amount as is set forth on the current fee schedule adopted by the board of commissioners from time to time, payable at the time of the application for the license or renewal thereof, provided however that renewal licenses may be paid with a business check. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-233. - Regulation. 
Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the county governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations. The county, however, will grant no alcoholic beverage license to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Secs. 6-234—6-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TEMPORARY ALCOHOL PERMIT FOR NON-PROFIT CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS 

Sec. 6-281. - Necessity of obtaining temporary alcohol permit. 
All non-profit civil organizations organizing authorized events that involve the consumption of alcohol shall be required to obtain a temporary alcohol permit. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-282. - Bona fide non-profit organization defined. 
To be eligible to receive a temporary permit to sell alcoholic beverages at an authorized event, a bona fide nonprofit organization must be the applicant; a nonprofit authorization letter (Federal Form 501-C) must be produced; any required event permit must be obtained; and the authorized event for which the event permit is issued must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-283. - Limits of temporary permit. 
Pursuant to state law, any temporary permit issued hereunder shall authorize the organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises for a period not to exceed one day, subject to all laws and ordinances regulating the time for selling such beverages; the temporary permit shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit; and no more than six such permits may be issued to the applicant organization in any one calendar year. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-284. - Application process. 
(a)  The bona fide nonprofit organization shall apply for a temporary permit on the form prescribed from time to time by the board of commissioners or its designee. 
(b)  Each application for a temporary permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $100.00. 
(c)  If the bona fide nonprofit organization is organizing a multi-day event, a separate application must be made for each day of the event. Each application relating to a multi-day event shall be judged on its own merits, and the granting of a temporary permit for one of the days of a multi-day event shall not obligate the county to approve applications relating to other dates associated with that same multi-day event. 
(d)  The permit application shall be submitted to the county at least 30 days prior to the commencement of the first day of the event. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-285. - Compliance with other laws. 
In addition to complying with this article, a bona fide non-profit organization that obtains a temporary permit is required to comply with all applicable state and federal laws prior to and subsequent to the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Secs. 6-286—6-305. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TASTING PERMIT 

Sec. 6-306. - Compliance with article. 
No person shall conduct alcoholic beverages tastings without having first complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-307. - Prerequisites for authorization to conduct. 
Notwithstanding any part hereof to the contrary, the county hereby authorizes tastings to be conducted by retail dealer licensees in accordance with this section. The term "tasting" shall be defined for purposes herein as the gratuitous service of wine or malt beverages for educational purposes. It is unlawful for any person or licensee to conduct tastings within the county unless authorized in accordance with this section. Tastings of distilled spirits are strictly prohibited. Tastings shall not be authorized until the following prerequisites are fully satisfied, as determined by the county: 
(a)  A retail dealer that wishes to conduct tastings shall submit an application for a tasting permit to the county manager. The county manager may reject the application if the applicant fails to establish that the licensee is able to conduct tastings without violating any of the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The application shall include the name of the licensee, the address of the licensed premises, and the person who is submitting the notice. 
(c)  The notice must state and affirm that the licensee wishing to conduct such tasting shall do so in accordance with the provisions of this section, and without creating a public safety risk to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(d)  The alcoholic beverage tasting permit shall be valid for one calendar year and run concurrently with the alcoholic beverage license. 
(e)  Tastings authorized pursuant to this section shall be allowed only for a retail dealer operating within the county whose license is valid and in full force and effect. 
(f)  Tastings, once approved, shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Tastings shall be conducted only by a person who is either a retail dealer, or an employee of a licensee, and only on a licensee's licensed premises. 
(2)  The alcohol used in tastings shall be purchased through a licensed wholesaler, licensed brew pub, or winery licensed pursuant to state law. 
(3)  The size of an individual alcohol sample shall not exceed one ounce of malt beverage or wine. 
(4)  Tastings shall not exceed a total of three consecutive hours in duration per day. 
(5)  Tastings shall be conducted only during the operating hours in which the licensee on whose premises the tastings occur is permitted to sell alcoholic beverages, and in no case earlier than 11:00 a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m. 
(6)  The licensee shall promptly remove all open and unconsumed alcoholic beverage samples from the licensed premises or shall destroy the samples immediately following the completion of the tasting. 
(7)  The licensee shall not serve a person who is under 21 years of age or who is visibly intoxicated. 
(8)  The licensee shall not serve more than six individual samples to a patron during a tasting. 
(9)  Alcohol samples shall be in open containers and shall be provided to a customer free of charge. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Secs. 6-308—6-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - WHOLESALERS 

Sec. 6-331. - License—Required. 
Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages licensed by the state or the agent of such wholesale dealer, shall be granted a license to distribute such beverages to licensed retailers or dealers in the unincorporated areas of the county upon application for such license to the county manager and the presentation of satisfactory evidence that he understands the alcoholic beverage rules and regulations of this county and the conditions under which retail licenses are issued. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-332. - Same—Fees. 
A wholesaler of alcoholic beverages sold in the county whose principal place of business is in the county shall pay to the county manager annual license fees in such amount as is set forth on the current fee schedule adopted by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-333. - Hours of sale. 
The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be from sunup to sundown only on days the outlets for sale of alcoholic beverages in the original package and by the drink are authorized to sell alcoholic beverages, excluding Sundays. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-334. - Special provisions applicable to wholesale license. 
(a)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverages to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. No alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to any outlet in the county except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(b)  Licensed wholesalers or their employees shall follow all traffic rules in effect for the county and shall not in any way conduct their business so as to interfere with the flow of traffic in the county. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Secs. 6-335—6-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 6-351. - Statement of purpose. 
The county, in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, does hereby levy a local tax in the manner set forth herein. It is the intention that the excise tax imposed hereunder shall be the maximum provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-352. - Excise tax on wholesalers. 
(a)  Excise tax on the sale of beer and malt beverages. The county, in addition to excise taxes levied by the state, does hereby levy a local tax on the sale of beer and malt beverages of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces sold by wholesalers to retail package outlets in the county. Further, there is also levied by the county an excise tax on tap or draft beer of $6.00 per each container sold by wholesalers to retail package outlets in the county and containing more than 15 gallons and a like rate for fractional parts where the draft beer is sold in or from barrel or bulk containers. Said tax is imposed upon wholesalers and is payable on a monthly basis as set out under subsection (f) of this section. 
(b)  Excise tax on the sale of wine. There is hereby levied an excise tax of $0.22 per liter on wines sold by a wholesaler to retail outlets in the county and a proportionate tax on the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. Said tax is imposed upon wholesalers and is payable on a monthly basis as set out under subsection (f) of this section. 
(c)  Excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits. The county does hereby levy an excise tax of $0.22 per liter on all distilled spirits, except for fortified wines, sold by wholesaler to a retail outlet authorized to sell distilled spirits by the package and a proportionate tax on the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. Said tax is imposed upon wholesalers and is payable on a monthly basis as set out under subsection (f) of this section. 
(d)  Excise tax relating to sales to private clubs. In addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, the county does hereby levy an excise tax of $0.22 per liter on all distilled spirits sold by a wholesaler to a private club. Said tax is imposed upon wholesalers and is payable on a monthly basis as set out under subsection (f) of this section. 
(e)  Excise tax relating to sales to retail package outlets. All wholesale dealers engaged in the wholesale distributions of alcoholic beverages to retail package outlets in this county shall pay to the county manager the excise taxes set forth in subsections (a) through (d) of this section. 
(f)  Method of payment. Payment of the excise tax shall be made before the tenth day of each month for all sales made during the previous month. Each wholesale dealer responsible for the payment of an excise tax under this article shall file a report and payment within the time required. Failure to do so on a timely basis shall result in a payment penalty of ten percent of the excise tax amount due or $200.00 whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2016, Exh. A) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted November 20, 2012, amended ch. 8 by deleting said chapter and inserting new material as herein set out. Former ch. 8 pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of §§ 8-1—8-18, 8-40—8-50, and derived from the 1998 Code; and an ordinance adopted August 16, 2005. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1- et seq.; dogs and dangerous dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; dog fighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; governing authorities of counties are authorized and required in the control of rabies to require regulation or licensing of animals, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means any domesticated animal which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property, and is unattended or uncared for. 
Animal control department means the division of animal control within the county government responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. 
Animal control officer means an employee assigned to the animal control department of the county board of commissioners duly deputized under the legal authority of the county to enforce the rules and regulations of this chapter. 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to this article. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(a)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
(b)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
(c)  While off the owner's property kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Guard or watch dog means any dog trained by a recognized training facility for the purpose of protecting individuals from assault and/or preventing property loss or damage. A recognized training facility shall be deemed to mean any person holding a state kennel license and a business license for either of the purposes described in this definition. 
Impoundment means the act of taking physical possession and control of an animal by an animal control officer or other officer empowered to act. 
Livestock means horses, cows, goats, pigs or any other four legged animals, excluding dogs and cats, used for pleasure or profit. Fowl are expressly included within this definition. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term owner includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Police officer means any law enforcement officer empowered to make arrests and authorized to issue citations in unincorporated areas of the county. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Per county's direction, § 8-2, adoption of chapter by municipalities within county, has been deleted. 
Sec. 8-3. - Restraint of animals not deemed vicious, dangerous or classified. 
(a)  Duty of all animal owners to be responsible owners. It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any animal to exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property and animals from injuries or damage which might result from their animal's behavior. If the owner or custodian of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure that all provisions of this chapter are complied with. 
(b)  Guard or watch dogs. 
(1)  Owners or custodians of any guard or watch dog must confine all such dogs within a perimeter fence and meet the following conditions: 
a.  The fence shall be sufficient to prevent the dog's escape, with all points of ingress and egress securely locked at all times. 
b.  A "beware of dog" sign shall be conspicuously displayed on each exterior side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure (minimum of two) as well as a sign on each ingress and egress point to the enclosure. Signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
c.  The owner or custodian shall, prior to placing dogs on property, obtain from the animal control department a registration number and distinctive identification collar for each dog. There shall be a fee for each dog for the first year and any part thereof and a renewal fee for each dog every year thereafter as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The renewal fee shall be paid by January 30 of each year. The collar provided shall be worn at all times. 
d.  The registration number shall be tattooed at the owner's expense on the inside of the right hind leg or inside the upper lip of the dog. 
e.  The owner or custodian shall report to the animal control department within 24 hours of any of the following: 
1.  Escape of the dog. 
2.  An attack on a human or animal by the dog. 
3.  Transfer of ownership of the dog. 
4.  Death of the dog. 
(2)  Any enforcement officer shall have the authority to enter onto private or public property for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of subsection (b)(l)d of this section. 
(c)  Failure to keep guard or watch dogs under restraint. Failure to keep any guard or watch dog under restraint or control as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-4. - Abandoned animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon any domesticated animal or livestock within the county. Each person who does abandon, or knowingly and willfully permits such abandonment, or aids in the abandonment of any domesticated animal shall be in violation of this chapter and may be punished as provided in this chapter and Code. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-5. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  The term "cruelty" means and includes every act whereby unnecessary or unjustified pain, suffering or death is caused, permitted or allowed to continue where there is reasonable remedy or relief. Acts of cruelty shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Whoever willfully or maliciously kills, abuses, maims, or disfigures any animal or willfully or maliciously administers poison to any animal or exposes any poisonous substance with intent that the poisonous substance shall be taken and swallowed by such animal shall be in violation of this chapter. Persons engaged in the practice of hunting, fishing, or trapping animals in a manner that conforms to the laws of the state are not in violation of this subsection (a)(l). 
(2)  Whoever overloads, overdoses, tortures, torments, or deprives an animal of its necessary sustenance or shelter; beats, mutilates or kills any animal or causes the same to be done; or carries in or upon vehicles or otherwise any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(3)  Whoever confines any animal and fails to supply it with sufficient quantities of wholesome food and water; who keeps any animals in any enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air; or abandons any animal to die shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall: 
(1)  Own, possess, keep or train any animal with the intent that such animal shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting. 
(2)  Build, make, maintain or keep a pit on premises owned by him or occupied by him or allow a pit to be built, made, maintained or kept on such premises for the purposes of an exhibition of animal fighting. 
(3)  In any manner encourage, instigate, promote or assist in an exhibition of animal fighting or intentional combat. 
(4)  Charge admission, be an assistant, umpire or participate or be present as a spectator to any exhibition of animal fighting or combat. 
(c)  Any animal control officer, or other officer empowered to act by law, may impound any animal found to be cruelly treated. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the owner to maintain in a clean and sanitary condition all structures, pens, yards, and areas adjacent thereto wherein any animal is kept. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-6. - Adoption. 
(a)  The animal control department or its designee may offer for adoption any animal unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after five days or, if the animal is voluntarily surrendered to the animal control department by the owner of the animal, the animal may be offered for adoption immediately. All persons adopting animals shall be over 18 years of age and shall provide proper and humane care, feeding, shelter and protection from the weather and veterinary treatment as required. All persons adopting a fertile dog or cat shall cause to have a female spayed or a male neutered within 30 days of the date of adoption or by the maximum age of six months for a female and nine months for a male, whichever is longer. Any person adopting an animal shall not use the animal for breeding, exhibition or profit and shall not engage in any research involving the use of the animal or supply the animal to any individual or institution which may use the animal in research. The frequency with which animals may be adopted and placed in any household may be restricted. 
(b)  Adoption fees in an amount stated in the schedule of fees and charges may include all or part of the costs of an examination and rabies inoculation and all or part of the costs associated with neutering or spaying dogs and cats. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-7. - Disposition of impounded animals not dangerous, vicious or classified. 
(a)  Any animal, dog or cat, seized or impounded by an animal control officer, or any officer empowered to act by law, shall be detained at the animal control shelter. The officers of the animal control department shall notify the owner of such animal, if known or can be reasonably ascertained, that the animal has been impounded. The owner of any animal impounded may, within five days after the receipt of the notice, reclaim the animal by the payment of an impoundment fee plus boarding fee for each day the animal was impounded; and the cost of rabies vaccination of the animal if the animal has not been vaccinated within the prescribed time period. These fees, as applicable, shall also apply to biting animals held for rabies observation at the animal control shelter. 
(b)  If any animal seized or impounded by the animal control department evidences advanced symptoms of contagious, infectious or fatal diseases, is seriously ill or severely injured, the animal control department shall seek the services of a licensed veterinarian who will determine whether to treat the animal or euthanize; or in the absence of an available veterinarian, the animal control officer shall confer with a superior on duty, in addition to writing a complete report on the reason for euthanization. This action may be taken to control the spread of disease or to eliminate any further pain and suffering of an animal. Every attempt will be made to stabilize an owned animal to afford the owner the opportunity to pick up the animal. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-8. - Humane disposition. 
(a)  If a dog or cat is not claimed by the owner within five days of notice to the owner, or a dog or cat of unknown ownership is not adopted within five days of impoundment, then it shall be the duty of the animal control department to euthanize the animal in as humane and painless manner as possible. An animal deemed to be highly desirable for adoption may be kept beyond the five-day limitation, provided that the animal does not evidence any apparent signs of illness, injury, contagious or infectious diseases and that space is available to house the animal, at the discretion of the director of the division of animal control. Animals may be released by the local humane society to approved foster homes authorized to accept animals if not claimed or adopted as provided. Animals shall not be provided to any public or private institution, animal dealer or other individual who may use or supply the animal for research purposes. 
(b)  Any animal which is suffering excessively or any animal which represents a real danger to persons or other animals, with regard to the period of confinement as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be destroyed by officers of the animal control department in as humane a manner as possible. 
(c)  When, in the opinion of a supervisor of the animal control department, a diseased or injured animal, taken into custody, is in need of immediate treatment so as to lessen the animal's suffering or to prevent the spread of a communicable disease to other animals, he shall immediately obtain the services of or place the animal with a licensed veterinarian for the purposes of administering necessary treatment. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-9. - Biting dogs and cats. 
(a)  In accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health, all dogs and cats known to have bitten a person shall be confined to the animal control shelter or veterinarian's hospital for a period of ten days. All expenses incurred shall be paid by the owner or possessor of the biting animal. A dog or cat may be declared to be a dangerous animal once proven that it has bitten a person and the owner shall be required to comply with section 8-9. 
(b)  In accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of public health, all pets or wild animals, other than a dog or cat, known to have bitten a person, or any animal which cannot be held for a rabies observation period, shall be euthanized and a lab specimen of brain tissue sent to the state department of epidemiology for testing and control of rabies. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-10. - Livestock. 
(a)  All livestock shall be properly housed with an adequate food and water supply and confined within a fenced enclosure. The fenced enclosure shall be maintained in such a manner as to keep any average livestock animal, for which is enclosure is designed, from escaping the enclosed compound and causing damage, accidents or injury to any person or property owners of such livestock shall be liable for any damage, accidents or injury provided that a pattern of neglect has been determined. 
(b)  No person shall tie, stake or fasten any animal within any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place within the county or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place. Such animal shall also be tied so as not to cross any property limits or boundaries without the express permission of the property owners. 
(c)  Owners or possessors of livestock or animals, other than dogs and cats impounded for violation of this chapter or any state and/or federal laws, will be charged in accordance with actual costs of impoundment plus impounding and boarding fees. 
(d)  Impounded livestock shall be held for a period of 21 days. If such impounded animals are not claimed by the owner during that period of time, the animal may be given to persons willing to accept them, at the discretion of the department of police services. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-11. - Wildlife. 
All complaints and matters concerning wild animals not of a domestic nature and complaints involving game animals or protected species and/or hunting shall be forwarded to the state department of natural resources, game and fish division, or the U.S. Department of Agriculture, law enforcement division, for proper disposition (i.e., compliance, apprehension, controlling and/or enforcement) as may be necessary as provided by state and federal rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-12. - Dead animals. 
Officers of the animal control department are authorized to remove dead animals from public property, including public schools, parks and roadways. Carcasses on private property must be disposed of by the animal or property owner or possessor in accordance with state law. Any dog, cat or small animal carcass to be picked up for disposal by the animal control center from a private residence must first be contained in a plastic bag and delivered to the right-of-way of the road or street for disposal. All dead livestock, including horses, cattle and any other large animal must be disposed of by the animal owner or property owner/possessor in accordance with state and local regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-13. - Collar, vaccination, and rabies vaccination tag. 
It shall be the duty of each dog and cat owner or possessor to abide by state rules and regulations regarding identification of pets, vaccinations, and evidence of vaccinations. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Secs. 8-14—8-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 8-40. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
a.  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
b.  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
c.  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
(3)  Local government means any county or municipality of this state. 
(4)  Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term 'owner' includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
(5)  Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
(6)  Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-41. - Designation of officers. 
Greene County hereby designates its animal control department, and the various animal control officers employed thereby, dog control officers to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. A person carrying out the duties of dog control officer of Greene County shall not be authorized to make arrests unless the person is also a law enforcement officer having the powers of arrest. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-42. - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting a person from: 
(a)  Defending his or her person or property, or the person or property of another, from the immediate threat of injury or damage from an animal. 
(b)  Injuring or killing an animal reasonably believed to constitute an immediate threat of injury or death to any livestock, poultry or pet animal. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-43. - Classification procedure. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term: 
(1)  Authority means the Magistrate Court of Greene County. 
(2)  Mail means to send by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
(b)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(c)  When a dog control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the authority on the dog control officer's determination within 15 days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall also provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. 
(d)  When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with subsection (c) of this Code section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the authority for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the authority conducting the hearing shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the authority conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
(e)  Within ten days after the hearing, the authority which conducted the hearing shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog shall be euthanized pursuant to section 8-46 of this chapter or O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(f)  Judicial review of the authority's final decision may be had in accordance with O.C.G.A § 50-13-19. 
(g)  No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement or military officer's official duties. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense under Chapter 5 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-44. - Impound authority. 
A law enforcement officer or dog control officer shall immediately impound a dog if the officer believes the dog poses a threat to the public safety. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-45. - Concurrent jurisdiction in superior court. 
The judge of any superior court of competent jurisdiction within this state may order the euthanasia of a dog if the court finds, after notice and opportunity fur hearing as provided by section 8-43 of this chapter or O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23, that the dog has seriously injured a human or presents a danger to humans not suitable for control under this article and: 
(1)  The owner or custodian of the dog has been convicted of a violation of any state criminal law and the crime was related to such dog; or 
(2)  Any local governmental authority has filed with the court a civil action requesting the euthanasia of the dog. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-46. - Mandatory euthanasia; effective date. 
A dog that is found, after notice and opportunity for hearing as provided by section 8-43 of this article or O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23, to have caused a serious injury to a human on more than one occasion shall be euthanized provided, however, that no injury occurring before July 1, 2012, shall count for purposes of this subsection. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-47. - Certificate of registration. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within Greene County a classified dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. Certificates of registration shall be non-transferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified by this chapter, a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the dangerous dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dangerous dog from leaving such property; and 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(c)  Except as provided in subsections (e) and (f) of this Code section, a certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property; 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog; and 
(4)  The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog. 
(d)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. 
(e)  No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious dog. 
(f)  No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dogfighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1 from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his or her sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(g)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a vicious dog, a dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with provisions of this article. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall institute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-48. - Notification of attack, roaming or death. 
(a)  The owner of a classified dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose or has attacked a human and shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog has died or has been euthanized. 
(b)  A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
(c)  The owner of a classified dog who moves from Greene County to another county or municipality within the State of Georgia shall register the classified dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days of becoming a resident and notify the dog control officer of the jurisdiction from which he or she moved. The owner of a similarly classified dog who moves into Greene County from another state, county or municipality shall register the dog as required in this chapter within 30 days of becoming a resident. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-49. - Restraint and enclosure requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be off the owner's property unless: 
(1)  The dog is restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; or 
(2)  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(3)  The dog is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be: 
(1)  Outside an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog while on the owner's property or outside a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property unless: 
a.  The dog is muzzled and restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; or 
b.  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(2)  Unattended with minors. 
(c)  Any irregularity in classification proceedings shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this article so long as the owner of the dog received actual notice of the classification and did not pursue a civil remedy for the correction of the irregularity. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-50. - Confiscation and recovery; costs and fines. 
(a)  A dangerous or vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by any dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation of this article. A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  The owner of any dog that has been confiscated pursuant to this article may recover such dog upon payment of reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this article. All fines and all charges for services performed by a law enforcement or dog control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the dog. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(c)  In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner and the owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-51. - Compliance effective dates. 
(a)  (1)  Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as a potentially dangerous dog in under this chapter or in this state shall on and after that date be classified as a dangerous dog under this article. 
(2)  Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as a dangerous dog or vicious dog under this chapter or in this state shall on and after that date be classified as a vicious dog under this article. 
(b)  The owner of any dog referred to in subsection (a) above shall come into compliance with all current provisions of this article by January 1, 2013. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-52. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
Except as specifically amended herein, all current provisions of the County Code which are not affected by this amendment, shall remain in full force and effect. Any and all ordinances or provisions of the County Code which conflict in any way with the provisions of this amendment are hereby expressly repealed. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 8-53. - Effective date. 
This amendment shall be effective from the date of its adoption and shall remain in full force and effect until such time as it is repealed by the Greene County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2012) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDING CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; county authority regarding technical building and construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter and/or the building and technical codes adopted by reference in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official or building inspector means a qualified person as designated by the board of commissioners to administer and enforce the provisions of said code. 
Construction board of adjustment and appeals or the board of appeals means a hearing board consisting of those persons as appointed by the board of commissioners, who make determinations on appeals from the decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider requests for building variances from the construction standards in the technical codes. 
Trade official means the electrical official, gas official, plumbing official, or housing official. 
Sec. 10-2. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the technical codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repairs, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Code 1998, § 17-117; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-117) 
Sec. 10-3. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)  Enforcement; interpretation. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes which are consistent with their intent and purpose. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by the technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work, but a written order will follow. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter or the technical codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, do not provide adequate egress, constitute a fire hazard, are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by codes. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this chapter or the technical codes, shall be determined by the construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. the building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Code 1998, § 17-108; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-108) 
Sec. 10-4. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner or his agent by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Code 1998, § 17-114; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-114) 
Secs. 10-5—10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 10-21. - Adoption by reference. 
(a)  It is the desire of the board to adopt, in all respects, the various state minimum standard codes relating to amusement devices, building, fire prevention, gas, grading, mechanical, plumbing, and swimming pools. The adoption of these state minimum standard codes is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the county relating to construction and maintenance of buildings within the unincorporated areas of the county and relating to public safety, health and general welfare. The latest edition of the following building and technical codes, as approved and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as though they were fully set out: 
(1)  International Building Code (IBC); 
(2)  International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC); 
(3)  International Mechanical Code (IMC); 
(4)  International Plumbing Code (IPC); 
(5)  National Electrical Code (NEC); 
(6)  International Fire Code (IFC); 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (IECC); 
(8)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (IRC); and 
(9)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC). 
(b)  The county following optional building and techincal codes, as approved and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out: 
(1)  International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC); and 
(2)  International Existing Building Code (IEBC). 
(c)  Any references in the standard codes made to the duties of certain officials named therein shall be the duty of the designated official of the county who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said standard code and shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the standard code. 
(Code 1998, § 17-101; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-101; Amend. of 1-9-2018 ) 
Sec. 10-22. - Adoption of minimum standard codes. 
(a)  It is the desire of the board to adopt and enforce, in all respects, the various state minimum standard codes. Local jurisdiction is required to adopt administrative procedures in order to enforce the standard codes by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 
(b)  The board hereby adopts the administrative procedures outlined in this chapter for enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction in the county. 
(Code 1998, § 17-103; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-103) 
Sec. 10-23. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the state minimum standard codes as allowed heretofore adopted. Hereinafter, all of the standard codes heretofore adopted shall be referenced as the "technical codes," as may be adopted by the state or local jurisdiction. 
(b)  Codes declared remedial. 
(1)  General. The technical codes are hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof; which are: 
a.  Public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation; 
b.  Safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises; and 
c.  Regulation of the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as the "service systems." 
(2)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this chapter, except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(3)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection and permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this chapter shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The county, nor any employee thereof, shall not be liable in tort for damages for any defects or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy of such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as approved and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as approved and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as approved and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this chapter. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as approved and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related items, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as approved and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, as approved and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(8)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as approved and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water, heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(9)  One- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as approved and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every one- and two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(10)  Unsafe buildings. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, as approved and amended by the state department of community affairs, will provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(d)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of this chapter shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(e)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(f)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provision shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(g)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Code 1998, § 17-104; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-104) 
Sec. 10-24. - Building and zoning department. 
There is hereby established a department to be called the building and zoning department, and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. the qualifications of the building official and other technical code enforcement personnel shall be established by the board. 
(1)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the building and zoning department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this chapter, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the building and zoning department. 
(2)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the building and zoning department. The records of the building and zoning department shall be open to public inspection. 
(3)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the construction board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer, employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall be defended by the county attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(4)  Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building and zoning department during the preceding year; he may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the construction board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
(Code 1998, § 17-105; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-105) 
Secs. 10-25—10-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-52. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alternations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to an existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes, provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes, as required by the building official. 
(Code 1998, § 17-106; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-106) 
Sec. 10-53. - Specific historic buildings. 
The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation and moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings, when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, or relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Code 1998, § 17-107; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-107) 
Sec. 10-54. - Service utilities. 
(a)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or, for certain types of permits, a certificate of completion, is issued. 
(b)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize a temporary connection of a building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes in case of emergency, where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system, of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Code 1998, § 17-112; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-112) 
Sec. 10-55. - Posting of floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes by a specific business when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record in the building and zoning department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates of approved design, which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building, in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Code 1998, § 17-113; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-113) 
Secs. 10-56—10-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITS, INSPECTIONS, AND CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 10-82. - Application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(b)  Exception. Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this chapter; 
(5)  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)  Any portable evaporative cooler; and 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(c)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(d)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(e)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or his authorized agent. The application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official or "The Zoning Ordinance for Greene County, Georgia," as amended. 
(f)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than 90 days each, may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Code 1998, § 17-109(A); Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-109(A)) 
Sec. 10-83. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer, legally registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering, and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data for the following: 
(1)  All Group A, E, and I occupancies; 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more high; and 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
a.  For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
b.  Exception. Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes, and systems and also indicate, in sufficient detail, how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor showing seal and signature on the survey. 
(f)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning' areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment, and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building, and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exists, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid-tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Code 1998, § 17-109(B); Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-109(B)) 
Sec. 10-84. - Examination of documents. 
(a)  Plan review. The building official shall examine, or cause to be examined, each Application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction, and general arrangement and, if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such an affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Code 1998, § 17-109(C); Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-109(C)) 
Sec. 10-85. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform with the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the application with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and, pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted, nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building, where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane or for the placing on any lot or premises of any such building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in the building code. 
(Code 1998, § 17-109(D); Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-109(D)) 
Sec. 10-86. - Contractor's responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state and local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the building official with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Code 1998, § 17-109(E); Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-109(E)) 
Sec. 10-87. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work, and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this chapter. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for period not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be approved in writing by the building official. 
(b)  Issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit, or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations supervise such work. In addition, the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been completed in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(c)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1998, § 17-109(F); Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-109(F)) 
Sec. 10-88. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees as established by the board of commissioners from time to time, have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas system has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee, in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit in accordance with the fee schedules set by the board shall be paid, as required, at the time of filing the application. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of a building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, and other systems, including materials an labor. 
(f)  Refund. If, within 30 days of issuance of a permit, the permit is withdrawn by the applicant, the applicant may receive a refund of 75 percent of the permit fee. At any time that work commences under a permit, there will be no refund. 
(Code 1998, § 17-109(G); Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-109(G)) 
Sec. 10-89. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied, or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building, until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and, for certain types of permits, is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1998, § 17-111; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-111) 
Secs. 10-90—10-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS 

Sec. 10-113. - Appointment. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals which shall consist of five members and two alternates. The board shall appoint the members and alternates. 
(Code 1998, § 17-115(A); Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-115) 
Sec. 10-114. - Membership and terms. 
(a)  Membership. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall consist of five members. Such members shall be composed of individuals serving on the board with knowledge and experience in the technical codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members, there shall be two alternate members: one member at large from the building industry; and one member at large from the public. A member who is also a member of the board shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(b)  Terms. The terms of office of the members shall be staggered so no more than one-third of the members are appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. The two alternates, if appointed, shall serve one-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings shall, at the discretion of the board, render any such member subject tb immediate removal from office. 
(c)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this chapter, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(d)  Secretary of the members. The building official shall act as secretary at each meeting of the members and shall make a detailed records of all proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for any decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Code 1998, § 17-115(B); Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-115) 
Sec. 10-115. - Powers. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in section 10-116, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the technical codes. 
(Code 1998, § 17-115(C); Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-115) 
Sec. 10-116. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of this chapter or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. The construction board of adjustment and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this chapter to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other buildings, structures or service system. 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Condition of variances. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed, or both. In addition, the members may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(e)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeal to a shorter period. 
(f)  Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the members shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the members reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of this chapter, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant, and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the members shall be final, subject however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Code 1998, § 17-115(D); Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-115) 
Sec. 10-117. - Rules and regulations. 
The members shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure, not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The members shall meet on call of the chairman of the construction board. The members shall meet within 30 calendar days after a notice of appeal has been received. 
(Code 1998, § 17-115(E); Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 17-115) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General powers of counties as to taxation and licenses, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV; certain persons prohibited from investigating business for issuance of county license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9; business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Scope. 
(a)  This chapter shall apply to: 
(1)  All businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations which have one or more locations or offices within the unincorporated part of the county; and 
(2)  To those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the state, if the business or practitioner: 
a.  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the unincorporated part of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
b.  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in the unincorporated part of the county. 
(b)  Businesses and practitioners subject to this chapter shall be required to pay occupation tax to only one local government in the state, which shall be the local government for the municipal corporation or county in which the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by the individual business or practitioner. 
(c)  If a business or practitioner subject to this chapter provides to the county proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business or practitioner's sales or services in the state, the business or practitioner shall be exempt from local occupation tax in the county. 
(d)  This chapter shall not apply to those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations which are excluded from coverage by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16, which generally includes: 
(1)  Businesses and practitioners regulated by the public service commission and the department of public safety; 
(2)  Electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of title 46; and 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products (but not including any agribusiness). 
(e)  This chapter shall not apply to those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations which are excluded from coverage by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16, which generally includes: 
(1)  Disabled veterans of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the United States armed forces was involved, whether under United States command or otherwise; 
(2)  Blind persons; 
(3)  Veterans of peace-time service in the United States armed forces who have a physical disability which was incurred during that service. 
(f)  This chapter shall not apply to those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations which are excluded from occupation tax as otherwise allowed by the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(g)  The county shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have. 
(h)  The following examples of businesses and practitioners of professions or occupations are not subject to this chapter may include, but are expressly not limited to: lawyers; physicians licensed under O.C.G.A. § 43-34-20 et seq.; osteopaths licensed under O.C.G.A. § 43-34-20 et seq.; chiropractors; podiatrists; dentists; optometrists; psychologists; veterinarians; landscape architects, land surveyors; practitioners of physiotherapy; public accountants; embalmers; funeral directors; civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; architects, marriage and family therapists, social workers and professional counselors; dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622(1); and any other business, profession or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
(Code 1998, § 14-101; Ord. of 11-14-2017(2) ) 
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, all terms shall have the same definitions as those correspondingly set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
(Code 1998, § 14-102) 
Sec. 12-3. - Determination of occupation tax. 
(a)  A fee of $75.00 shall be paid by all businesses and practitioners of professions or occupations with at least one but not more than nine employees. 
(b)  A fee of $100.00 shall be paid by all businesses and practitioners of professions or occupations which have ten or more employees. 
(c)  The county may, by ordinance or resolution, provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. 
(d)  When the business or practitioner of an occupation or profession has a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction, the number of employees for purposes of this section will be determined by the number of employees who are employed within the unincorporated part of the county. 
(Code 1998, § 14-103; Ord. of 11-14-2017(2) ) 
Sec. 12-4. - Payment of fees. 
(a)  All license fees imposed under this chapter shall be due and payable annually on January 1, with the exception that any business commenced after January 1 in any year shall pay the license fee on the date of the commencement of the business. 
(b)  When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the fee imposed for the entire year. 
(c)  All monies collected shall be remitted daily to the county clerk for processing under current board procedures. 
(Code 1998, § 14-104) 
Sec. 12-5. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  Should any license fee imposed under this chapter remain due and unpaid for 90 days from the due date for the fee, the person liable for the fee shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the fee due. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty in subsection (a) of this section, the board may issue executions against the delinquent licensee for the amount of the fees when the fees become due. 
(c)  Interest on delinquent occupation taxes will accrue at the rate of 1½ percent per month. 
(Code 1998, § 14-105) 
Sec. 12-6. - Posting of licenses. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the county by this chapter shall post the license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(b)  Each person subject to this chapter who is also licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1998, § 14-106) 
Sec. 12-7. - Applications. 
(a)  Required. Every person required to procure a license under the provision of this chapter or any ordinance or law of the county shall submit an application for such license to the county clerk, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the county clerk. 
(2)  Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and home address of the applicant, if an individual, or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
b.  Place where the proposed business is to be located; 
c.  Description of business; 
d.  The number of employees employed by the applicant in Greene County; 
e.  If the business of the applicant requires a license from the state, a copy of said license must be included with the application for a license with the county; and 
f.  Such additional information which the county clerk or board may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this section. 
(3)  Each application shall be sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer if a corporation. 
(4)  Each application shall be accompanied by the amount chargeable for such occupation tax and/or license. 
a.  The county clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount tendered with the application for an occupational tax certificate and/or license, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application, nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  Rebate. Upon the disapproval of any application for which payment has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the county clerk shall refund such payment, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the county. 
(b)  Confidentiality of information. All information furnished or secured under the authority of this section shall be kept in strict confidence by the county clerk, shall only be subject to public inspection in accordance with the Open Records Act, and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the county responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  False statements. False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of such license and possible prosecution under state law. 
(d)  Right of inspection. The applicant shall agree to the inspection of the licensed premises by appropriate officers of the county at any time said licensed premises are open to the public or at other times deemed necessary and reasonable. 
(Code 1998, § 14-107; Ord. of 11-14-2017(2) ) 
Secs. 12-8—12-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BODY TATTOO/BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATORS 

Sec. 12-51. - Authority. 
The legal authority for this article is O.C.G.A. ch. 31-40. (O.C.G.A. Chapters 31-40-1 through 31-40-9, and 31-5.) 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § I) 
Sec. 12-52. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules and regulations is to establish reasonable standards for individuals performing body tattoo/body piercing procedures and for the facilities where the procedures are provided. If followed, such standards should reduce the risk to the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving these services. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § II) 
Sec. 12-53. - Exemptions. 
These regulations do not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 [of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated], or to a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § III) 
Sec. 12-54. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Administrative body or owner means the partnership, corporation, association, or the person or group of persons who maintain and control or own the body tattoo/body piercing establishment and personnel, and who are legally responsible for the operation of the establishment. 
Antimicrobial solution means any solution used to retard the growth of microorganisms approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
Antiseptic means an agent or substance that will destroy or inhibit the growth and development of infectious microorganisms on human skin or mucous membranes. 
Applicant means any person who applies for a body tattoo/body piercing operator permit, guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit or body tattoo/body piercing establishment permit. 
Autoclave or sterilizer means an apparatus, certified to meet generally accepted medical standards, for sterilization utilizing steam pressure at a specific temperature over a period of time per manufacturer's specifications. 
Biohazardous waste means liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious materials and/or contaminated items, which if compressed, would release blood or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state. 
Blood-borne pathogens means pathogenic microorganisms present in human blood that can cause disease in humans. These pathogens include, but are not limited to, Hepatitis B virus (HBV), Hepatitis C virus (HCV), and Human Immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
Body tattoo/body piercing means the practice of physical body adornment by means of tattooing or body piercing. This definition does not include practices considered medical procedures by the Georgia Board of Registration in Medicine such as implants under the skin which are prohibited unless such medical procedures are performed by a person licensed by the Georgia Board of Registration in Medicine. 
Body tattoo/body piercing establishment means any permanent building or structure on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business license, if applicable, and permit from the county board of health where the practices of body tattoo and/or body piercing are performed whether or not for profit. 
Body tattoo/body piercing establishment permit means departmental approval in writing authorizing the administrative body to operate a body tattoo/body piercing establishment for the purpose of engaging in the practice or business of body tattoo/body piercing procedures. Health department approval shall be granted solely for the practice of body tattoo/body piercing pursuant to these regulations. 
Body piercing means puncturing or penetrating the skin or mucosa of a client utilizing a single-use sterile needle or other sterile instrument for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other adornment into the body for nonmedical purposes; body piercing includes ear piercing, except when the ear piercing procedure is performed on the ear lobe with a single-use ear piercing gun using sterile materials. (See definition: Single use.) 
Cleaning room shall mean the area in a body tattoo/body piercing establishment used in the sterilization, sanitation or other cleaning of instruments or other equipment used for the practice of body tattoo/body piercing and shall be separated from any other area in the facility by means of doors, nonabsorbent curtains, or similar approved partition extending from floor to ceiling or a height of eight feet. 
Client or customer shall mean an individual upon whom one or more body tattoo/body piercing activities are to be performed. 
Contaminated means the presence or the reasonably anticipated presence of blood, other body fluids, other potentially infectious materials, or potentially harmful chemicals on an item or surface. 
Contaminated waste shall mean any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious material; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially infectious material in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items on which there is dried blood or other potentially infectious material and which are capable of releasing these materials during handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood or other potentially infectious materials, as defined in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
County board of health or health department means the local county board of health, county health department, county health department office of environmental health, district office of environmental health, and/or district health director or any other designee/agent authorized to act on behalf of the local county board of health such as the Georgia Division of Public Health. 
Critical item(s) means those aspects of operation or conditions which, if in violation, constitute the greatest hazards to health and safety, including imminent health hazards. Critical violations shall include the following: 
(a)  Autoclave that does not meet minimum time, pressure or temperature requirements; 
(b)  Lack of a monthly negative spore or microbiological monitoring test for quality control; 
(c)  Nondisposable tubes and needles that are not sterilized or were sterilized greater than six months ago; 
(d)  Work area that is not equipped or stocked as required; 
(e)  Reuse of single-use equipment or supplies; 
(f)  Sterile instruments are not properly handled; 
(g)  Reusable instruments are not handled properly; 
(h)  Employees with infectious lesions on hands not restricted from body tattoo/body piercing procedures; 
(i)  Employees not practicing proper cleanliness and good hygienic practices; 
(j)  Water supply not approved or hot and cold running water under pressure not available; 
(k)  Approved sewage and liquid waste disposal not available or improper disposal of liquid wastes; 
(l)  Cross connection allowing back-siphonage present in plumbing system; 
(m)  Readily available hand washing and toilet facilities not available for operators and employees; 
(n)  Insect and rodent evidence, harborage, or outer opening present; 
(o)  Toxic items not properly stored, labeled, or used; 
(p)  Unpermitted operator performing tattooing/body piercing; 
(q)  Prohibited procedures occurring within establishment. 
Decontamination means the use of physical or chemical means to remove, inactivate, or destroy blood-borne pathogens on a surface or item to the point where they are no longer capable of transmitting infectious particles and the surface or item is rendered safe for handling, use, or disposal. 
Disinfectant means a solution registered as a hospital tuberculocidal disinfectant by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and is intended to destroy or inactivate specific viruses, bacteria, or fungi on clean, inanimate surfaces. 
Disinfection means the destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use or handling. 
Ear piercing means the puncturing of the outer ear for nonmedical purposes. 
Easily cleanable means that surfaces are readily accessible and made of such materials and finish and so fabricated that residue may be effectively removed by normal cleaning methods. 
Equipment means all machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of a body tattoo/body piercing establishment. 
Establishment means the physical location of a business which offers and performs body tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
Germicidal solution means any solution approved by the FDA which destroys microorganisms and is so labeled. 
Gloves means medical grade disposable single-use gloves labeled for surgical or examination purposes. 
Guest operator shall mean a visiting body tattoo/body piercing operator possessing a guest operator permit issued by the health department. 
Guest operator permit means the issuance of a seven-day permit by the health department to allow a person to practice body tattooing/body piercing in accordance with these regulations under the direct supervision of a permitted body tattoo/body piercing operator. 
Hand sink means a lavatory equipped with hot and cold potable running water under pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of the body. The facility shall include a soap dispenser, soap, and single-use disposable towels on a dispenser. 
Imminent health hazard means any condition, deficiency, or practice, as discovered by the environmental health inspector which, if not corrected, is very likely to result in disease transmission, injury, or loss of life to any person. 
Informed consent means the health department-approved statement that a client signs prior to receiving a body tattoo/body piercing procedure notifying them of the possible hazards of receiving a tattoo or piercing. 
Instruments means hand pieces, needles, needle bars, and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body or may be exposed to bodily fluids during any body tattooing/body piercing procedure. 
Jewelry means any ornament used in any body piercing procedure which is inserted into a newly pierced area. Jewelry used shall be one of the following: Surgical steel that is American Society of Testing Materials International (ASTM) F-138, International Standards Organization (ISO) 5832-1, or ISO 10993-(6,10 or 11) compliant; titanium that is ASTM F-136, ASTM- 67, or ISO 5832-3 compliant; Niobium; solid platinum; biocompatible polymers Tygon, PTPE, or Bioplast; glass such as fused quartz, lead-free borosilicate and lead-free soda-lime glass that can be autoclaved; or solid 14-karat or higher, white or yellow nickel-free gold. Copies of the jewelry manufacturer's documentation, which verify compliance with these standards, must be available for inspection on request. 
Microbiological monitoring for quality control means the use of a standard spore, to challenge the sterilization process. 
Minor means an individual under the age of 18. 
Notification of risk or disclosure statement means a framed, posted health department-approved statement which notifies clients of the possible hazards of body tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
Occupational exposure means a specific eye, mouth, other mucous membrane, non-intact skin, or parenteral contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials resulting from the performance of an employee's activities. 
Operator means a person at least 18 years of age who performs tattooing or body piercing and who is responsible for complying with applicable provisions of these regulations. 
Operator permit shall mean a document issued by the health department pursuant to this body tattoo/body piercing regulation authorizing a person to conduct allowed body tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
Personal protective equipment means specialized clothing or equipment, such as gloves or lap cloth, worn by an employee for protection against a hazard. General work clothes not intended to function as protection against a hazard are not considered to be personal protective equipment. 
Personnel means the permit holder, any person who performs body tattoo/body piercing, persons having supervisory or management duties, or any other person employed or working in a body tattoo/body piercing establishment. Such an individual may or may not be an operator. 
Physician or osteopath means a person licensed to practice medicine in Georgia. 
Proof of age means a driver's license or other generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as 18 years of age or older, contains a photograph, and appears on its face to be valid. 
Sanitary means clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
Sanitize means the application of a U.S. EPA-registered sanitizer on a cleaned surface by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the microorganism level, including pathogens, to a safe level on utensils and equipment in accordance with the label instructions. 
Sharps means any object, sterile or contaminated, that may intentionally or accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa. 
Sharps container means a puncture-resistant, leak-proof container that can be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal and that is labeled with the International Biohazard Symbol. 
Single use means disposable products or items that are intended for one-time, one-person use and are properly disposed of by appropriate measures after use on each client. Single-use items include, but are not limited to, piercing needles, stencils, ink cups, razors, single-use instruments, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, medical grade absorbent liner that is waterproof on one side, and protective gloves. 
Solid waste means refuse, garbage, trash, rubbish, and any other item(s) which could cause an unsanitary condition or undesirable health and safety conditions. 
Sterilization or sterilize means the use of a physical or chemical procedure by which all forms of microbial life, including bacteria, viruses, spores, and fungi are destroyed including highly resistant bacterial endospores. This is achieved by holding in an autoclave for 15 minutes, at 15 pounds pressure, and at a temperature of 250° Fahrenheit or 121° Celsius, or any equivalent procedure resulting in complete destruction of microbial life including spores. 
Sterilized indicator means a tape, strip, bag, or other device designed to change color to indicate that sterilization temperature has been achieved during the sterilization procedure. 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin. Micropigmentation is included in this definition. 
Ultrasonic cleaning unit means a unit approved by the health department with lid, physically large enough to fully submerge instruments in liquid, which removes all foreign matter from the instruments by means of high frequency oscillations transmitted through the contained liquid. 
Universal precautions means treating all blood and body fluids as if they contain blood-borne pathogens and taking proper precautions to prevent the spread of any blood-borne pathogens. (See appendix I.) 
Utensil means any implement, tool, or other similar device used in the storage, preparation, operation, or processing of body tattoo/body piercing. 
Violation correction means a plan for correcting deficiencies in meeting these rules and regulations of the local board of health. 
Waste means solid waste, sewage, blood and body fluids or other waste resulting from the operation of a body tattoo/body piercing establishment. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § IV) 
Sec. 12-55. - Administrative body. 
(1)  The administrative body shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-40, with applicable administrative rules and regulations of the local county board of health, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes, rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(2)  The administrative body shall certify in its application the name(s) and exact duties of the operators who have been designated as being responsible for carrying out the rules and policies adopted by the administrative body. The following information shall be included: Valid driver's license or Government-issued I.D., date of birth (DOB), gender, home address, home/work phone numbers, ID photos of all operators. 
(3)  Prior to being granted a permit, each body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall develop a written statement of policies and standard operating procedures including: 
(a)  Sterilization. 
(b)  Employee health. 
(c)  Sanitizing areas and equipment between clients. 
(d)  Disposal of waste. 
(e)  Recordkeeping. 
(f)  Client screening. 
(g)  Aftercare procedures. 
(h)  Emergency sterilization procedures. 
(4)  Prohibited facilities. 
(a)  Body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall not be allowed in the same facilities used for human habitation, any food service establishment, retail sales area, hotel room or similar areas. This does not prohibit body tattoo/body piercing operations in completely separated areas by walls and doors of these or other businesses. 
(b)  Body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall not be allowed in automobiles, mobile, transitory or other nonfixed facilities. Such nonfixed facilities include, but are not limited to, mobile trailers, tents, and recreational vehicles. 
(5)  Prohibited procedures. 
(a)  Implants or other procedures involving insertion of foreign objects completely under the skin, such as 3-D procedures, are prohibited. 
(b)  Any body tattoo/body piercing procedures which result in the permanent removal of tissue or requiring medical equipment (ex. scalpels) shall be prohibited, except that a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 [of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated], or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath shall be authorized to perform such procedures. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pierce the body, with the exception of the ear lobes, of any person under the age of 18 for the purposes of allowing the insertion of earrings, jewelry, or similar objects into the body, unless the body piercing is performed in the presence of the person's parent or legal guardian. The parent or legal guardian must have proper identification and sign a written consent form provided by the body tattoo/body piercing establishment. The consent form must indicate the methods and part(s) of the minor's body upon which the body art procedure is performed. Nipple and genital piercing is prohibited on minors regardless of parental or legal guardian consent. 
(d)  No person under the age of 18 shall be tattooed, except that a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 [of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated], or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath shall be authorized to do so. 
(e)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-5(b), it shall be unlawful for any person to perform permanent tattooing or cosmetic micropigmentation procedures within any area within one inch of the nearest part of the eye socket unless performed by a physician, licensed osteopath, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of a physician or licensed osteopath. 
(f)  No person except a duly licensed physician or a Georgia-licensed laser technician under the supervision of a physician shall remove or attempt to remove any tattoo. 
(6)  Body tattoo/body piercing operators shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
(7)  Operators shall refuse services to any person who is or appears to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(8)  Body tattoo/body piercing operators shall not provide service to any person who shows evidence of being mentally incapacitated. 
(9)  Live animals shall be excluded from within the body tattoo/body piercing establishment and from adjacent areas within the facility under the control of the permit holder. However, this exclusion does not apply to fish in aquariums. Service animals accompanying disabled persons shall be permitted in the establishment. 
(10)  The skin of the body tattoo/body piercing operator shall be free of rash, any lesion or visible sign of infection. A body tattoo/body piercing operator shall not conduct any form of body tattoo/body piercing activity upon any area of a client that evidences the presence of any rash, lesion or other visible signs of infection. 
(11)  No body tattoo/body piercing equipment or tattoo dyes and pigments shall be made available for use to nonpermitted operators or establishments. 
(12)  Any future body tattoo/body piercing procedures not covered within these rules which have the potential for transmitting infectious disease must receive written health department approval prior to being offered to customers or patrons. 
(13)  Body tattoo/body piercing shall only be performed by currently approved body tattoo/body piercing operators in a permitted body tattoo/body piercing establishment meeting the requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § V) 
Sec. 12-56. - Personnel. 
(1)  Persons performing the body tattoo/body piercing procedures shall successfully complete a written examination specified by the county health department, obtain current certification in Red Cross Basic First Aid/CPR or equivalent, and proof of successful completion of an Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) approved Blood-Borne Pathogen/Universal Precautions training program, at least yearly as required by OSHA. Training/courses provided by professional body tattoo/body piercing organizations/associations or by equipment manufacturers may also be submitted for consideration. 
(2)  The body tattoo/body piercing establishment owner shall make available, at no cost to the personnel, Hepatitis B vaccination series, as well as any routine booster dose(s) to every person who may have occupational exposure to blood or other potentially infectious material. For new personnel, the vaccine shall be made available within ten business days of initial work assignment. 
(3)  Proof shall be provided upon request that all operators have completed the Hepatitis B vaccination series; that antibody testing has revealed that the employee is immune to Hepatitis B; or that the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons. Contraindication requires a dated and signed physician's statement specifying the name of the employee and stating the reason the vaccine cannot be given. 
(4)  The owner or administrative body must maintain a file on all employees who perform body tattoo/body piercing procedures. Employee files must be kept on location and for a minimum of two years even after the employee is terminated. The employee files must be available for inspection and include the following: 
(a)  Report of Hepatitis B Vaccination, Hepatitis B antibody testing, or contraindication to Hepatitis B vaccine. 
(b)  Evidence of Red Cross Basic First Aid/CPR certification or equivalent and completion of an OSHA approved Blood-Borne Pathogen/Universal Precautions training program. 
(c)  A copy of a photo I.D. 
(d)  A copy of the health department issued operator permit. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § VI) 
Sec. 12-57. - Application for permit. 
(1)  The administrative body of each body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall submit to the local county health department an application for a permit to operate under the rules and regulations. No establishment shall be operated and no body tattoo/body piercing performed without such permit, which is current under these rules and regulations. 
(2)  The application for permit shall be made on forms provided by the county health department. 
(3)  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by an 8½" x 11" or larger page containing a detailed floor drawing to scale of the body tattoo/body piercing establishment. Such drawing shall show the accurate placement of each of the following: windows, doors, room measurements, chairs, tables, sinks, bathrooms, waiting area, and equipment placement for clients and/or staff. Plans must be submitted and approved 14 days prior to construction of a new body tattoo/body piercing establishment or remodeling of an existing body tattoo/body piercing establishment. 
(4)  Specification sheets must be submitted for all equipment. 
(5)  A listing of the names of all staff including the owner who will be working in the establishment shall be included with the application for a permit. This listing shall include the full name of each staff person. 
(6)  The ownership of the establishment shall be fully disclosed in its application for a permit. 
(7)  Zoning and other local requirements regarding proper location and establishment of body tattoo/body piercing establishments shall be addressed by the applicant with the responsible local officials. 
(8)  Existing establishments and personnel. 
(a)  Both body tattoo/body piercing establishments and body tattoo/body piercing operators in business at the date of adoption of the rules and regulations shall make application for a permit within 30 days of the adoption date. 
(b)  The health department may approve up to a 12-month period from the date of application for compliance of physical facilities of existing establishments; provided however, that no exemptions will be granted for circumstances presenting an immediate threat to public health such as lack of potable water, toilet facilities, waste disposal, adequate lighting, adequate sinks and lavatories, and universal precautions. 
(c)  Body tattoo/body piercing operators in business at the date of adoption of these rules must be certified in blood-borne pathogens/universal precautions and basic first aid/CPR certification within 90 days of adoption date. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § VII) 
Sec. 12-58. - Body tattoo/body piercing establishment permit. 
(1)  Any person planning to operate a body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall obtain a written application for a permit on a form provided by the health department through the local county health department prior to operating a body tattoo/body piercing establishment. 
(2)  A new or initial application is required for body tattoo/body piercing establishments that have not previously been permitted or for instances when ownership changes. To be eligible for a permit the establishment must be in compliance with these rules and regulations. 
(3)  The local health department shall issue a body tattoo/body piercing establishment permit: 
(a)  Upon receiving a completed application and plans with applicable fees; 
(b)  After an inspection of the proposed facility reveals that the facility is in compliance with requirements of these rules. 
(4)  The establishment permit and framed "notification of risk" shall be displayed in within 15 feet of the front or primary public door and between five feet and seven feet from the floor and in an area where it can be read at a distance of one foot away. 
(5)  Permits shall expire on June 30 each year and are not transferable from one facility to another. 
(6)  A permit shall no longer be valid and shall be returned to the health department when the establishment ceases to operate, has moved to another location, the ownership changes, or the permit is suspended, revoked or expired. 
(7)  An establishment which fails to comply with these rules and regulations shall be subject to the sanctions available to the county health department pursuant to O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-5 including, but not limited to, denial or revocation of its permit by the county health department. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § VIII) 
Sec. 12-59. - Body tattoo/body piercing operator permit. 
(1)  No person shall practice body tattoo/body piercing procedures without first obtaining a body tattoo/body piercing operator permit from the county health department. 
(2)  An applicant for a body tattoo/body piercing operator permit must be a minimum of 18 years of age and shall demonstrate to the health department his/her successful compliance with all training, disclosure, consent and educational requirements of this body tattoo/body piercing regulation prior to the issuance or renewal of a body tattoo/body piercing operator permit by the department. 
(3)  Application for the body tattoo/body piercing operator permit shall include: 
(a)  Name; 
(b)  Date of birth; 
(c)  Sex; 
(d)  Residence address; 
(e)  Mailing address; 
(f)  Phone number; 
(g)  Place(s) of employment as a body tattoo/body piercing operator; 
(h)  Photo I.D.; 
(i)  Proof of passing the departmental exam, successful completion of an OSHA approved blood-borne pathogen/universal precautions training program and basic first aid/CPR class approved by the health department. 
(4)  No permit will be issued without successfully completing an OSHA approved course in blood-borne pathogens/universal precautions, basic first aid/CPR and passing departmental exam. 
(5)  Individuals seeking a body tattoo/body piercing operator permit shall submit a completed application provided by the health department, pay a set fee determined by the health department, and provide proof of health department-required courses. 
(6)  Acting within the scope of the permit: a body tattoo/body piercing operator shall only perform those form(s) of body tattoo/body piercing that is/are indicated in the body tattoo/body piercing operator permit application submitted to the health department. 
(7)  The body tattoo/body piercing operator permit shall expire on June 30 each year and must be renewed unless revoked sooner by the health department. 
(8)  In order for a body tattoo/body piercing operator permit to be renewed, body tattoo/body piercing operators must attend a health department-approved educational class on blood-borne pathogens/universal precautions every year as required by OSHA, maintain current certification in basic first aid/CPR, and pay all applicable fees. 
(9)  All body tattoo/body piercing operator permits shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where they may be readily observed by clients. 
(10)  Guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit: 
(a)  The health department may issue one (seven-day) permit per year to a guest body tattoo/body piercing operator. Such guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit will allow a person to practice body tattoo/body piercing under the direct supervision of a body tattoo/body piercing operator holding a valid body tattoo/body piercing operator permit issued by the health department. The issuance of a guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit is conditioned upon the applicant demonstrating the following: 
1.  The applicant has received training equivalent to the minimum training requirement set by this body tattoo/body piercing regulation; 
2.  The applicant shall provide a letter of consent signed by a health department-approved body tattoo/body piercing operator, a copy of the body tattoo/body piercing operator permit, and a copy of the body tattoo/body piercing establishment permit where the applicant will practice any body tattoo/body piercing procedures; 
3.  Paying a set application fee paid to the health department. 
(b)  No visiting body tattoo/body piercing operator shall practice body tattoo/body piercing without a guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit issued by the health department. 
(c)  Any body tattoo/body piercing operator permitted by the health department requesting to have a visiting body tattoo/body piercing operator perform under his/her supervision shall: 
1.  Notify the health department in writing in advance of the proposed effective date of the requested guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit; 
2.  Require that the visiting body tattoo/body piercing operator obtain a guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit from the health department. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § IX) 
Sec. 12-60. - Client files. 
(1)  For each client, proper records of identification, body tattoo/body piercing administered, informed consent, and care instructions shall be kept and retained for a minimum of two years at the establishment or preapproved location. 
(2)  Records of each client shall be prepared prior to the body tattoo/body piercing procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name and signature, address, proof of age, date procedure performed, design, its location and name of the operator. 
(3)  A statement of informed consent approved by the health department must be read and signed by the person receiving the body tattoo/body piercing procedure and maintained in the client file. 
(4)  A signed statement by the client attesting that he/she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs shall be on file. 
(5)  A copy of instructions signed by the client advising them of proper subsequent care of the body tattoo/body piercing procedure shall be maintained on file. 
(6)  A copy of notification signed by the client informing them of the risks involved and possible complications that might result from the body tattoo/body piercing procedure must be maintained on file. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § X) 
Sec. 12-61. - Minimum standards. 
(1)  Each establishment where body tattoo/body piercing procedures are administered shall provide a work area separate from observers or visitors. 
(2)  All new body tattoo/body piercing establishments permitted after adoption of these rules shall have a minimum of 45 square feet of floor space for each operator in the establishment. Multiple workstations shall be separated by dividers, nonabsorbent curtains, or partitions. 
(3)  At least one work area shall provide complete privacy for clients by means of doors, nonabsorbent curtains, or similar approved partition. 
(4)  A body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall have a cleaning room to be used exclusively for the cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization of instruments. 
(a)  The cleaning room shall have a separate National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) approved instrument sink or stainless steel instrument sink reserved only for instrument disinfectant activities and shall be equipped with hot and cold running water. 
(b)  The cleaning room shall be separated from any other area in the facility by means of doors, nonabsorbent curtains, or similar approved partition extending from floor to ceiling or a height of eight feet. 
(c)  The cleaning room shall be equipped with an ultrasonic cleaning unit that will remove all foreign matter from the instruments and a medical grade autoclave. The autoclave shall be used to sterilize all nondisposable and reusable body tattoo/body piercing equipment. 
(d)  The autoclave shall be separated from the ultrasonic cleaner and the instruments sink by a minimum distance of 48 inches, unless using a splashguard approved by the health department. 
(e)  In establishments that only tattoo, the requirement for an ultrasonic cleaning unit and autoclave may be waived if the establishment only stores and uses commercially purchased sterile single-use disposable tattoo instruments. 
(5)  A wrist-action or foot pedal-operated hand sink shall be provided for each private workstation and for every two adjacent workstations. Hand sinks shall be no more than 15 feet of unobstructed distance from any workstation. Obstructions include, but are not limited to, doors. Establishments in operation prior to the adoption of these rules and regulations shall have a hand sink located within 35 feet of unobstructed distance from each workstation. 
(6)  The use of common towels and cloths is prohibited. Hand sinks shall be equipped with a soap dispenser and single-use disposable towels on a dispenser. 
(7)  Hot water must be a minimum of 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(8)  At least one janitorial sink or one curbed cleaning facility equipped with a floor drain shall be provided and conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. Any hand-washing sink and instrument sink shall not be used as a janitorial sink. 
(9)  Each location shall have the facilities to properly dispose of all waste material. All materials (e.g., needles) must be disposed of in accordance with Georgia Department of Natural Resources - Environmental Protection Division - Solid Waste Management - Chapter 391-3-4.15. 
(10)  Sanitary facilities and controls. 
(a)  Water supply. 
1.  Enough potable water for the needs of the body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall be provided from an approved source that is a public water system; or a nonpublic water system that is constructed, maintained and operated according to applicable state or local codes. 
2.  Water from a public water system shall meet 40 CFR 141 — National Primary Drinking Water Regulations and state drinking water quality standards. 
3.  Water from a nonpublic water system shall follow guidelines established in the Georgia EPD and Division of Public Health Memorandum of Understanding for Nonpublic Water Supplies. 
4.  The most recent sample report for the nonpublic water system shall be retained on file in the body tattoo/body piercing establishment and results must be forwarded to the local environmental health office. 
(b)  Sewage. All sewage, including liquid water, shall be disposed of by a public sewerage system or by a sewerage disposal system constructed and operated according to law. 
(c)  Plumbing. Plumbing shall be sized, installed, and maintained according to law. There shall be no cross-connection between the potable water supply and any other water supply or other source of contamination. 
(11)  Toilet facilities. 
(a)  Toilet facilities shall be designed, installed, and maintained according to law. Toilet facilities shall be made available to customers. Public access to toilet facilities shall not be through cleaning rooms or work areas; however, for establishments in business prior to the adoption of these regulations, access through such areas may be allowed if the risk of contamination is determined to be minimal. 
(b)  Toilet rooms opening directly into work or client waiting areas shall be completely enclosed and shall have tight-fitting, self-closing, solid doors, which shall be closed except during cleaning or maintenance. 
(c)  All toilet rooms shall have sufficient mechanical ventilation to keep them free of excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke, and fumes. 
(d)  Toilet fixtures shall be kept clean and in good repair. A supply of toilet tissue on a dispenser shall be provided at each toilet at all times. Easily cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste materials. Toilet rooms shall have at least one covered waste receptacle. 
(12)  Hand sinks. 
(a)  Hand sinks shall be designed, installed, and maintained according to law. Facilities shall be of sufficient number and location to permit convenient use by clients and operators. 
(b)  Each hand sink shall be provided with hot and cold water tempered by means of a mixing valve or combination faucet. Any self-closing, slow-closing, or metering faucet used shall be designed to provide a flow of water for at least 20 seconds without the need to reactivate the faucet. 
(c)  An approved soap dispenser with liquid soap shall be available at each hand sink. A supply of single-use sanitary towels shall be conveniently located near each lavatory. Easily cleanable covered waste receptacles shall be conveniently located near the hand-washing facilities. 
(d)  Soap dispensers, paper towel dispensers, and all related fixtures shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
(13)  Solid waste. 
(a)  Garbage and refuse shall be kept in durable, easily cleanable, leak-proof and non-absorbent containers. Containers shall be kept in a clean and sound condition and disposed of according to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20. 
(b)  At least one covered waste receptacle shall be provided in each operator area and each toilet room. Receptacles in the operator area shall be emptied daily and solid waste shall be removed from the premises at least weekly or more often if necessary. All refuse containers shall be covered when not in use and maintained. 
(c)  There shall be a sufficient number of containers to hold all the garbage and refuse that accumulate. 
(14)  The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the entrance, harborage, or feeding of insects, rodents, or vermin. 
(15)  Floors and floor coverings of all work areas, dressing rooms, locker rooms, toilet rooms and vestibules shall be constructed of smooth, nonabsorbent, durable material and maintained in good repair. Carpeting is allowed in the lobby area only and shall be of closely woven construction, properly installed, easily cleanable, and maintained in good repair. 
(16)  Walls, ceilings, and attachments. 
(a)  Walls must be painted, covered, or sealed in a manner which would allow for easy and effective cleaning. Ceilings shall be maintained in good repair allowing for easy and effective cleaning. 
(b)  Light fixtures, vent covers, wall-mounted fans, and similar equipment attached to walls and ceilings shall be easily cleanable and maintained in good repair. 
(17)  Physical facilities. Floors, walls, ceilings, and attached equipment and decorative materials shall be kept clean and maintained in good repair. 
(18)  Lighting. 
(a)  Artificial light sources shall be installed to provide at least 50-foot candles of light on all work area surfaces and at equipment washing work levels. 
(b)  Artificial light sources shall be installed to provide at a distance of 30 inches from the floor at least ten footcandles of light in all other areas. 
(19)  All rooms shall have sufficient ventilation to keep them free of excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke, and fumes. 
(20)  Poisonous or toxic materials. 
(a)  Materials permitted: There shall be present in the body tattoo/body piercing establishment only those poisonous or toxic materials necessary for maintaining the establishment and cleaning or sanitizing equipment, as well as controlling insects and rodents. 
(b)  Containers of poisonous or toxic materials shall be prominently and distinctly labeled according to law for easy identification of contents. 
(c)  Toxic items shall be stored separately from other forms of materials used in body tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
(d)  Spray bottles containing cleaning solutions may be used for the purpose of cleaning but not while conducting a body tattoo/body piercing procedure. 
(22)  Premises. 
(a)  Body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall be kept neat, clean, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Only articles necessary for the operation and maintenance of the body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall be stored within the establishment. 
(23)  Animals. If applicable, all fish aquariums shall be cleaned and maintained in good repair. Reptiles are prohibited due to the possibility of Salmonella and other infectious microbes. 
(24)  Equipment and utensils. 
(a)  Materials. 
1.  Multiuse equipment and utensils shall be constructed and repaired with safe materials, including finishing materials; they shall be corrosion resistant and nonabsorbent; and they shall be smooth, easily cleanable, and durable under conditions of normal use. Single-service articles shall be made from clean, sanitary, and safe materials. 
2.  Reuse of single-use articles is prohibited. 
(b)  Design and fabrication. 
1.  General: All equipment and utensils, including plastic ware, shall be designed and fabricated for durability under conditions of normal use and shall be resistant to denting, buckling, pitting, and chipping. 
a.  Body tattoo/body piercing operational surfaces shall be easily cleanable, smooth, and free of breaks, open seams, cracks, chips, pits, and similar imperfections, as well as free of difficult to clean internal corners and crevices. 
b.  Sinks and drain boards shall be self-draining. 
2.  Operational surfaces: Surfaces of equipment not intended as operational surfaces, but which are exposed to splash or debris or which otherwise require frequent cleaning, shall be designed and fabricated to be smooth, washable, free of unnecessary ledges, projections, or crevices and readily accessible for cleaning. Such surfaces shall be of material and in such repair as to be easily maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
3.  Needles, needle bars, needle tubes and pigments shall be designed and manufactured for the sole purpose of body tattoo/body piercing. 
(25)  Aisles and working spaces. Aisles and working spaces between units of equipment and walls shall be unobstructed and of sufficient width to permit employees to perform their duties readily without contamination of equipment or of operational surfaces by clothing or personal contact. 
(26)  Minimum supplies of establishment. Each work station is to be equipped or stocked in the following manner: 
(a)  Body tattooing establishments: 
•  A minimum of six sterilized needles (with bars), and six sterilized needle tubes; 
Body piercing establishments: 
•  A minimum of six sterilized needles, six sterilized receiving tubes, six sterilized medical grade forceps, and six sterilized hemostats/sponge clamps. 
(b)  A minimum of four extra packages of disposable towels other than the package that is being used; 
(c)  A minimum of three extra boxes of medical grade disposable gloves other than the box being used; 
(d)  An extra supply of bandages, ointment or gel, and antimicrobial soap. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XI) 
Sec. 12-62. - Furnishings and fixtures. 
(1)  Furnishings of the body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall be maintained in good condition, intact, and functional. Furnishings shall be made of or covered in a material that is easily cleanable and nonabsorbent. The establishment shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(2)  Cabinets and closed sealable containers for the storage of instruments, pigments, single-use articles (e.g., gloves, ink caps, carbon, stencils, etc.) shall be provided for each operator and shall be maintained in a sanitary manner which protects them from contamination. 
(3)  Work tables and chairs shall be provided for each operator. 
(a)  All exposed surfaces of all worktables and chairs shall be constructed of material, which is smooth, nonabsorbent, corrosion resistant, and easily sanitized. 
(b)  All exposed surfaces of work tables and chairs shall be sanitized with a disinfectant solution at the beginning of each work day, after each procedure on each individual, and at the end of each work day. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XII) 
Sec. 12-63. - Supplies. 
(1)  Single-use articles shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These articles shall be stored in an area separate from the work area and toilet facilities. 
(2)  All materials applied to the human skin, such as inks and ointments shall be commercially packaged and dispensed in single-use, disposable containers and shall be disposed of after each use. 
(3)  Only commercially packaged, single-use, sterilized needles shall be used. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XIII) 
Sec. 12-64. - Sanitation. 
(1)  All operator jewelry such as watches, rings, etc., shall be removed from hands prior to the start of a body tattoo/body piercing procedure. 
(2)  Prior to the start of the body tattoo/body piercing procedure, the operator shall inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage shall be applied for added protection before gloving. Trim fingernails to not extend past the tips of the fingers to insure that gloves are not punctured. Recent tattoos or piercings in the healing process shall also be properly covered to prevent any bodily fluid transfer. 
(3)  Use aseptic technique. Thorough hand washing is essential before and after client contact, after handling blood and body fluids, after wearing gloves, and prior to exiting the work area. 
(4)  Before performing body tattoo/body piercing procedures, the operator must thoroughly wash hands in hot, running water with antibacterial soap, then rinse hands and dry with disposable paper towels. Use of hand sanitizers is recommended after each hand washing. Hand washing shall be done as often as necessary to remove contaminants. 
(5)  Medical grade single use disposable latex or approved non-latex examination gloves shall be worn during the body tattoo/body piercing procedure. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the body tattoo/body piercing procedure, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whenever their ability to function is compromised. Hands must be thoroughly washed whenever gloves need changing and prior to the operator leaving the workstation. Under no circumstances shall a single pair of gloves be used on more than one individual. 
(6)  A body tattoo/body piercing operator shall maintain the highest degree of personal cleanliness, conform to standard hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes when performing body tattoo/body piercing procedures. Single-use aprons, smocks, or sleeve covers are acceptable. Open-toed shoes shall not be permissible. 
(7)  The skin of the operator shall be free of rash or infection. No operator afflicted with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, weeping dermatological lesions or acute respiratory infection shall work in any area of a body tattoo/body piercing establishment in any capacity in which there is likelihood that the individual could contaminate body tattoo/body piercing equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or pathogenic organisms. 
(8)  Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the area receiving body tattoo/body piercing. 
(9)  Any item or instrument used for body tattoo/body piercing that is contaminated during the procedure shall be discarded and replaced immediately with a new disposable item or a new sterilized instrument or item before the procedure resumes. 
(10)  Universal precautions, as defined in these rules, shall be observed to prevent contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials. All employees shall be trained in universal precautions. 
(a)  Assume all human blood, plasma, serum, body fluids (semen, saliva, breast milk, vaginal secretions and any fluid contaminated with blood) and tissues to be contaminated with Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), Hepatitis virus, or bacteria such as staphylococcus or streptococcus. 
(b)  The most susceptible route of occupational infection for HIV, HBV, and HCV is by accidental needle sticks, but may include contamination of the mucous membranes, or through broken, abraded, or irritated skin. Use appropriate caution and maximum protection to prevent such contact. 
(c)  Proper decontamination procedures, emergency biohazard spill management, and proper use of biosafety equipment shall be utilized. 
(d)  Use aseptic technique. Thorough hand washing is essential after client contact, after handling blood and body fluids, after wearing gloves, and prior to exiting the work area. 
(e)  All regulated wastes shall be disposed of in labeled, manufacturer's color-coded waste containers. 
(f)  Infectious material spills shall be cleaned using an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered disinfectant and universal precautions. 
(g)  Clean all work areas and equipment used in handling human biohazardous materials with an EPA-registered disinfectant when concluding work to protect personnel from accidental infection. 
(h)  Eating, use of tobacco products, applying cosmetics or lip balm are not permitted in the work area. 
(i)  All procedures shall be performed carefully to minimize the creation of aerosols which could transmit infectious material. 
(j)  Employees shall report all work related accidents, incidents, and unexplained illness to their supervisor and/or physician immediately. 
(k)  Soiled gloves shall be removed in a manner to minimize the risk of self-contamination or cross-contamination after each operation and prior to contacting work surfaces, door knobs, wall switches, or telephones. Dispose of used gloves in a bagged trash container. 
(l)  Food storage cabinets or refrigerators shall be located outside the work area. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XIV) 
Sec. 12-65. - Instrument cleaning. 
(1)  Used nondisposable instruments shall be kept in a separate puncture resistant container soaked in an EPA approved disinfectant until cleaned. The solution shall be changed as recommended by the solution manufacturer. 
(2)  Employees shall use personal protective equipment, protecting their eyes, nose, mouth and hands while cleaning instruments and follow manufacture's safety precautions for any chemicals used. 
(3)  Instruments shall be completely disassembled and must be cleaned by immersing in detergent and water in an ultrasonic cleaning unit following manufacturer's directions. The ultrasonic unit must be sealed and covered when in use to protect from aerosolization. 
(4)  After removal from ultrasonic cleaning unit, instruments shall then be brush scrubbed in hot water and soap, in a manner approved by the health department avoiding aerosolization, then rinsed in clean water and dried. 
(5)  Ultrasonic cleaning units shall be clearly labeled "biohazardous" and placed away from the autoclave and workstations and shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(6)  The ultrasonic cleaning unit shall be used and maintained according to manufacturer's specifications, emptied, thoroughly cleaned, and disinfected per manufacturer's recommendations after each use. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XV) 
Sec. 12-66. - Sterilization. 
(1)  Cleaned instruments shall be packed individually in sterilized packs and sterilized in a medical grade autoclave. All sterilized packs shall contain either a sterilized indicator or internal temperature indicator. 
(2)  Prior to being placed in the autoclave all equipment shall be bagged, labeled, initialed, dated and sealed. Packages will no longer be considered sterile six months after the date of sterilization. 
(3)  Each autoclave bag must be used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and may hold no more than one individual item (e.g., one tube or needle bar). A piercing set may be bagged together. 
(4)  The medical grade autoclave shall be used and maintained according to manufacturer's specifications. The medical grade autoclave shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected daily. The autoclave manufacturer's instructions must be available at all times. 
(5)  After sterilization, the packaged instruments shall be stored in a clean dry cabinet or other tightly covered container reserved and labeled for storage of sterile instruments. 
(6)  If a sterilized package has been breached or allowed to get wet, the instrument(s) must be repackaged and sterilized again before use. 
(7)  Spore indicators shall be used a minimum of at least once a month (unless more frequent monitoring is specified by the manufacturer) and the results must be kept on-site for a minimum of two years. An independent commercial testing laboratory contracted by the administrative body shall perform monthly biological spore testing of the autoclave. A provision shall be included in the contract between the administrative body with the commercial testing laboratory requiring the commercial testing facility to notify the health department of any failure of the autoclave to eradicate all living organisms, including spores. 
(8)  Upon notification of a positive microbiological monitoring report, the sterilizer shall be immediately checked for proper use and function, and the operator shall cease use of the sterilizer immediately upon receipt of the positive report. Three consecutive negative biological tests must be achieved before the establishment is reopened. The establishment shall have the option to obtain a properly functioning sterilizer with a negative biological report in order to remain open or if the facility has more than one autoclave in operation they may be given approval to remain open. The health department may consider the body tattoo/body piercing establishment's emergency plan should autoclave failure or malfunctions occur. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XVI) 
Sec. 12-67. - Dyes and pigments (ink). 
(1)  All ink shall be from commercial professional suppliers, specifically manufactured for the tattooing of human skin, containing an alcohol-based preservative, and shall be used according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
(2)  All ink shall be handled by using the following protocol: 
(a)  All bulk containers of ink shall not be used for longer than 12 months from the date of initial opening, and not longer than the manufacturer's expiration date. Each open bulk container must be labeled with the date the container is first opened. 
(b)  A supply of ink must be located at each work station and stored in a closed cabinet or drawer. 
(c)  Containers of ink may only be handled while wearing clean medical grade gloves. 
(d)  The tops of containers of ink must be disinfected prior to dispensing. After dispensing, the containers must be disinfected and immediately returned to their approved storage location before any tattoo procedures begin. 
(e)  All ink must be dispensed into approved single-use containers. 
(3)  After tattooing, the remaining unused pigment in the single-use container(s) shall be properly discarded along with the container(s). 
(4)  In preparing dyes and pigments to be used by the operator, only nontoxic single-use materials shall be used. 
(5)  The Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) of all inks must be available for client review to assess any possible allergic reactions to ingredients. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XVII) 
Sec. 12-68. - Tattoo preparation. 
(1)  All medical trays used in tattooing must be washed in hot water and soap and dried, then saturated with disinfectant prior to the procedure. 
(2)  Medical grade disposable gloves shall be worn during the preparation of equipment and during the tattoo procedure. 
(3)  Before the procedure begins, all utensils to be used in the tattooing must be placed on a medical grade absorbent liner that is waterproof on one side, which must be placed on the disinfected medical tray. 
(4)  Only a commercially packaged single use presterilized needle assembly with bar shall be used and disposed of immediately after use into a puncture-proof disposable biohazard container. 
(5)  The use of some rotary pens is permitted. Any rotary pen that uses a sponge at the opening of the chamber to stop the pigment or body fluids from getting into the machine or is designed in a manner that does not allow it to be properly cleaned and sterilized is prohibited. 
(6)  Only rotary machines or other instruments that are engineered to prevent cross contamination through the use of detachable, disposable or autoclavable components shall be used. 
(7)  Sterilized instruments shall remain in sterile packages until opened in front of the client. 
(8)  Any part of a tattooing machine that may be touched by the operator during the procedure shall be covered with a disposable plastic sheath that is discarded after each procedure and the machine shall be disinfected. 
(9)  A clip cord sleeve and barrier film shall be used over exposed electrical cords or other cleaning and disinfection methods demonstrated to prevent contamination. 
(10)  All devices used to apply pigments must be designed and used to prevent backflow of pigments into the machine. 
(11)  Single-use towels or gauze shall be used in preparing the site to be tattooed and shall be disposed of after use on each patron or client. 
(12)  If shaving is necessary, only single-use disposable razors shall be used and shall be disposed of after use on each patron or client. 
(13)  After shaving the area to be tattooed, or if the area does not need to be shaved, the site of the tattoo shall be thoroughly cleaned and germicidal solution applied in a sanitary manner before each placement of design on the skin. 
(14)  When a workstation rinse cup is used alone, the cup and solution shall be disposable and discarded after each client. 
(15)  If squirt/spray bottles are used to dispense liquids, the liquid shall be applied onto a single-use wipe rather than directly onto the client. 
(16)  Single-use ointment tubes, applicators, and supplies shall be discarded after each tattoo application on each patron or client. 
(17)  When a stencil is used in body tattooing for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be single-use and disposable. The use of roll-on or stick deodorants for tattoo site preparation is prohibited. 
(18)  The stencil shall be applied with antimicrobial soap or a health department-approved product dispensed from a container in a manner that does not contaminate the unused portion. 
(19)  When the design is drawn directly onto the skin, presterilized, single-use nontoxic pens or markers shall be used and discarded after each use. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XVIII) 
Sec. 12-69. - Piercing jewelry. 
(1)  Client and body piercer shall have appropriate size and quality jewelry chosen before the procedure begins. Random jewelry shall not be used for the initial piercing. 
(2)  Jewelry used in piercing shall be one of the following: Surgical steel that is American Society of Testing Materials International (ASTM) F-138, International Standards Organization (ISO) 5832-1, or ISO 10993-(6,10 or 11) compliant; titanium that is ASTM F-136, ASTM-67, or ISO 5832-3 compliant; Niobium; solid platinum; Biocompatible Polymers Tygon, PTPE, or Bioplast; glass such as fused quartz, lead-free borosilicate and lead-free soda-lime glass that can be autoclaved; or solid 14 karat or higher, white or yellow nickel-free gold. Copies of the jewelry manufacturer's documentation, which verify compliance with these standards, must be available for inspection on request. 
(3)  The jewelry must be free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces and must be properly sterilized prior to use. 
(4)  All jewelry shall be sterilized in a medical grade autoclave, stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(5)  Ear studs or other jewelry designed for earlobe piercing are not appropriate jewelry for other body parts and must not be used by body piercers. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XIX) 
Sec. 12-70. - Body piercing preparation. 
(1)  All medical trays used in body piercing must be washed in hot water and soap and dried, then saturated with disinfectant prior to the procedure. 
(2)  Medical grade disposable gloves shall be worn during the preparation of equipment for a body piercing procedure and during the procedure. 
(3)  Before the procedure begins, all utensils to be used in the body piercing must be placed on a medical grade absorbent liner that is waterproof on one side, which must be placed on the disinfected medical tray. 
(4)  Only a commercially packaged single-use presterilized piercing needle shall be used and disposed of immediately after use into a puncture-proof disposable biohazard container. 
(5)  Presterilize all forceps, hemostats, calipers, and tubes in sealed, properly labeled, sterile indicator bags. These items are to be used on one person, in one sitting. After one such use, they must be cleaned and sterilized as required in these regulations. 
(6)  Sterilized instruments and jewelry shall remain in sterile packages until opened in front of the client. 
(7)  Single-use towels or gauze shall be used in preparing the piercing site and shall be disposed of after use on each patron or client. 
(8)  After shaving the area to be pierced, or if the area does not need to be shaved, the piercing site shall be thoroughly cleaned and germicidal solution applied in a sanitary manner before beginning the procedure. 
(9)  In the case of oral piercings, the operator shall provide the individual with antiseptic mouthwash in a single-use cup and shall ensure that the individual utilizes the mouthwash provided. In the case of a lip, labret, or cheek piercing, procedures described in this section for both skin and oral piercings shall be followed. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XX) 
Sec. 12-71. - Body tattoo/body piercing aftercare. 
(1)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antimicrobial solution. 
(2)  After the area has dried, apply a layer of antibacterial ointment or other approved product from a single-use container or single-use collapsible plastic tube. 
(3)  A bandage or dressing shall then be applied to the tattoo using a commercially packaged sterile sealed nonsticking pad or wrap. 
(4)  Verbal and written instructions, approved by the health department for the care of the body tattoo/body piercing procedure site shall be provided to each client by the operator upon completion of the procedure. The written instructions shall advise the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection, file a report with the health department and shall contain the name, address and phone number of the establishment. These documents shall be signed and dated by both parties, with a copy given to the client and the operator retaining the original with all other required records. 
(5)  The facility shall also post in public view the name, address and phone number of the local county health department and the procedure for filing a complaint. A copy of the notice for filing a complaint shall be included in the establishment application packet. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XXI) 
Sec. 12-72. - Disinfection of workplace. 
(1)  Each body tattoo/body piercing establishment must be kept clean and sanitary. The owner must develop and implement a written cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination and tasks or procedures to be performed. 
(2)  This written schedule must be based on the location within the establishment, the type of surfaces to be cleaned, type of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the establishment. 
(3)  The following procedures shall be adhered to: 
(a)  Clean and sanitize all equipment and work surfaces with an appropriate EPA-registered disinfectant at the beginning of each work day, after completion of each and every body tattoo/body piercing, and at the end of each work day. 
(b)  Remove and replace protective coverings such as plastic wrap and aluminum foil after each body tattoo/body piercing procedure. 
(c)  Inspect and decontaminate, on a daily basis, reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have the likelihood of becoming contaminated. When contamination is visible, clean and decontaminate receptacles immediately. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XXII) 
Sec. 12-73. - Disposal of waste. 
(1)  Needles or other sharp instruments used during body tattoo/body piercing procedures shall be placed immediately after use in puncture-resistant, closed containers with a biohazard label. 
(2)  Used needles shall not be purposely bent or broken, or otherwise manipulated by hand. 
(3)  Filled sharps containers shall be considered regulated waste and shall be sent to a facility where they are either incinerated, rendered nonhazardous, or deposited in a landfill approved to accept biomedical waste in compliance with Georgia Department of Natural Resources - Environmental Protection Division - Solid Waste Management - Chapter 391-3-4.15. 
(4)  Regulated waste, which may release liquid blood or body fluids when compressed or may release dried blood or body fluids when handled, must be placed in a sealed bag. It must then be disposed of in compliance with Georgia Department of Natural Resources - Environmental Protection Division - Solid Waste Management - Chapter 391-3-4.15. 
(5)  Waste potentially contaminated with small amounts of blood or other infectious body fluids (e.g., gauze, wipes, disposable lap cloths), which does not meet the definition of regulated waste, shall be double-bagged in sealed, impervious bags to prevent leakage of the contained items. These bags shall be of sufficient strength to prevent breakage or leakage and shall not contain any sharps. The waste bags shall be containerized and disposed of in an approved sanitary landfill. 
(6)  Disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(7)  Garbage and refuse shall be disposed of at such frequency to prevent the development of odor and the attraction of insects, rodents, or vermin. Solid waste shall not be stored outdoors unless in a secured and lidded dumpster, and in compliance with county/city solid waste ordinances. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XXIII) 
Sec. 12-74. - Inspections. 
(1)  The establishment and its records shall be available for review and examination by properly identified representatives of the county health department. 
(2)  A copy of the inspection report shall be posted within 15 feet of the front or primary public door and between five feet and seven feet from the floor and in an area where it can be read at a distance of one foot. 
(3)  Body tattoo/body piercing establishments shall be inspected at least twice each calendar year. 
(4)  Environmental health specialists shall complete an Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)-approved blood-borne pathogens/universal precautions course, and pass a departmental exam. 
(5)  Inspection results—Reporting and scoring. 
(a)  Inspection results for body tattoo/body piercing establishments shall be recorded on standard departmental forms. 
(b)  The scoring system shall include a weighted point value for each requirement in which critical items are assigned values of five points, with minor violations having assigned values of either one or two points. 
(c)  The rating score of the facilities shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations subtracted from 100. 
(6)  Violation correction. 
(a)  Correction of critical and minor violations shall be within five and ten calendar days, respectively. 
(b)  Upon declaration of an imminent health hazard which cannot be immediately corrected, the local environmental health specialist shall issue an order requiring the facility to immediately cease operations until authorized to reopen. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XXIV) 
Sec. 12-75. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1. The health department shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke permits for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Each county board of health shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of these rules and regulations within its jurisdiction and may include adoption of code by the governing bodies of counties and municipalities for the purpose of enforcement. 
(3)  The health department/county board of health is empowered to institute appropriate proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining violation of any applicable provision of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or of the rules and regulations. 
(4)  No body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall operate without a permit. Failure or refusal to file an application for a permit shall constitute a violation of Chapter 40 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Any person who fails or refuses to file including, but not limited to, an order to cease and desist operating a body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall be subject to an injunction or other penalties from a court of jurisdiction. 
(5)  When an application for a permit is denied or the permit previously granted is to be suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder thereof shall be afforded notice and hearing as provided in O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1. 
(6)  If an application is denied or a permit is suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder of the permit must be notified in writing, specifically stating any and all reasons why the action was taken. 
(7)  The purpose of these procedures is to state the minimum actions to be taken to fulfill the obligation of the health department in assuring compliance with the regulations when the continued operation of a body tattoo/body piercing establishment presents a substantial and imminent health hazard to the public or when a body tattoo/body piercing establishment is in flagrant or continuing violation of this chapter. 
(8)  Suspension is effective upon service of a written notice thereof, and body tattoo/body piercing procedures must cease immediately. 
(9)  The notice must state the basis for the suspension and advise the permit holder of the right to a preliminary hearing with the health department, upon request, within 72 business hours. 
(10)  If requested, the preliminary hearing will be held by an experienced supervisory level employee of the health department not directly involved in the suspension. 
(11)  The rules of evidence will not apply, but both the health department and the permit holder may present witnesses, records and argument. 
(12)  The hearing official will be authorized immediately to rescind or modify the suspension or to continue the suspension with or without conditions. 
(13)  If the suspension is not rescinded, the permit holder will have the right to request an evidentiary hearing. If a hearing is not requested, upon correction of all violations, the owner may request an inspection to reinstate the permit. 
(14)  Notice of hearing. For the purpose of this chapter a notice of hearing is properly served when delivered in person or by registered or certified mail. 
(15)  Conditions warranting action. The health department may summarily suspend a permit to operate a body tattoo/body piercing establishment if it determines through inspection, or examination of employees, records, or other means as specified in this chapter, that an imminent health hazard exists. 
(16)  Resumption of operations. If operations of a body tattoo/body piercing establishment are discontinued due to the existence of an imminent health hazard or otherwise according to law, the permit holder shall obtain approval from the health department before resuming operations. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XXV) 
Sec. 12-76. - Severability. 
If any provision or subpart thereof contained in this body tattoo/body piercing regulation is found to be invalid, unconstitutional, or in conflict with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity of all remaining provisions or subpart thereof shall not be so affected but shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011, § XXVI) 
APPENDIX I 
Universal precautions means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as "Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immune-deficiency Virus (HIV) and Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38 No. S-6, and as "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of Human Immune Deficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures" in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8. This method of infection control requires the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV, HCV, and other blood pathogens. Precautions include hand washing; gloving; personal protective equipment; injury prevention; and proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood and body fluid-contaminated products. 
Effective date. These rules and regulations shall become effective on May 12, 2011. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2011) 
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term "emergency management" means the preparation for and carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or other state and federal agencies are primarily responsible; to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitations, firefighting services, police services, emergency medical services, rescue; engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, consequence management functions to include victim services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility spaces, search and rescue, and any other function relative to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for the carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1998, § 3-701) 
Sec. 14-2. - Declaration of local emergency or disaster. 
(a)  In the event of actual or impending emergency or disaster of natural or human origin, or pandemic influenza emergency, or impending or actual enemy attack, or a public health emergency, within or affecting this county or against the United States, the board of commissioners or a designee may declare that a state of local emergency or disaster exists. The state of local emergency or disaster shall continue until the board of commissioners finds that the threat or danger has passed or the emergency or disaster has been dealt with, to the extent that emergency or disaster conditions no longer exist, and terminates the state of local emergency or disaster. No state of local emergency or disaster may continue for longer than 30 days unless renewed by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  A declaration of a state of local emergency or disaster shall activate the emergency and disaster response and recovery aspects of the local emergency or disaster plans applicable to the county and shall be authority for the deployment and use of any forces to which the plan or plans apply and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, and materials and facilities assembled, stockpiled, or arranged to be made available. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "state of local emergency or disaster" means the condition declared by the board of commissioners when, in its judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the county is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the county to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several localities and relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Secs. 14-3—14-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-36—14-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES 

Sec. 14-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this division if: 
(1)  He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2)  He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county, expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency means, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(1), § 2) 
Sec. 14-73. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this division to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this division. Violation of this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(1), § 5) 
Sec. 14-74. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the board of commissioners and having paid fees as provided by this division. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(1), § 1) 
Sec. 14-75. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the board of commissioners or such other person designated by the board of commissioners at the county courthouse or such other place designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the board of commissioners with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(1), § 3) 
Sec. 14-76. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this division at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(1), § 4) 
Sec. 14-77. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this division is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(1), § 6) 
Sec. 14-78. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(1), § 7) 
Sec. 14-79. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this division is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The board of commissioners hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this division or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(1), § 8) 
Secs. 14-80—14-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS, MATERIALS, SERVICES AND HOUSING 

Sec. 14-102. - Prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(2), § 1) 
Sec. 14-103. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency means, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(2), § 2) 
Sec. 14-104. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(2), § 3) 
Secs. 14-105—14-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUSPENSION OF PORTIONS OF THE CODE 

Sec. 14-122. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fees means any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency means, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
Temporary dwelling means any mobile or easily movable home, trailer recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(3), § 2) 
Sec. 14-123. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting this state or the United States, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code, or any portion thereof, where: 
(1)  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2)  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and the county building and zoning department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(3), § I) 
Secs. 14-124—14-144. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - IMPOSITION OF CURFEW 

Sec. 14-145. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this division from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals , unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, includes those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to division 2 of this article, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency means, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(4), § 2) 
Sec. 14-146. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(4), § 4) 
Sec. 14-147. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the county. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(4), § 1) 
Sec. 14-148. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated the county during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(4), § 3) 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 14, 2017, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 16-19—16-28 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance adopted Sept. 21, 2010. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 

Sec. 16-19. - Title. 
This article will be known as "Greene County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. of 11-14-2017(3) ) 
Sec. 16-20. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 16-22(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 16-21(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. of 11-14-2017(3) ) 
Sec. 16-21. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968;" 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 16-22(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. of 11-14-2017(3) ) 
Sec. 16-22. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 16-22(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections 16-22(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b); 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres; 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs; 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur; and 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15),(16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 16-22(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraphs (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table yearround; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970," and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; and 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in [EPD Rule] 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. Shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 16-22(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. of 11-14-2017(3) ) 
Sec. 16-23. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Greene County without first obtaining a permit from the building inspection/planning and zoning department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable; 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the building inspection/planning and zoning department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 16-23(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 16-22(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10; 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction; 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 16-22(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 16-23(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal; 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application; and 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 16-22(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20; and 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken; 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 16-22(c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 16-23(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant; 
(3)  Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority; 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase; 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit; and 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
( Ord. of 11-14-2017(3) ) 
Sec. 16-24. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The building inspection/planning and zoning department will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article; 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975; 
(c)  The building inspection/planning and zoning department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
( Ord. of 11-14-2017(3) ) 
Sec. 16-25. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 16-23(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. of 11-14-2017(3) ) 
Sec. 16-26. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. of 11-14-2017(3) ) 
Sec. 16-27. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the board of commissioners within 15 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Greene County. 
( Ord. of 11-14-2017(3) ) 
Sec. 16-28. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 14th day of November, 2017. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property; 
(2)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit; and 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
( Ord. of 11-14-2017(3) ) 
Secs. 16-29—16-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 15, 2010 amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III pertained to the same subject matter, and derived from the 1998 Code; and an ordinance adopted Jan. 14, 1999. 

Sec. 16-60. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of Greene County, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Greene County, Georgia, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(d)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 16-61. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Greene County, Georgia. 
(b)  Basis for area of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Greene County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. (None) 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Building, Planning and Zoning Office of Greene County, Georgia. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Greene County, Georgia or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00, imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Greene County, Georgia from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 16-62. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The Greene County Building Official or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the Greene County Building, Planning and Zoning Department on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 16-63(b)(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage: For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The Greene County Building Official or his designee shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project by the Greene County Building Official or his designee. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the Greene County Building Official or his designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 16-61(b), then the Greene County Building Official or his designee shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of section 16-63. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 16-62(b)(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 16-62(b). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the Greene County Building Official or his designee shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 16-61(b)(1)c. and subsection 16-63(b)(2) or subsection 16-63(d)(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Greene County Building Official or his designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the Greene County Building, Planning and Zoning Department and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 16-63. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 16-63(a)(4) "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction: New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 16-62(c). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles: Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 16-63(a)(6) above.) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(i)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
(ii)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 16-63(b)(3)a. and c., above. 
(4)  Floodway: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 16-61(b), are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development on encroachments may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection 16-63(b)(4)a., above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 16-63. 
(c)  Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 16-61(b), where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 16-61(b), then the Greene County Building Official or his designee, shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 16-63. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (In the event the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 16-63(a)(4) "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The Greene County Building Official or his designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(d)  Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 16-61(b), where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with subsection 16-63(b). 
(e)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). Areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 16-61(b), may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 16-63(a)(4), "elevated buildings". 
The Greene County Building Official or his designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsection 16-62(b)(1)c. and subsection 16-62(b)(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All proposals for subdivision and/or development project proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All proposals for subdivision of land and/or development project proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All proposals for subdivision of land and/or development projects shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments involving greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision projects and all other proposed development, including, but not limited to, manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(g)  Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 16-64. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of Greene County, Georgia, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Greene County Building Official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of commissioners of Greene County, Georgia, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Greene as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board of commissioners of Greene County, Georgia, shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(i)  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice by Greene County Building Official specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The Greene County Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the board of commissioners of Greene County, Georgia may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 16-65. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Greene County Building Official or his designee's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 16-61(b). 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(a)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(b)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(c)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(d)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before December 17, 2010. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before January 14, 1999. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after December 17, 2010, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after January 14, 1999, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after January 14, 1999. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, includes, but is not limited to, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the Greene County Building Official or inspector, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided by the developer or applicant to the Greene County Building Official. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 16-66. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2010) 
Secs. 16-67—16-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Sec. 16-89. - Findings; purpose. 
(a)  In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the county and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted development. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport, and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of the Sherrills Creek Reservoir Watershed; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply; and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This article shall apply to all existing and proposed water supply watersheds within the county. This district shall be an overlay district. 
(Code 1998, § 16-301; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-301) 
Sec. 16-90. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas, located adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed and within other setback areas specified in article V of this chapter. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Large water supply watershed means a watershed containing 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGS Quad map. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Small water supply watershed means a watershed that contains less than 100 square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
(Code 1998, § 16-302; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-302) 
Sec. 16-91. - Establishment of a water supply watershed district. 
(a)  The Sherrills Creek Reservoir. Lake Sinclair - Sparta intake, and Oconee River - Greensboro Water Supply Watershed Districts are hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to Sherrills Creek Reservoir (Sherrills Creek Reservoir Watershed), the intake on Lake Sinclair (Lake Sinclair - Sparta intake watershed), and the intake on Lake Oconee (Oconee River -Greensboro Watershed). The boundaries of these overlays are defined by the ridgelines of the respective watersheds and the boundary of a. radius of seven miles upstream of the respective public water supply intakes or reservoirs. These overlays shall be further delineated and defined on the water supply watershed protection district overlay map of the county. The map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. 
(b)  The following water supply watershed districts and reservoirs are hereby defined and the boundaries shall be identified on the water supply watershed district overlay map: 
(1)  The Lake Oconee - Greensboro intake and Lake Sinclair - Sparta intake are large water supply watersheds. An intake for Sparta is located on Lake Sinclair and the intake for Greensboro is located on Lake Oconee. These water supply watersheds contain reservoirs that are located in Hancock County and Morgan County, respectively. Reservoir management plans have been established to protect these two water systems. 
(2)  The Sherrills Creek Reservoir is a small wafer supply watershed. An intake for Union Point is located on this lake. This water supply watershed contains a reservoir within the jurisdiction of the county. The Sherrills Creek reservoir management plan has been established to protect this water system. 
(Code 1998, § 16-303; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-303) 
Sec. 16-92. - Protection criteria. 
(a)  The following regulations shall apply to the Lake Oconee - Greensboro and Lake Sinclair - Sparta intake water supply watersheds identified on the water supply watershed protection district overlay map of the county as a large water supply watershed with a reservoir known as Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair, respectively: 
(1)  The corridors of all perennial streams within a seven-mile radius of the reservoir boundary must be protected by the following criteria: 
a.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
c.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfjelds are prohibited, in the 150-foot setback area of subsection (a)(1)b of this section. 
(2)  New facilities, located within seven miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the standard fire prevention code. 
(3)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 150-feet from the reservoir boundary. The allowable buffer vegetation and disturbance is specified in the reservoir management plan. 
(4)  Lakes Sinclair and Oconee are owned by the Georgia Power Company and will be protected as described in their respective reservoir management plans. 
(b)  The following regulations shall apply to the Sherrills Creek water supply watershed identified on the water supply watershed protection district overlay map of the county as a small wafer supply watershed with a reservoir known as the Sherrills Creek Reservoir: 
(1)  The corridors of all perennial streams within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmental owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir must be protected by the following criteria: 
a.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
c.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the 150-foot setback area as described in subsection (b)(1)b of this section. 
(2)  Reserved. (The entire watershed is located within the first seven-mile segment upstream of the intake.) 
(3)  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities. or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to 25 percent or existing use, whichever is greater. 
(4)  New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the standard fire prevention code. 
(5)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 150-feet from the reservoir boundary. The allowable buffer vegetation and disturbance is specified in the reservoir management plan. 
(6)  The Sherrills Creek Reservoir is owned by the Citv of Union Point and will be protected as described in the Sherrills Creek Reservoir management plan. 
(Code 1998, § 16-304; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-304) 
Sec. 16-93. - Exemptions. 
The following uses shall be exempted: 
(1)  Land uses existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Mining activities permitted by the Department of Natural Resources under the Surface Mining Act. 
(3)  Utilities from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions in accordance with the following conditions if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas: 
a.  The utilities shall be located as fer from the stream bank as reasonably possible. 
b.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
c.  The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(4)  Specific forestry and agricultural activities in the stream corridor buffer and setback areas in accordance with the following conditions: 
a.  The activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state forestry commission or the state department of agriculture. 
b.  The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream, 
(Code 1998, § 16-306; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-306) 
Sec. 16-94. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Permit requirements and compliance. Within the water supply watershed district, no land disturbing activity, construction, or other development, other than certain exempted activities identified within, may be conducted without a permit from the board of commissioners and full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not permitted as a right or as special permit uses are prohibited. 
(b)  Temporary emergency permit. Notwithstanding the provisions of this article or any other law to the contrary, the board of commissioners may issue a temporary emergency permit through oral or written authorization, provided a written permit is accomplished with five days, if it deems that an unacceptable threat to life or severe loss of property will occur is temporary emergency permit is not granted. The temporary emergency permit may be terminated at any time without process upon a determination by the board of commissioners that the action was not or is no longer necessary to protect human health or the environment. 
(c)  Site plans. Applications for a local development permit within the generalized watershed protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(d)  Activities to comply with site plan. 
(1)  All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. The site plan may be amended only with the approval of the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this article or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of the purposes of this article. 
(2)  The county may require a bond up to the larger of $5,000.00 or $1,000.00 per acre of project area and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions and limitations set forth in the permit. The particular amount and conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. In the event of a breach of condition of any such bond, the board of commissioners or its designee may collect such bond or institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution. 
(e)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the zoning administrator and will be reviewed within 45 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the board of commissioners. The review period shall include the preparation of findings by the zoning administrator or his designee. The board of commissioners shall review the record prepared by the zoning administrator and vote on the permit application. The board of commissioners may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Within seven days of its decision, the zoning administrator shall notify the applicant. If the board of commissioners tails to act on the application within 45 days of its submission to the board of commissioners, the application is deemed to have been approved. Decisions of the board of commissioners may be appealed to the county superior court. 
(f)  Duration of permit. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator. 
(g)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the board of commissioners. 
(3)  If the board of commissioners discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the board of commissioners shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(h)  Appeal procedures. Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision under this article to the county superior court. Such appeal must be made within 30 days of decision. 
(i)  Suspension, revocation. The board of commissioners may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The board of commissioners shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(j)  Judicial review; alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the board of commissioners may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
(k)  Map amendment. These regulations and the generalized wetland map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding or plant species peculiar to wetlands becomes available. 
(l)  Assessment relief. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation program with the government or a nonprofit organization restricting activities in a wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains. 
(Code 1998, § 16-307; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-307) 
Secs. 16-95—16-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AQUIFER RECHARGE DISTRICT GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS 

Sec. 16-117. - Findings; purpose. 
(a)  In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the county and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that the county and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. 
(b)  Groundwater resources are contained within underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earth's surface capable of containing or producing water from a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. This district shall be an overlay district. 
(Code 1998, § 16-401; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-401) 
Sec. 16-118. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Drastic means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: the drastic methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility). 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. 
Pollution susceptibility map means maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the department of natural resources, using the drastic methodology (Georgia Department of Natural Resources Hydrologic Atlas 18: Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia). 
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant recharge areas means those areas mapped by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). 
(Code 1998, § 16-402; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-402) 
Sec. 16-119. - Establishment of the groundwater recharge area protection district. 
(a)  The groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the county that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1992 edition). Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this article. 
(b)  Determination of pollution susceptibility. Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20 (1992 edition). Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 16-403; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-403) 
Sec. 16-120. - Protection criteria. 
(a)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the state department of human resource for on-site sewage management (hereinafter DHR Manual), and subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-3 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A—F) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(c)  New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A—F) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(d)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; or a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10 7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service. 
(e)  New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(f)  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(g)  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Code 1998, § 16-404; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-404) 
Sec. 16-121. - Exemptions. 
Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived is exempt from the minimum lot size requirements contained in section 16-120(b) and (c). 
(Code 1998, § 16-405; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-405) 
Sec. 16-122. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Permit requirements and enforcement. No building permit, rezoning request, or subdivision plan will be approved by the board of commissioners unless the permit, request or plan is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards. 
(b)  Enforcement. The board of commissioners or its designee, agent, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the board of commissioners deems necessary. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to remove the structure by board of commissioners or its designee. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(c)  Permit review and site plan requirement. Application for a development permit within the groundwater recharge area district shall include a site plan, with the exception of certain exempted activities identified in subsection (d) of this section. The following information is required for all site plans: 
(1)  A map shall, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, showing all planned improvements including: 
a.  The width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, watercourses and drainageways; 
b.  Water, wastewater, and stormwater facilities; and 
c.  Utility installations. 
(2)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
(3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(6)  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross sectional drawings. 
(d)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and development are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings constructed within a subdivision of fewer than three parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of accessory buildings, such as sheds, or additions to single-family residences. 
(e)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the board of commissioners. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(f)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the board of commissioners. 
(g)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the zoning administrator and will be reviewed within 45 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by board of commissioners. The review period shall include the preparation of findings by the zoning administrator or designee. The board of commissioners shall review the record prepared by the zoning administrator and vote on the permit application. The board of commissioners may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Within seven days of its decision, the zoning administrator shall notify the applicant. If the board of commissioners fails to act on the application within 45 days of its submission to the board of commissioners, the application is deemed to have been approved. Decisions of the board of commissioners may be appealed to the superior court of the county. 
(h)  Judicial review. Based on any proceedings and the decision of the proper court of law, the board of commissioners may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance): or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(i)  Amendments. These regulations may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(j)  Assessment relief. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Code 1998, § 16-406; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-406) 
Secs. 16-123—16-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROTECTED RIVER DISTRICT 

Sec. 16-142. - Findings; purpose. 
(a)  River corridors are the strips of land that flank major rivers in the state. These corridors are of vital importance to the state in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable as a habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. River corridors also allow the free movement of wildlife from area to area within the state, help control erosion and river sedimentation, and help absorb floodwaters. 
(b)  The Oconee River has been designated as a protected river by the state. The purpose of this article is to establish measures to guide future growth and development in the areas adjacent to the Oconee River as defined herein. 
(Code 1998, § 16-501; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-501) 
Sec. 16-143. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 CFR 261.3. (Note: This is same definition as used in the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act.) 
Land disturbing activity means any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; and any construction, rebuilding, or alteration of a structure. Land disturbing activity shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single-family dwelling, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Natural vegetative buffer or buffer area means a river corridor containing the flora native to that area. The natural floras for specific areas are described in Georgia Geologic Survey Bulletin 114, the Natural Environments of Georgia. Habitats for endangered and threatened species may require human management of the river corridor in order to maintain those species. 
Perennial river means a river or section of a river that flows continuously throughout the year. 
Port facility means any facility for the docking, loading, and unloading of ships. 
Protected river means any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of at least 400-cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. However, those segments of river covered by the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.) or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280 et seq.) are specifically excluded from the definition of a protected river. In coastal areas, the seaward limit of any protected river shall be the inland limits of the jurisdiction of the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280 et seq.). 
Public utility or utilities means a service or services provided by a public utility company or a private entity, which provides such service or services and all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services. 
River bank means the rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
River corridor means all the land, inclusive of islands, not regulated under the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-440 through 12-5-457), or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-280 through 12-5-293), in areas of a protected river and being within 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks. 
(1)  The 100-foot buffer shall be measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the riverbanks, usually marked by a break in slope. Although not within the measured 100-foot wide buffer, the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river shall be treated by the local governments in the same manner as the river corridor and shall be included within the River Corridor Protection District. 
(2)  Because stream channels move due to natural processes such as meandering, riverbank erosion, and jumping of channels, the river corridor may shift with time. For the purposes of these standards, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the beginning of each review period for the county comprehensive plan. Any shift in the location of the protected river after the review period will be shown by revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of the next comprehensive plan review by the department of community affairs. 
Sensitive natural area means any area, as identified now or hereafter by the department of natural resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
(1)  Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
(2)  Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
(3)  Significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; or 
(4)  Other areas so designated by the department of natural resources; and which are sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Single-family dwelling means a dwelling structure that is designed for the use of one family. 
(Code 1998, § 16-502(A)—(I); Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-502) 
Sec. 16-144. - Establishment of the Oconee River Corridor Protection District. 
The Oconee River Corridor Protection District is hereby designated and shall comprise all land, inclusive of islands, in areas of the Oconee River within the county and being within 100-feet horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks. Also included is the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river although this strip of land is not included as part of the 100-foot buffer requirement contained in the minimum standards. This district shall be further defined and delineated on the Oconee River Corridor Protection District Overlay Map. The Map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. 
(Code 1998, § 16-502(J); Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-502) 
Sec. 16-145. - Protection criteria. 
(a)  Construction within the buffer area is prohibited except as provided herein. 
(b)  A natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained at all times in the river corridor, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(c)  The natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land disturbing activity. 
(d)  Septic tank and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the river corridor, except as expressly provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Single-family dwellings including the usual appurtenances are permitted in the buffer area subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The dwelling shall be in compliance with all local zoning regulations. 
(2)  The dwelling shall be located on a tract of land containing at least two acres. For the purposes of these standards, the size of the tract of the land shall not include any area that lies within the protected river, (that is, for tracts of land that include portions of a protected river, the area between the river banks can not be counted towards the two acre minimum size). 
(3)  There shall be only one such dwelling on each two-acre or larger tract of land. 
(4)  A septic tank or tanks serving such a dwelling may be located within the buffer area. 
(5)  Septic tank drainfields shall not be located within the buffer area. 
(f)  Industrial and commercial land uses existing in the river corridor prior to the promulgation of this article are exempt from the criteria contained herein, provided that: 
(1)  These uses do not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(2)  These uses meet all state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
(g)  The construction of road crossings and utility crossings is permitted in the river corridor, provided such construction meets all requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), and all applicable local ordinances on soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(h)  The following uses are permitted in the river corridor, provided that such uses do not impair the long-term functions of the protected river or the river corridor: 
(1)  Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Forestry activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state forestry commission; and 
b.  Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
(2)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
(3)  Wastewater treatment. 
(4)  Recreational usage consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river-dependent recreation. For example, a boat ramp would be consistent with this criterion but a hard-surface tennis court would not. Parking lots are not consistent with this criterion. Paths and walkways within the river corridor are consistent with this criterion. 
(5)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(6)  Agricultural production and management, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state soil and water conservation commission; 
b.  Agricultural activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.); and 
c.  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with all state and federal laws, and all regulations promulgated by the state department of agriculture. 
(7)  Other uses permitted by the Department of Natural Resources or under section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(i)  Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste are prohibited within the river corridor. 
(j)  Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills are prohibited within the river corridor. 
(k)  The standards and requirements in this article do not supercede those contained in the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.), the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280 et seq.), and the Erosion and Sedimentation Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1998, § 16-503; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-503) 
Sec. 16-146. - Exemptions. 
The following uses are exempted from the river corridor protection plan: 
(1)  Land uses existing prior to the promulgation of the county river corridor protection district. For the purposes of this article, a preexisting use is defined as any land use or land disturbing activity, including all human endeavors directly associated with such use or activity, which, prior to the promulgation of this article falls within one of the following categories: 
a.  Is completed; 
b.  Is under construction; 
c.  Is fully approved by the board of commissioners; 
d.  All materials have been submitted for approval to the board of commissioners; or 
e.  Is zoned for such use and expenditures in excess of $2,500.00 have been made in preparation for construction in accordance with such zoning. 
See section 16-145(f) for additional regulations governing preexisting industrial and commercial uses. 
(2)  Mining activities, if permitted by the department of natural resources pursuant to the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, as amended. 
(3)  Utilities, (except as discussed in section 16-145(g)) if such utilities cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer area (feasibility shall be decided conservatively by the local government), provided that: 
a.  The utilities shall be located as far from the river bank as reasonably possible; 
b.  Installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the buffer area as well as is reasonably possible; and 
c.  Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(4)  Specific forestry and agricultural activities except as discussed in section 16-145(h)(1) and (6). 
(Code 1998, § 16-504; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-504) 
Sec. 16-147. - Site plans. 
(a)  Information required. Application for a local development permit within the Oconee River Protective District shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(b)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the zoning administrator or designated appointee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(c)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(d)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the zoning administrator or designated appointee and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the county. Filing fees up to the larger of $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the zoning administrator. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the zoning administrator. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the zoning administrator. Decisions of the zoning administrator may be appealed to the board of commissioners 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration. of the development permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator or designated appointee. 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the building inspector and/or the zoning administrator. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the zoning administrator. 
(3)  If the zoning administrator discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.), the board of commissioners shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation. The zoning administrator or designated appointee may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The zoning administrator shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(h)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the county concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the superior court. 
(2)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the superior court, the county board of commissioners or its designee may, within the time specified by the superior court, elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the county board of commissioners. 
(i)  Amendments. These regulations and the zoning map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(j)  Relief assessment. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Code 1998, § 16-506; Ord. of 6-21-2001, § 16-506) 
Secs. 16-148—16-177. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WETLANDS DISTRICT 

Sec. 16-178. - Findings; purpose. 
(a)  The wetlands in the county are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the state. 
(b)  Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
(c)  The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Code 1998, § 16-601; Ord. of 2-8-2001, § 16-601) 
Sec. 16-179. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps for the county. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Code 1998, § 16-602; Ord. of 2-8-2001, § 16-602) 
Sec. 16-180. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
(a)  The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the county that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
(b)  The generalized wetlands map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the county and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Code 1998, § 16-603; Ord. of 2-8-2001, § 16-603) 
Sec. 16-181. - Protection criteria. 
No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the planning and zoning office. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the zoning administrator using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Code 1998, § 16-604; Ord. of 2-8-2001, § 16-604) 
Sec. 16-182. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the Wetlands Protection District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein: 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances. 
(Code 1998, § 16-605; Ord. of 2-8-2001, § 16-605) 
Sec. 16-183. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Code 1998, § 16-606; Ord. of 2-8-2001, § 16-606) 
Sec. 16-184. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Site plans. Applications for a local development permit within the generalized wetland protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(b)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. The site plan may be amended only with the approval of the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this article or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of the purposes of this article. The county may require a bond up to the larger of $5,000.00 or $1,000.00 per acre of project area and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions and limitations set forth in the permit. The particular amount and conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. In the event of a breach of condition of any such bond, the board of commissioners or its designee may collect such bond or institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution. 
(c)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the zoning administrator and will be reviewed within 45 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by board of commissioners. The review period shall include the preparation of findings by the zoning administrator or his designee. The board of commissioners shall review the record prepared by the zoning administrator and vote on the permit application. The board of commissioners may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Within seven days of its decision, the zoning administrator shall notify the applicant. If the board of commissioners fails to act on the application within 45 days of its submission to the board of commissioners, the application is deemed to have been approved. Decisions of the board of commissioners may be appealed to the county superior court. 
(d)  Duration of permit. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the board of commissioners. 
(3)  If the board of commissioners discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.), the board of commissioners shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(f)  Appeal procedures. Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision under this article to the county superior court. Such appeal must be made within 30 days of decision. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation. The board of commissioners may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The board of commissioners shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(h)  Judicial review; alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the board of commissioners may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
(i)  Map amendment. These regulations and the generalized wetland map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding or plant species peculiar to wetlands becomes available. 
(j)  Assessment relief. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation program with the government or a nonprofit organization restricting activities in a wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains. 
(Code 1998, § 16-607; Ord. of 2-8-2001, § 16-607) 
Secs. 16-185—16-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE 

Sec. 16-200. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(a)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(b)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable Greene County Ordinances and state guidelines; 
(c)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(d)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(e)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(f)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(g)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(h)  Hand-watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(i)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property, or for the use of adjacent property owners if such use is permitted by the owner; 
(j)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(k)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(l)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(m)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 16-201. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)  The Greene County Code Enforcement Officers shall be the enforcement authority for this article. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 16-202. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 16-203. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance are severable. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases shall not be affected but shall continue in effect until amended or repealed by action of the governing authority of Greene County. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 16-204. - Effective date. 
This article shall go into effect on January 1, 2011. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010) 
Chapter 18 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WRECKER SERVICE ROTATION 

Sec. 18-19. - Regulations. 
(a)  The county communications center shall be the sole dispatching agent for wrecker service originated by those agencies covered by this article. The term "originating agencies" includes all county departments and employees thereof including full-time, part-time or volunteers performing as employees. 
(b)  The county communications center shall establish and maintain a card file listing all registered and authorized wrecker services in the county. 
(c)  Assignments of wreckers to accidents or other towing situations shall be handled by the following system, to wit: 
(1)  "O" Owner's preference will be used if the driver/owner of the vehicle has a preference for a particular wrecker service. The requesting officer will notify the county communications center of the driver/owner's preference, and the radio operator at said center will notify the requested wrecker service. The card will be properly marked "O" but will not be moved to the back of the file. 
(2)  "R" Rotation will be used if the driver/owner express no preference and if there is no emergency involved. The requesting officer will notify the county communications center to use "Rotation" and the next wrecker service in line will be called. The card will be properly marked "R" and moved to the back of the file. 
(3)  "E" Emergency will be used in cases where traffic is blocked at a main artery or in situations where a crushed or multi-vehicle collision must be untangled to save a life. The requesting officer will contact the county communications center which will notify the wrecker service next is line on the list and specify that an emergency exists. If such wrecker service cannot respond immediately, then such wrecker service shall so notify the radio operator and the operator shall contact the next available wrecker service. If the radio operator cannot reach the wrecker service, then said radio operator shall be at liberty to locate the most readily available wrecker service. If the initial wrecker service is unable to respond to the emergency and a subsequent wrecker service is notified, the responding wrecker service card will be properly marked "E" but will not be moved to the back of the file. 
(4)  "NA" Not available will be used if a wrecker service is not available for any reason. The card will be marked "NA" and moved to the back of the file. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the radio operator at the county communications center to mark each card properly and record all necessary information that is required. Upon each wrecker call the radio operator shall record the following information, to wit: 
(1)  Time call was received; 
(2)  Name of person requesting service; 
(3)  Time service requested: 
(4)  Wrecker service response; and 
(5)  Comments, if any. 
(e)  Registered and authorized wrecker companies. Any company requesting in writing to be placed in the card file system as a registered and authorized wrecker service, shall be placed in the system at the end of the rotation at the time of the receipt of the written request by the county communications center. However, the company must present proof of general liability insurance coverage for wrecker service in an amount no less than $1,000,000.00 and a current business license. The county communications center may request proof of continued coverage or current business license at any time from any company providing wrecker services in the county. 
(f)  The county communications center shall maintain a list of wrecker companies capable of towing regular sized passenger vehicles including light passenger trucks, and a list of wrecker companies capable of towing large trucks as a heavy wrecker service. The maximum number of authorized wrecker companies is set at four for each list. Nothing herein shall prohibit a wrecker service from serving on both lists. 
(g)  The board of commissioners shall have final approval of all requests before authorization shall be given by the county communications center. 
(h)  The county board of commissioners will review the list of wrecker service providers and their performance every three years and will consider additions and deletions. 
(Code 1998, § 9-101; Ord. of 12-12-2001, § 9-101; Amend. of 2-13-2018 ) 
Secs. 18-20—18-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES 

Sec. 18-42. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Off-road vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain and not intended for use predominately on public roads unless said vehicle has been duly registered and licensed for use on public roads pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-2-20 in which event said vehicle shall be limited to operation on the roadway as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(53) to include that portion of the highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel exclusive of the berm or shoulder. The term "off-road vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, four-wheel drive or low-pressure tire vehicles, two-wheel vehicles, three-wheel vehicles, golf carts, go-carts, electric scooters, amphibious machines, ground effect or air cushion vehicles, vehicles commonly known as three wheelers or four wheelers, and any other means of transportation deriving power from any source other than muscle or wind, except that such term shall exclude any motorboat; any military, fire, or law enforcement vehicle; any vehicles used exclusively on airports; all farm machinery, farm tractors, and other self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, for clearing land for planting, for utility services and maintenance, for earth moving, construction, or mining; and self-propelled lawnmowers, snow blowers, garden or lawn tractors, while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes 
Operate means to ride in or on, and be in actual control of an off-road vehicle. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007, exh. A(art. IV, § 1)) 
Sec. 18-43. - Operating restrictions. 
Any person operating an off-road vehicle in the unincorporated areas of the county under any of the following conditions shall be deemed to be in violation of this article: 
(1)  Without operative brakes or without mufflers or other silencing equipment; 
(2)  On any public property, including, but not limited to, any portion(s) of any county or state right-of-way whether or not improved, except where permitted pursuant to article V of this chapter. 
(3)  On any private property without the express written permission of the owner of the property or his agent, proof of which shall be in the immediate possession of the operator of a off-road vehicle and which shall be displayed upon request of any law enforcement officer, except in those locations where off-road vehicles are lawfully allowed to operate. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007, exh. A(art. IV, § 2); Ord. of 12-30-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 18-44. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First offense: $250.00 and/or up to six months imprisonment. 
(2)  Second offense: $500.00 and/or up to six months imprisonment. 
(3)  Third and subsequent offenses: $1,000.00 and/or impoundment of off-road vehicle; and/or up to six months' imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007, exh. A(art. IV, § 3)) 
Sec. 18-45. - Enforcement. 
The county sheriff and the sheriff's deputies, as well as such county employees as the board of commissioners may appoint to serve as code enforcement officers, shall be authorized to issue citations for violations of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007, exh. A(art. IV, § 98-104)) 
ARTICLE IV. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR FESTIVALS, RECREATION PURPOSES AND SPORTING EVENTS 

Sec. 18-58. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to any recreational or sporting event conducted wholly or in part within the unincorporated area of Greene County, hereinafter an "event". If the event is conducted wholly within the unincorporated area of Greene County, this article shall apply to the entire event and its full length. If the event is conducted partly within the unincorporated area and partly outside the unincorporated area, this article shall apply to the portion of the event conducted in the unincorporated area. 
(Ord. of 12-30-2009, § 1, (98-58)) 
Sec. 18-59. - Restrictions. 
Public rights-of-way of Greene County shall not be used for sporting or recreational contests or competitions except as provided in this article. Such contests regulated by this article shall include all sporting or recreational contests or competitions on foot, bicycle, vehicle, or any other method of locomotion. 
(Ord. of 12-30-2009, § 1, (98-59)) 
Sec. 18-60. - Permit required prior to event. 
No such event shall be conducted on the public rights-of-way of Greene County unless and until the sponsor for the event has obtained all required permits. The issuance of a permit is subject to the approval of the board of commissioners or its designee under the following conditions: 
(a)  The sponsor of the event shall, at least 60 days prior to the scheduled date of the event, make application to the Greene County Board of Commissioners or its designee to conduct the event. 
(b)  Applications shall be in such form as the Greene County Board of Commissioners prescribes and shall at least provide the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the sponsoring organization; 
(2)  The event organizer (or in the event of an organization which is not local, the name, address, email address and cell phone number of a responsible county resident who is involved in planning the event); 
(3)  The date(s) and times of the proposed event and activities; 
(4)  The expected number of participants at the event and/or each activity; 
(5)  The location of such event or activity including all public rights-of-way which would be used or otherwise impacted; 
(6)  The duration of disruption of any vehicular traffic; 
(7)  Specific arrangements for crowd control and accommodation for security. Said organization shall provide a minimum of one security personnel for every 100 persons estimated to attend the event; 
(8)  Specific arrangements for traffic control; 
(9)  Specific arrangements for safety, restroom facilities, and waste control. 
(c)  Where multiple activities are held in connection with one event, the applicant shall submit one permit application listing the times, dates, arrangements and locations of all activities connected with said event; 
(d)  The board of commissioners reserves the right to reject any and all applications based on the public health, safety, and welfare including the failure to provide for adequate measures to ensure a safe event. Special consideration shall be given to the impact of the event on more heavily traveled roads and on citizens not involved in the event. 
(e)  The event sponsor shall be responsible for the provision of and payment for all security, maintenance, sanitation, safety, medical and other support personnel and shall provide evidence to the board of commissioners therefore. The board of commissioners, in its reasonable discretion, shall be entitled to require the sponsor to post a bond or other sufficient security for the cost thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-30-2009, § 1(98-60)) 
Sec. 18-61. - Board of commissioners to have authority over route of event. 
If the board of commissioners shall determine, upon investigation, whether the proposed route is hazardous to participants or others, the board of commissioners or its designee may approve or deny the proposed route and may recommend another or different route in the interest of public safety. 
(Ord. of 12-30-2009, § 1(98-61)) 
Sec. 18-62. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall upon conviction, by the Greene County Magistrate Court be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 12-30-2009, § 1(98-62)) 
Sec. 18-63. - Application fee nonrefundable. 
A nonrefundable fee of $100.00, payable to Greene County, Georgia, shall be paid at the time a permit application for an event is filed. 
(Ord. of 12-30-2009, § 1(98-63)) 
Sec. 18-64. - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, or portion of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional in any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any part thereof that is not specifically declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. of 12-30-2009, § 1(98-64)) 
Sec. 18-65. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect immediately upon its adoption. 
(Ord. of 12-30-2009, § 1(98-65)) 
Chapter 20 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Disorderly conduct (bondable). 
A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when such person commits any of the following: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person so as to place such person in reasonable fear for the safety of such person's life, limb or health. 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person so as to place the property of such person in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to engage in any violent, tumultuous, obstreperous, or similar disorderly conduct tending to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the county. Fighting between two or more persons in which physical contact is made, except that which occurs at boxing exhibitions duly authorized by the county, shall be deemed to be disorderly conduct within the meaning of this section. 
(4)  Operates a motor vehicle upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle access or pedestrian walkway of any parking facility by sudden starting, stopping or turning, or at a speed so as to endanger the person or property of another. 
(5)  Public drunkenness. A person who shall be and appears in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1998, § 13-101) 
Sec. 20-2. - Hindering or obstructing the county officials, employees, or agents. 
(a)  Obstructing or hindering officials prohibited. No person shall, by violence, threat of violence, or by fleeing, or by any unlawful means, obstruct or hinder an official, employee or agent of the county (which for all purposes of this section shall exclude law enforcement officials, firefighters and emergency medical technicians, so long as same are covered by state law addressing this subject), when such official, employee or agent has been properly identified or is identifiable as such and is engaged in the lawful performance of official duties. See O.C.G.A. §§ 16-10-24.1 and 16-10-24.2. 
(b)  Threats or abusive language prohibited. No person shall communicate, personally, by telephone or by other means of communication, any threats, opprobrious words, abusive language or words tending to cause a breach of the peace to any official, employee or agent of the county charged with enforcing the laws or ordinances of the county with the intent of harassing, preventing, or obstructing such official, agent, or employee in the enforcement of such laws or ordinances. 
(c)  Threats to family members prohibited. No person shall communicate, personally, by telephone or by other means of communication, any threats of violence, opprobrious words, abusive language or words tending to cause a breach of the peace to the spouse or children or family of any official, agent or employee of the county with the intent to thereby obstruct, hinder and prevent such official, employee or agent from enforcing the laws or ordinances of the county. 
(d)  Discharge of duties by officials, agents or employees. This section shall in no way free such officers, agents or employees of the county from penalties imposed by laws or ordinances of the county, or regulations of any board thereof, for failure to discharge their official duties. 
(e)  Giving false identification. No person shall give a false name, address, date of birth, or any other information to any the county official, employee or agent in the lawful discharge of official duties with the intent to mislead such official, employee or agent in any way. 
(Code 1998, § 13-103) 
Sec. 20-3. - Disturbing cemeteries. 
No person shall disturb any grave or injure, mutilate, deface or remove any tomb, monument, shrubbery, railing, or other ornamental improvement within any cemetery in the county which has been or may be established, not the fencing or enclosure of either, or use any of such cemeteries or burial grounds as a sink, privy or similar convenience. 
(Code 1998, § 13-104) 
Sec. 20-4. - Bullet/knife wound reports. 
All physicians in the county are required to report to the sheriff's department all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from the result of a bullet wound or knife wound. Such report may be made in writing, by telephone or in person, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the sheriff's department. All reports shall be made within 24 hours after treatment by a physician. 
(Code 1998, § 13-105) 
Sec. 20-5. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Public school grounds. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or carry any alcoholic beverages, as defined in state law, onto any property of any public school operated by the county board of education or possess such on such school property, unless used by a teacher for educational purposes or if used in a religious ceremony or observance. Any such prohibited items shall be confiscated and, upon completion of its use as evidence, destroyed. 
(b)  Intoxicated persons. No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, given or in any way furnished to any person in a noticeable state of intoxication. 
(c)  Possession by minors. Except as otherwise authorized by state law: 
(1)  No person knowingly, directly or through any other person shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age; 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage; 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatsoever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; 
(4)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age; or 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(d)  Furnishing alcohol to inmates. No person, knowingly or intentionally, shall offer for sale, sell, barter, exchange, give, provide, or furnish alcoholic beverages to any person confined in any jail, penal institution, correctional institution, or other lawful place of confinement. 
(Code 1998, § 13-106) 
State Law reference— Possession of alcoholic beverages on public school grounds prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21.1; furnishing alcoholic beverages to intoxicated persons prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22; furnishing alcoholic beverages to, possession of alcoholic beverages by, and purchase of alcoholic beverages by, persons under 21 years of age prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 20-6. - Theft and diversion of county and public utility services. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without authority, to destroy, damage or tamper with any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus owned by the county or by any company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service, or utility services. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without authority, to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the county or of a company engaged in the manufacture or sale of utility services, or to intentionally divert any of the services of the county or such company, or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without consent of the county or such company, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the county or such company. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly receive the benefits of acts of diversion or of tampering with utility services without the proper charge. 
(d)  Proof that any of the acts specified in this section were done on premises in possession of an accused, or that the accused received the benefit of any such act, shall be prima facie evidence that the accused committed such act or aided and abetted in the commission thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 13-107) 
Sec. 20-7. - Loitering or prowling (bondable). 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when that person is in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity or under circumstances which cause a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern that such person is involved in unlawful activity. 
(b)  The circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm or concern is warranted include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Taking flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer; 
(2)  Refusing to identify oneself, or manifestly endeavoring to conceal oneself or any object. 
(c)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by allowing the person to produce satisfactory identification and an explanation of that person's presence and conduct. 
(Code 1998, § 13-108) 
Secs. 20-8—20-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 20-33. - Jurisdiction. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20, the governing authority of each county, for the purpose of protecting and preserving the public health, safety and welfare, is authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, violations of which ordinances may be punished by fine or imprisonment or both. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, such ordinances may provide for the regulation and control of litter in the same manner as municipal ordinances under O.C.G.A. § 16-7-48. 
(Code 1998, § 13-201) 
Sec. 20-34. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 (Littering Public and Private Property- Definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42. 
(Code 1998, § 13-202) 
Sec. 20-35. - Littering public or private property or waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the county or any waters in the county, unless: 
(1)  The area is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use such area; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a non-disposable litter receptacle or container designed for the temporary storage of litter and located in an area designated by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  Misdemeanor offense; additional punishments. 
(1)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(2)  In addition to the punishment provided under subsection (b)(1) of this section: 
a.  In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(c)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1998, § 13-203) 
Sec. 20-36. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, the trier of fact may in its discretion and in consideration of the totality of the circumstances infer that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of section 20-35 is discovered to contain any articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, the trier of fact may in its discretion and in consideration of the totality of the circumstances infer that such person has violated this article. 
(Code 1998, § 13-204) 
Sec. 20-37. - Enforcement. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of the state or any political subdivision thereof or any enforcement agency, officer, or any official of any commission of the state or any political subdivision thereof is authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Code 1998, § 13-205) 
Secs. 20-38—20-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-63. - Prohibited; complaints made to county dispatcher. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wildly make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing within the unincorporated limits of the county. The county dispatcher shall dispatch law enforcement to the location of the person lodging a complaint under this article. 
(Code 1998, § 8-101) 
Sec. 20-64. - Noises prohibited. 
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exhaustive. 
(1)  Motor vehicle horns. The sounding of any horn on any automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle on any street or public place of the county except as a warning signal. 
(2)  Radios, television sets, and similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used, or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and amplifiers. The using or operating of any loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device mounted upon any vehicle within the county, unless a permit for such sound amplification has been obtained from the board. 
(4)  Construction equipment and activity. The operating of any equipment or the performing of any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, roads, or projects within the county between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless of an emergency nature or when a permit for such construction or repair work between such hours has been obtained from the board. 
(5)  Exhausts. The discharging into the open air of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(6)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by frequent or continuous barking, chirping or other means of communication disturbs the comfort or repose of the residents of any residential neighborhood. 
(7)  Vehicle repair in residential areas. The repairing, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the residents of the area. 
(8)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creating of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(9)  Hawkers and peddlers. The selling of anything by outcry within the residential areas of the county, except at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
(10)  Drums. The using of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the county, unless a permit for such use has been obtained from the board. 
(Code 1998, § 8-102) 
Sec. 20-65. - Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals and warning devices; 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency; and 
(3)  Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(Code 1998, § 8-103) 
Sec. 20-66. - Injunctions. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this article which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents of this county shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1998, § 8-105) 
Sec. 20-67. - Noises and disturbances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including, without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas, and further including, without limitation, the following specifically prohibited conduct: 
(1)  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, including music, in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet from the building, structure or vehicle or, in the case of real property, beyond the property limits in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekends shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article; or 
(2)  The using, operating or permitting to be used, operated or played of any machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, including music, which is cast upon the public streets which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle. 
(b)  Registration is required of all outdoor entertainment events not being conducted under the direction and control of public or private school or of a government entity that has commercial entertainment or electronic amplification. Registration of the event must be 72 hours prior to the event and must be by the person responsible for the event. Registrations are to be made with the county sheriff's department, Monday through Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on an application specified by the sheriff and shall include the organization sponsoring the event, the location, the date and time of the event, and security provisions. 
(Code 1998, § 13-109) 
Chapter 22 - ROADS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - General regulations. 
(a)  Maintenance and repair of public roads. All maintenance and repair of public roads, alleys, curbs, sidewalks, and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the director of public works, which officer shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this chapter and all ordinances of the county relating to such public ways. 
(b)  Maintenance of sidewalks. It shall be the duty of all owners of property in the county upon which sidewalks have been laid to keep such walkways in good repair at all times and to remove from them all snow or ice within 12 hours from the time such snow or ice ceases to fall or within less time if so ordered by the department of public works. 
(c)  Maintenance of property between sidewalks and roads. All persons who own real estate in the county which abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved shall be required to keep that portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curbline of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts, in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and over obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other things which would mar or detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the road upon which their property abuts. Any property owner who shall place or allow grass to grow upon the portion of the sidewalk lying between the property line and the curbline of the road as aforesaid, and upon which his real estate abuts, shall keep such grass properly mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of their property, then this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession or control of the same. 
(d)  Defacing sidewalks. roads, and curbs. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, road or curb in the county by any signs thereon, whether for commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk or drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way any newly laid road, sidewalk or curbing pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid. 
(e)  Obstructions. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction on any road, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, except as may be provided in this chapter or in other ordinances and laws of the county or state. 
(f)  Deposits and discharges onto roads and sidewalks. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any road or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal or property. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged onto any public road or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk or other organic material including dirt or mud. 
(g)  Report of defects, obstructions, deposits, and discharges. It shall be the duty of every county officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or discharge, in or on any public road, alley, curb, sidewalk, or other public way of the county to report the same to the director of public works as soon as possible. 
(h)  Private use. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any road, sidewalk or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement. 
(i)  Encroachments. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public road or property, or to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, road, alley, or other public way, without having first secured a permit from the county clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(j)  Openings. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public road, sidewalk or alley without first obtaining a permit from the county clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(2)  All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the director of public works. 
(k)  Trees and shrubs. 
(1)  Planting and removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure, or cut any tree, bush, or shrub in or from any public road, parkway or other public place without first obtaining a permit therefor from the county clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(2)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(3)  Dangerous trees. Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, road or other public place in the county in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. Any tree or limb of a tree which is likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. The director of public works may cause to be trimmed or removed any and all such trees or shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be removed. 
(4)  Poles and wires. Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the roads, alleys or other public places of the county shall keep such wires and poles free and away from any nearby trees or shrubs in such places, and keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the director of public works, so that no injury shall befall either the poles and wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact. 
(l)  Burning of leaves and rubbish. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, papers, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public roads, alleys or sidewalks of the county. 
(Code 1998, § 6-301) 
Sec. 22-2. - Road construction and improvements. 
(a)  Board resolution. Whenever the improvement of any road or part thereof shall be deemed necessary by the board, a resolution stating the nature and location of the proposed improvement shall be declared and published once a week for three consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which the county's legal advertisements are published. If the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the lands abutting on the proposed improvement do not, within 15 days after the last day of publication of said resection, file with the county clerk a written protest against such improvement, contracts for the work to be done shall be entered into and assessments and liens shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 32-3-12. 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public road, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way, or to repair the same, without having first obtained a permit from the county clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(c)  Bond. Each applicant for a permit to construct or improve any pavement on any public road, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way shall be required to file a bond in the amount of $2,500.00 with surety to be approved by the board, conditioned to indemnify the county for any loss or damage caused by, or resulting from, the work undertaken. 
(d)  Specifications. 
(1)  Conformity required. All roads and sidewalk pavements and all curbing shall be in conformity with the specifications established or approved from time to time by the board. 
(2)  Curb ramping. The standard for construction of curbs on each side of any county road, or any connecting street or road for which curbs have been prescribed, shall be not less than one ramp per lineal block giving on the crosswalks at intersections. Such ramps shall be at least 40 inches wide and so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically handicapped persons. 
(e)  Barricades. Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a road, sidewalk or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person, or vehicle by reason of the work, and those barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(f)  Prioritization of roads to be paved by the county or with a contribution of funds from the county. 
(1)  A list will be maintained of all roads in the county which have been determined to be suitable and acceptable for paving with the expenditure of county and state funds. 
(2)  Roads, where the rights-of-way have been donated to the county, which have been placed on the list will receive priority over roads that condemnation or payment will be necessary to secure the necessary rights-of-way for construction and paving of the roads using State funds. 
(3)  Roads will be prioritized in the order in which they are surveyed and found acceptable for paving with State funds and in which all of the executed rights-of-way have been received by the county. 
(4)  Each district will be entitled to priority within the list to the extent that, when reasonably possible, a road will be paved from each of the districts in turn, before a second road is paved from the same district. 
(5)  Roads will also receive priority within each district based upon the mileage to be paved, with the roads having the greater mileage to be prioritized over shorter roads. 
(6)  Roads may also be prioritized by unanimous vote of the board. 
(Code 1998, § 6-302) 
Sec. 22-3. - Procedure for the issuance of permits. 
(a)  Application. Every person required to procure a permit under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or law of this governing authority relating to the subject matter of this chapter shall submit a written application for such permit to the county clerk. The written application shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The purpose for which the application is submitted; 
(3)  The nature and location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The estimated cost of the proposed work; and 
(5)  The date of commencement and date of completion of the proposed work, and other dates or plans as may reasonably be required by the county clerk or the director of public works. 
(b)  Permit fee. Unless otherwise provided, each application for a permit under this chapter shall be accompanied by a permit fee in an amount as established by the board of commissioners, from time to time. 
(1)  Issuance of receipts. The county clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a permit, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application. 
(2)  Rebate of fee. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the county clerk shall refund such fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the county. 
(c)  Review of application. Upon receipt of the application for a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the county clerk shall forward such application to the director of public works, who shall approve or disapprove such application within seven days after receipt thereof. After indicating approval or disapproval on the application, the director of public works shall return the same to the county clerk. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of an approved application from the director of public works, the county clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant therefor, which permit shall state the nature of the work to be done or activity to be carried out and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the county clerk. 
(e)  Display of permit. It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the permit issued to him in a conspicuous place at the site of the work or activity to be engaged in. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such permit at or about any location not covered thereby or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(f)  Limitation on issuance. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no permit shall be issued to any applicant therefor who has failed to satisfy any bonding requirements imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done or carried out by such applicant. 
(Code 1998, § 6-305) 
Sec. 22-4. - Policy on naming public buildings, lands, roads and bridges. 
The Greene County Board of Commissioners establishes the following policy to provide certainty and clarity in determining the appropriateness of naming public buildings, lands, roads or bridges under its jurisdiction, ownership, and control. 
As a policy, the board of commissioners does not name, rename, or otherwise alter the existing names of county-owned facilities. 
The board of commissioners recognizes that public buildings and lands should be named according to their general purpose or function, and therefore not named after any individual or group. It shall be the policy of the board of commissioners that public buildings, lands, and physical plant facilities owned or falling under the jurisdictional control of the board of commissioners shall be named according to general purpose and/or function, and shall therefore not be named after individuals or groups in any semblance whatsoever. 
Road names already in existence are addressed, known by public safety responders, the postal service, and the general public and should not be renamed for the purpose of recognizing an individual or group, even if in "honorary" fashion, given the confusion that such a practice could easily create. The importance of maintaining the addressing system that is the backbone of the E911 system, supporting the efficient and expedient response for public safety providers, and avoiding disruption in the postal system shall be deemed paramount and shall not be compromised. Accordingly, road names shall not be renamed in any fashion, including "honorary" designations, to honor individuals or groups. 
Bridges located along the county road system are not named as any such practice serves no logistical purpose. Designation for bridges is generally related to the creek, stream, river, or other waterway the structure crosses. Any system of naming bridges to recognize individuals or groups creates a costly endeavor for signage, maintenance, and additional obstacles for routine mowing. Therefore, it shall be the policy of the board of commissioners that bridges located along the county road system shall not be named after individuals or groups. 
Newly constructed county-owned roadways shall be named by official action of the board of commissioners. Such road names shall be selected based on the general area served by the new road, general purpose of the new road, or other significant consideration of the new road. It shall be the policy of the board of commissioners that newly constructed county-owned roads shall not be named after an individual or group in any fashion or semblance whatsoever. 
( Ord. of 7-18-2017 ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 18, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 22-4 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 22-5—22-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED LIMITS AND ZONES 

Sec. 22-18. - Authority. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183 concerning local authorities' power to alter lawful speed limits, the ordinance from which this article is derived, regulating speed limits within the county, is adopted. 
(b)  Be it ordained by the board that the speed zones set forth in this article are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1998, § 6-101; Ord. of 5-17-2005(2), § 6-101) 
Sec. 22-19. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided for by law. 
(Code 1998, § 6-107; Ord. of 5-17-2005(2), § 6-107) 
Sec. 22-20. - State route segments. 
The state department of transportation and the state department of public safety, through a joint order, establishes the speed zones on all segments of state routes in the county. Said order, as updated from time to time, is incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1998, § 6-102; Ord. of 5-17-2005(2), § 6-102) 
Sec. 22-21. - Signage on state route segments. 
Signs are to be erected by the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1998, § 6-103; Ord. of 5-17-2005(2), § 6-103) 
Sec. 22-22. - County roads. 
The speed limits on county roads shall be as established, from time to time, by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1998, § 6-104; Ord. of 5-17-2005(2), § 6-104) 
Sec. 22-23. - Signage on county roads. 
Signs on county roads are to be erected by the county. 
(Code 1998, § 6-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(2), § 6-105) 
Sec. 22-24. - City of White Plains. 
(a)  The speed limits on roads within the incorporated area of the City of White Plains that are designated as county roads shall be as established, from time to time, by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Signs on roads within the incorporated area of the City of White Plains that are designated as county roads are to be erected by the City of White Plains. 
(Code 1998, § 6-106; Ord. of 5-17-2005(2), § 6-106) 
Secs. 22-25—22-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HEAVY EQUIPMENT, MACHINERY AND VEHICLES ON COUNTY ROADS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 22-53. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to any and all activity that occurs throughout the county road system and respective rights-of-way. This article includes specific requirements for any industry, trade or commerce that carries out its business by loading and/or unloading materials of any nature that requires equipment to pass through unpaved sections of county rights-of-way. Government agencies shall be exempt from the this article. 
(Code 1998, § 6-201) 
Sec. 22-54. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access site means any temporary roadway, drive, structure, fill or device, existing or constructed, that is used or employed for the purpose of crossing, travel upon or use of county road rights-of-way. 
County right-of-way means for the purpose of this article, the shoulder, front slope, ditch, drain, and back slope, facility or any appurtenance of any county road as herein defined. 
County road means any county owned or maintained highway, road, street, avenue, drive, detour or other way open to the public and intended or used for the passage of motor vehicles. 
Equipment shall be defined in its everyday meaning, but includes vehicles of any kind, provided, however, that vehicles in use immediately for the control or extinguishing of wild fires shall be exempt from this article. 
Industry , trade or commerce means any commercial activity. 
Loading and/or unloading shall be defined in its everyday meaning but also shall include any activity known as harvesting or mining of any product or material. 
Operations means those activities contemplated by this article, including, but not limited to, the loading or transporting of raw materials such as stone, timber, pulpwood, fill dirt and construction material. 
(Code 1998, § 6-202) 
Sec. 22-55. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person, corporation, business, partnership or consortium violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to fine and/or injunctive relief or any other legal procedure authorized by law. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1998, § 6-208) 
Sec. 22-56. - Regulations. 
This article shall regulate any and all activity that occurs throughout the county road system and respective rights-of-way. Any activity that directly or indirectly causes or creates a detrimental condition that could lead to the deterioration of any section of the county road system and/or respective rights-of-way will be considered a violation of this article. Further, any activity that directly or indirectly causes or creates an unsafe situation detrimental to the welfare of the citizens of the county will be considered a violation of this article. Each instance will be considered a separate violation. Direct violations of this article include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Parking of equipment on any part of the county road system and respective rights-of-way, unless such area is a designated parking area. Only such equipment that is in disrepair shall be excluded on a temporary basis as deemed reasonable by the county code enforcement representative. 
(2)  The operation of any track-driven piece of equipment on any section of the county road system, unless such use is permitted by the public works director. 
(3)  The operation of any equipment on or through county rights-of-way, unless such use is through a permitted drive and meets the requirements set forth in article V of this chapter or is covered by a surety bond as described in this article. 
(4)  The loading, unloading, and/or skidding (dragging) of any material on any section of the county road system and respective rights-of-way, unless such activity is permitted by the county code enforcement representative. 
(Code 1998, § 6-203) 
Sec. 22-57. - Notification required. 
(a)  Any industry, trade, or commerce, prior to conducting any business that requires equipment to pass through unpaved sections of county rights-of-way to load and/or unload materials of any nature, other than for the harvesting and/or removal of standing timber, shall be required to obtain a permit from the county building and zoning office. Under this section, a separate permit is required for every access point on any section of the county road system and respective rights-of-way, unless such access points are on the same tract of land. The permit must be completed by the applicant in its entirety. 
(b)  Upon notification, the public works department and/or code enforcement representative shall inspect the site to determine if any special provisions are required. Periodic inspections of the site may also require special provisions. Special provisions include, but are not limited to, the following; 
(1)  Installation of a culvert. 
(2)  Use of crushed stone (gravel) or its equivalent. 
(3)  Use of advanced warning signs for traffic flow. 
(c)  Any special provision required by the public works department and/or code enforcement representative shall be installed by the firm or company as directed, and at the expense of the firm or company. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued to any applicant who has failed to satisfy any bonding requirements imposed, or has not satisfactorily completed repairs and cleanup from any previously approved site for said applicant's agents. 
(Code 1998, § 6-204; Amend. of 2-16-2017, § 1 ) 
Sec. 22-58. - Surety bond. 
(a)  The board shall be authorized to require the posting of a surety bond, or its equivalent, in the amount of $3,000.00 by the company, corporation, or individual that is required by this article to obtain a permit. Said bond will be required for every tract of land and is not transferable unless allowed under section 22-60. An additional $1,000.00 surety bond, or its equivalent, shall be required for every access point desired from any section of the county road system and respective rights-of-way. Said bond will remain in force until the conclusion of operation with the condition of access points and roads being found satisfactory as prescribed by this article. 
(b)  The bond shall be conditioned to protect and save harmless the board from all claims and damages for cleaning and repairing any county road. Funds shall be deducted from the bond to pay for reasonably required repairs to maintain the county road in a proper and safe operating condition throughout the operation, or as described in section 22-60. In the event that the bond is fully expended, operations must cease until another bond is posted. 
(c)  Any provision of this article notwithstanding, an applicant or operator shall be liable to the county for the full amount of any damages caused by said operations, the amount of the bond notwithstanding. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above, this article shall not be interpreted to impose any surety bond requirement in connection with timber harvesting operations contrary to those described in section 22-61(b) of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 6-205; Amend. of 2-16-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 22-59. - Suspension of operations. 
(a)  The public works department and/or code enforcement representative shall have the authority to close down all operations covered under this article when it is determined that such operation is in violation of this article. 
(b)  Upon suspension of operations by the public works department and/or code enforcement representative, the firm, company or individual shall have the right to appeal in writing to the board. The right to appeal shall be limited to the duration of the suspension of operations. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the written appeal, the board shall have five days to impanel an arbitration board. The arbitration board shall consist of three people: one person selected by the board; one person selected by the firm, company, or individual; and one person mutually agreed upon by the two persons selected. 
(d)  Once the arbitration board has been formed, the arbitration board shall have no more than 30 days from the receipt of the letter of appeal in which to reach a decision. The decision of the arbitration board shall be final 
(e)  The inability to form an arbitration board shall constitute the actions of the public works department to remain in effect. 
(Code 1998, § 6-206) 
Sec. 22-60. - Conclusion of operations. 
(a)  Upon conclusion of operations, any company, corporation or individual that is required by this article to obtain a permit shall notify the county clerk. Upon such notification, the site shall be inspected to determine that the roads and access sites are in compliance with this article, if it is found that the site complies with this article, the bond required under section 22-58 shall be released to the firm, company, or individual, or transferred to another site upon proper completion of the permit required under section 22-56. 
(b)  If it is found that the site does not comply, the public works department shall make repairs to the site to bring it into compliance with this article. Such repairs shall be at the expense of the bond required under section 22-58. The firm, company, or individual shall be notified in writing of the decision of the public works department. 
(c)  Upon notification by the public works department, the firm, company, or individual shall have the right to appeal in writing to the board. The right to appeal shall be limited to 30 days from notification by the public works department. Upon receipt of the written appeal, the board shall have five days to impanel an arbitration board. The arbitration board shall consist of three people: one person selected by the board; one person selected by the firm, company, or individual; and one person mutually agreed upon by the two persons selected. 
(d)  Once the arbitration board has been formed, the arbitration board shall have no more than 30 days from the receipt of the letter of appeal in which to reach a decision. The decision of the arbitration board shall be final. 
(e)  The inability to form an arbitration board shall constitute the actions of the public works department to remain in effect, or the firm, company, or individual shall request that the board make a ruling on the appeal. 
(Code 1998, § 6-207) 
Sec. 22-61. - Timber harvesting. 
(a)  Notice. Pursuant to and in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24, all persons or firms harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant shall provide notice of such harvesting operations to the building official prior to entering onto the property if possible, but in no event later than 24 hours after entering onto the property. Further, such persons shall give notice of cessation of cutting within 24 hours after the job is completed. Such notice shall be provided for each separate tract to be harvested and shall be on and comply with the form provided by the Georgia Forestry Commission at Section 224-2-.01 of the Rules of the Georgia Forestry Commission, as such form and rule may be amended from time to time. Such notice may be submitted in person, by mail, by facsimile transmission, or by e-mail transmission. Any subsequent change in the facts provided in the notice shall be reported to the county within three business days after such change via submission of a revised notice. 
(b)  Surety bond. Pursuant to and in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24(b)(3), the notice required by section 22-61(a) shall not be or remain effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered to the building official a surety bond or letter of credit, protecting the county against any damage caused by the timber harvesting operations, in the amount of $3,000.00, or such lesser amount as the county may authorize in writing. No more than one bond is required from each person or firm harvesting timber regardless of the number of tracts harvested, so long as the bond remains in effect. Otherwise, a valid replacement bond must be obtained and delivered to the building official no later than the close of business on the fifth business day following the day that the county filed a claim to recover damages against the then-existing bond. Upon filing such claim, the county shall provide immediate notice thereof, including the date the claim was filed, to the person or firm causing the damage. Such notice may be given in person, by facsimile transmission, or by email transmission. The person or firm engaged in timber harvesting shall also obtain and deliver to the building official by January 1 a valid replacement bond or letter of credit for each subsequent calendar year in which such person or firm remains engaged in timber harvesting operations in unincorporated Greene County. 
(c)  Fees. There is no fee required for submitting a notice of timber harvesting. 
(d)  Penalty. Violation of the notice requirements of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
( Amend. of 2-16-2017, § 5 ) 
Secs. 22-62—22-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 22-76. - Permit—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine, or in any manner break up any road, make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any road for any purpose, or to place, deposit, or leave upon any road any earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation or access permit from the county clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(A)) 
Sec. 22-77. - Same—Excavation fee. 
The excavation permit fee to be collected by the county clerk shall be in an amount varying with the type of surface to be opened, dug, or excavated under the permit issued. The amount of the permit fee shall be as established by the board of county commissioners, from time to time. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(B)) 
Sec. 22-78. - Same—Access fee. 
Any person desiring to access a public road for any purpose excluding the removal of timber, but including the removal of other commercial products and gaining access to a construction or other site, shall first make application to the county building and zoning office for a permit for such access. 
(1)  The fee for the access permit shall be as established by the board of county commissioners, from time to time. 
(2)  The application shall specify the exact locations at which access will be made to county roads. 
(3)  The director of public works will inspect the access points prior to access being made by the permittee and shall approve or disapprove the permit after giving consideration to such factors as potential damage to county roadways, interference with normal traffic flow at that point, etc. 
(4)  The provisions of this section shall be enforced whether or not an access point exists at the time of application. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(C); Amend. of 2-16-2017, § 3 ) 
Sec. 22-79. - Surety bond. 
Each applicant for an excavation or access permit shall be required to file a surety bond with the county clerk in the amount of $1,000.00. The required surety bond must be: 
(1)  With good and sufficient surety approved by the board; 
(2)  Satisfactory to the county attorney in form and substance; and 
(3)  Conditioned upon the permittee's agreement to secure and hold harmless the county and its officers against any and all claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation or access, or other work covered by the permit or for which the county, the board of commissioners, or any county officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned on the permittee's agreement to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the director of public works, all openings, excavations or access made in roads, and to maintain any road where excavations or access is made in as good condition for the period of 24 months after said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it was in before said work shall have been done. Any settlement of the surface within said two-year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee, except that nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the county if such repairs should prove defective. Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond, but it shall, in its entirety, cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given. In the event of any suit or claim against the county by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the county giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the county requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and its surety. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(D)) 
Sec. 22-80. - Routing of traffic. 
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during the performance of the excavation or access work, traffic conditions shall be maintained at all times as nearly normal as practicable so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants to the abutting property and to the general public, provided that the director of public works may recommend the closing of roads to all traffic for a period of time if, in his opinion, it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic, including its own vehicles, as directed by the director of public works. The following steps shall be taken before any highway may be closed or restricted to traffic: 
(1)  The permittee must receive the approval of the director of public works; 
(2)  The director of public works must notify the chief at the fire department of any road so closed; 
(3)  Upon completion of construction work the permittee shall notify the director of public works before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made; and 
(4)  Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the director of public works, they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own expense. 
Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible, the director of public works will designate detours. The county shall maintain roadway surfaces of existing highways designated as detours without expense to the permittee, but in cases where there are not existing highways, the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of the director of public works. The permittee will be responsive for any unnecessary damage caused to any highways by the operation of its equipment. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(E)) 
Sec. 22-81. - Clearance for fire equipment. 
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire plugs. Passageways leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of piles of material or other obstructions. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(F)) 
Sec. 22-82. - Protection of traffic. 
The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all road intersections. Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers and blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safely. Pedestrian crossings shall be of adequate thickness, width and length, together with necessary bracing, to ensure safe passage by pedestrians. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(G)) 
Sec. 22-83. - Interference with utilities. 
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the director of public works and the utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the county shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect, by timbers or otherwise, all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation or access work and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along, or across said work. In case any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them, and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and the bond of same shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduits or other utility, and its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(H)) 
Sec. 22-84. - Protection of adjoining property. 
The permittee shall at all times, and at its own expense, preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain permission from the owner of such private property for such purpose. The permittee shall at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation or access work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure properly to protect and carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as near as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property, the director of public works. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(I)) 
Sec. 22-85. - Sidewalk excavations. 
Any excavation made in or under any sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over said excavation on the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that pedestrians can pass over safely at all times. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(J)) 
Sec. 22-86. - Protective measures. 
The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the road or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight there shall be placed upon each place of excavation, and upon any excavated materials, structures or other obstructions to streets, suitable and efficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the night for the duration of such obstructions. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(K)) 
Sec. 22-87. - Attractive nuisances. 
It shall be unlawful for the permittee to allow to remain unguarded at the place of excavation or access any machinery, equipment or other device having the characteristic of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children and be hazardous to their safety or health. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(L)) 
Sec. 22-88. - Care of excavated material. 
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any road shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the roads, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using roads and adjoining property. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(M)) 
Sec. 22-89. - Damage to existing improvements. 
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation or access work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform to the requirements of any applicable Code provision or county ordinance. If, upon being ordered, the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the director of public works shall have the authority to cause said necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the county and the cost shall be charged against the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable on its bond therefor. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(N)) 
Sec. 22-90. - Cleanup. 
As the excavation or access work progresses, all streets and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the director of public works. From time to time, as may be ordered by said director of public works, and in any event immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall, at its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from said work, and upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the director of public works, said work may be done by the county and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided for hereunder. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(O)) 
Sec. 22-91. - Backfilling. 
Backfilling in any road opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation or access permit issued hereunder shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug and in a manner consistent with sound engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(P)) 
Sec. 22-92. - Restoration of surface. 
(a)  The permittee shall restore the surface of all roads broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation or access work to its original condition in accordance with the specifications of the director of public works. The permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes and shall be required to exercise special care in making and maintaining such temporary restorations to assure safe traveling conditions until such time as permanent restorations are made. 
(b)  Permanent restoration of roads shall be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the director of public works. Acceptance or approval of any evacuation work by the director of public works shall not prevent the county from asserting a claim against the permittee and its surety under the surety bond required hereunder for incomplete or defective work if such defects are discovered within 24 months from the completion of the excavation or access work. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(Q)) 
Sec. 22-93. - County's right to restore surface. 
(a)  If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the road to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by the permit, or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation or access work covered by such permit, the director of public works, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the road and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25 percent of such cost, in addition, for general overhead and administrative expenses. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation or access work in the same condition it was prior to the excavation or access for two years after restoring it to its original condition. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(R)) 
Sec. 22-94. - Prompt completion of work. 
The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expediency all excavation or access work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the road to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon as practicable and in any event not later than the date specified in the excavation permit. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(S)) 
Sec. 22-95. - Emergency work. 
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer main, conduit or utility in or under any road breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health, or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer main, conduit or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of the property, life, health, and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the county clerks's office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit as herein provided. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(T)) 
Sec. 22-96. - Noise, dust, and debris. 
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation or access work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent practicable, noise, dust and unsightly debris and during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the express written permission of the director of public works or in case of an emergency as herein provided, any tool, appliance or element producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(U)) 
Sec. 22-97. - Inspections. 
The director of public works shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article and shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be required to enforce and carry out the intent of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(V)) 
Sec. 22-98. - Drawings. 
Users of subsurface road space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans and profiles showing the location and character of all underground structures, including abandoned installations, and shall provide the director of public works with a copy of the same. Corrected maps shall be filed with such officer within 60 days after new installations, changes or replacements are made. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(W)) 
Sec. 22-99. - County exempted. 
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any excavation work carried out under the direction of competent county authorities by employees of the county. 
(Code 1998, § 6-303(X)) 
Secs. 22-100—22-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 22-113. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Driveway Permit Ordinance of Greene County." 
(Ord. of 7-19-2005(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-114. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of this article shall be punishable according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Continued violation may result in the county right-of-way being cleared of all obstructions as deemed necessary by the public works department to ensure proper maintenance of the county road system. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2005(2), § 5) 
Sec. 22-115. - Permit—Required. 
(a)  Before installing any driveway or means of ingress and egress to any property abutting a county road or county maintained road, other than in connection with timber harvesting operations, the owner or person installing said driveway shall make application to the county board of commissioners through its building and zoning office for a permit authorizing said installation. No work shall be authorized until the issuance of a valid permit. 
(b)  With each permit application a drawing must be provided showing the property boundaries in relation to the county road, the location of the proposed driveway on said property, and the distance from the nearest property boundary to the outside edge of each driveway. If more than one driveway to the property is being permitted, the distance between the two driveways must be included. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2005(2), § 2; Amend. of 2-16-2017, § 4 ) 
Sec. 22-116. - Same—Provisions. 
(a)  The permit application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Use of drive (residential, commercial, temporary, etc.); 
(2)  Width of finished drive (shoulder to shoulder); 
(3)  Pavement width, if applicable; 
(4)  Diameter, length and type of culvert or other drainage structure; 
(5)  Any other reasonable conditions that circumstances may warrant. 
(b)  In no case shall multiple driveways serving one parcel of property be placed less than 100 feet apart as measured from the edges of said driveways which are in closest proximity to each other. 
(c)  All driveways shall be graded so that no surface water will spill onto the existing county road. Water shall also be directed away from the edge of pavement into the adjacent roadway ditch on the portion of the driveway crossing the width of any existing shoulder. 
(d)  Any unpaved driveway shall be surfaced with crusher run stone or a clean, graded aggregate of size 57 stone or larger. The driveway shall be undercut at the edge of pavement of the existing road so that the grade of the surface will match the grade of the edge of pavement. 
(e)  All driveways constructed shall be surfaced with either pavement or stone beginning at the edge of pavement (or if the existing road is not paved, at the ditch line) and extending to the right-of-way line. 
(f)  All residential driveway drainage pipe shall be plain or coated corrugated aluminum pipe, plain or coated corrugated steel pipe, or Class II or higher concrete pipe; commercial driveways shall be Class III or higher concrete pipe, coated corrugated aluminum pipe, or coated corrugated steel pipe. 
(g)  The county public works director shall have the authority to require additional requirements for construction of individual drives if conditions warrant. 
(h)  The owner of the proposed driveway shall furnish all materials and labor necessary for construction such driveway. 
(i)  The owner will be responsible for damage occurring to the existing road during construction of a driveway. 
(j)  Any deviation from the conditions specified in a permit application shall require the written approval of the public works director or his agent as directed by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2005(2), § 3) 
Sec. 22-117. - Inspection of work. 
(a)  All work shall be in conformity with the permit as granted and shall be subject to inspection by authorized representatives of the board of commissioners at any time. 
(b)  No permit will be issued until an on site inspection has been made by the county building inspection department and the county public works department. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2005(2), § 4) 
Secs. 22-118—22-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR NEWLY DEVELOPED DIRT ROADS 

Sec. 22-137. - Purpose. 
The purpose for these standards is to set forth the minimum design requirements that private dirt roads must meet before being considered for acceptance into the county road system as a county road. 
(Code 1998, § 6-401; Ord. of 6-5-2003, § 6-401) 
Sec. 22-138. - Specifications. 
(a)  Any private dirt road that is requested to be accepted by the county must have a minimum of a 60 feet dedicated right-of-way. The total limits of the right-of-way must be cleared of any obstructions to include, but not be limited to, fences, trees, brush, etc. All utilities must be located on the back slopes. 
(b)  The 60-foot right-of-way consists of the road bed, front slope, ditch, and back slope. The 60 feet shall be 30 feet from the centerline of the road. The road bed width shall be a minimum of 24 feet, 12 feet from each side of the centerline. The road bed shall be crowned to facilitate drainage from the roadway into the ditches. The front and back slopes shall be on a 3:1 grade with a minimum of a two-foot-deep ditch. 
(c)  Culs-de-sac must have a minimum radius for turn-around of 50 feet. 
(d)  Where necessary, cross drains and side drains shall be in place to ensure adequate drainage. All drainage pipes shall meet the specifications set forth in this Code. 
(e)  Proper erosion control devices shall be in place where necessary to include, but not be limited to, sediment traps, riprap check dams, but especially grassing of all front slopes, back slopes, and ditches. 
(f)  Any road that meets these specifications as of January 7, 1999, shall be eligible for consideration for acceptance by the board. 
(Code 1998, § 6-402; Ord. of 6-5-2003, § 6-402) 
Secs. 22-139—22-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADOPT-A-ROAD 

Sec. 22-160. - Findings. 
(a)  The chairman and board of commissioners for the county find that it is in the best interest of the county to allow for adoption of roads by persons, companies and organizations for the purpose of maintaining and beautifying the county's roads. 
(b)  The chairman and board of commissioners for the county find that it is in the best interest of the county to offer permits to install improvements to road rights-of-way in the form of limited traffic control, landscaping, irrigation and adoption signs. 
(Code 1998, § 6-501; Ord. of 9-11-2003, § 3(6-501)) 
Sec. 22-161. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to any and all activity that occurs throughout the county road system in respect of road rights-of-way. This article includes specific requirements for any person, organization or company by which it can beautify, improve and maintain the county road rights-of-way. 
(Code 1998, § 6-502; Ord. of 9-11-2003, § 3(6-502)) 
Sec. 22-162. - Application for permit; grant of license; authorized actions. 
(a)  Any applicant wishing to adopt a road may file an application with the county planning and zoning department. In the event any improvements as hereinafter set out are desired, a plan of such improvements shall be submitted along with the application. Any additional improvements which permit holder desires to be included in a permit, once issued, shall be submitted in the same manner as an original application. All proposed improvements must be reviewed and approved by the building official, public works director, and county manager. 
(b)  Upon approval of an application for a the county adopt-a-road permit, the permit holder shall be granted a license to maintain and/or improve county road rights-of-way within the permitted area, at the permit holder's sole expense, as follows: 
(1)  Permit holder may install adopt-a-road signage; 
(2)  Permit holder may install landscaping improvements, and accompanying irrigation equipment, lighting, directional and identification signage and traffic control devices; 
(3)  Permit holder may maintain said landscaping and/or other improvements by right-of-way mowing, litter removal, minor road repair, and brush removal; 
(4)  Permit holder may install traffic safety devices and/or security control improvements or devices provided that such devices and/or improvements are designed by a traffic engineer or equivalent individual with certification that state DOT standards for said devices and/or improvements have been met for the class of road in question; 
(5)  No improvements installed pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be a violation of sections 22-1 through 22-3 and article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 6-503; Ord. of 9-11-2003, § 3(6-503)) 
Sec. 22-163. - Responsibility for maintenance of improvements. 
Upon installation of improvements, the county shall have no duty to maintain said improvements. However, in the event of an abandonment of those improvements and upon ten days' notice to the permit holder, at said permit holder's last known address via regular mail, the county may, but is not required to, maintain said roadway area according to its normal maintenance standards and practice. 
(Code 1998, § 6-504; Ord. of 9-11-2003, § 3(6-504)) 
Sec. 22-164. - Abandonment of improvements. 
In the event of abandonment of any improvements constructed herein, then said improvements shall revert to the ownership of the county. For the purposes of this article, abandonment shall mean failure to maintain the same according to the county minimum road maintenance standards for a period of one year or longer, or in the event of failure to correct any deficiency noted by the county public works department for a period of more than 60 days. 
(Code 1998, § 6-505; Ord. of 9-11-2003, § 3(6-505)) 
Chapter 24 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multi-jurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter is to provide for the protection of the public health by prescribing the manner of storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of residential and industrial waste, rubbish, garbage, and refuse. 
(Code 1998, § 7-101) 
Sec. 24-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collector means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Disposal facility means any county facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal, including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design, and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location of land area where the final deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or evasive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage deluges; and other waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety, or environment, as defined in the Rules of the Department of Natural Resources, chapter 391-3-11, except radioactive waste materials as provided for in the Rules of the Department of Natural Resources, chapter 391-3-17, entitled "Radioactive Materials." 
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, to burn or to otherwise create environmental pollution or nuisance. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by micro-organisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, offal, hatchery, poultry wastes and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use in accordance with an approved plan. 
Refuse means all pure and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid commerce and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means non-putrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustive and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Sanitary landfilling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials. 
Solid waste means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, except water-carried body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, food processing wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in this chapter. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposing of solid wastes, or any combination thereof. 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
(Code 1998, § 7-102) 
Sec. 24-3. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Director of public works' duties. The director of public works shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. In the exercise of his solid waste management duties, said director shall: 
(1)  Supervise the collection of solid waste, including the operation and maintenance of equipment and the supervision of personnel; 
(2)  Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Supervise the operation and maintenance of the sanitary landfill and/or other disposal sites or facilities; and 
(4)  Inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors and private transportation and disposal systems to ensure that such operations are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Limitations of authority. All regulatory actions of the director of public works shall be subject to the review of the board. 
(c)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or a fee charged by, the director of public works shall have the right to appeal to the board, which body may, upon hearing, condemn, modify or revoke such requirement or fee. 
(Code 1998, § 7-103) 
Secs. 24-4—24-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 24-25. - Pre-collection. 
No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the unincorporated limits of the county, except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth herein or under the express prior approval of the director of public works. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The director of public works, by written notice, shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such solid waste accumulation to remove same. Failure to remove such accumulation within two weeks of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject to penalties hereinafter set forth. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues. 
(Code 1998, § 7-104) 
Sec. 24-26. - Collection vehicles. 
(a)  General regulations. Any private and/or public vehicle for hire used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be kept clean and in good repair. They shall be constructed in such manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked or blown from the vehicle. They shall be readily identifiable by letters, not less than three inches high and easily legible, painted on the door of the vehicle cab or in an equally conspicuous place, showing the owner's name, telephone number, state permit number, truck number, and rated load capacity in cubic yards. The rated load capacity shall be specified by the director of public works following his measurement of the load-carrying portion of the truck body. 
(b)  Private contractors. No person other than employees of the county shall collect, transport or dispose of solid waste for pay in the county without having first applied for and received a license to engage in such business as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 7-105) 
Sec. 24-27. - Disposal. 
All disposal of solid waste shall be at disposal sites operated in accordance with state laws and with rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources, and at no other place. Waste deposited during operating hours at any site operated by the county shall be placed as designated by the attendant on duty; waste deposited at any other time shall be placed in a bulk container located near the site entrance gate for the purpose of receiving such waste. Operating hours of the county convenience/recycling center shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday of each week and Sunday from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except for holidays. Motor vehicle bodies or major parts thereof, stumps, or logs shall not be deposited at publicly operated disposal sites. 
(Code 1998, § 7-106) 
Sec. 24-28. - Fees. 
Fees shall be set by resolutions properly passed by the board from time to time. 
(Code 1998, § 7-107) 
Secs. 24-29—24-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - YARD TRIMMINGS 

Sec. 24-60. - Scope. 
The scope of this article shall apply to all property owners in unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 1998, § 7-201) 
Sec. 24-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels, motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, non-hazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. 
(Code 1998, § 7-202) 
Sec. 24-62. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 1998, § 7-203) 
Sec. 24-63. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. 
In order to support and replenish the soils of the state, the county adopts and recommends the following hierarchy for handling yard trimmings: 
(1)  Naturalized, low-maintenance landscaping requiring little or no cutting; 
(2)  Grass cycling by mowing it high and letting it lie; 
(3)  Stacking branches into brush piles for use as wild life habitats and for decomposition into the soil; 
(4)  Composting on the site where the material was grown, followed by the incorporation of the finished compost onto the soil at that site; 
(5)  Chopping woody material on the site where such material was generated; 
(6)  Collecting yard trimmings and transporting them to another site to be chipped or composted for later use; and 
(7)  Chipping woody material for later use as fiber fuel. 
(Code 1998, § 7-204) 
Secs. 24-64—24-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSPORTATION OF REFUSE, GARBAGE, DEBRIS, ROCK, SAND AND OTHER SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 24-85. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, owner, lessee, licensee, bailee, employee, contractor, or any other individual having control of a vehicle used herein. 
Refuse means trash, rock, sand, garbage, scrap, manufacturing, waste, cloth, paper, debris, or other matter, which if lost from said conveyance would be foreign matter to such public road or the shoulders and ditches thereof. 
Vehicle means any truck, trailer towed by truck, or any other type of conveyance, which is used to transport items over and across the roadways of the county, which shall be of a size commonly known as one ton or greater. 
(Code 1998, § 7-301) 
Sec. 24-86. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be fined no less than $30.00 per incident nor more than $300.00 per incident and imprisoned no more than 30 days or both. 
(Code 1998, § 7-303) 
Sec. 24-87. - Transportation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport over and across the public streets, roads and highways of unincorporated the county, upon any vehicle or trailer pulled by a vehicle, any refuse unless the same shall be covered by a tarpaulin or other such apparatus designed to prohibit and prevent such refuse from leaving said vehicle or trailer attached thereto and falling upon the said roadways, shoulders and ditches thereof 
(b)  There is hereby specifically excluded from the coverage of this article those vehicles which are designated "less than one ton," those vehicles transporting wood, commonly known as "pulpwood," wood commonly known as tree length saw timber, vehicles transporting baled hay for livestock feeding purposes, and those vehicles transporting sheet metal, steel or other construction materials (excluding rock or sand) which cannot be "blown off' said vehicle by force of wind. 
(Code 1998, § 7-302) 
Secs. 24-88—24-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SANITATION SERVICES 

Sec. 24-118. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Ordinance Regulating Sanitation Services in Greene County." 
(Ord. of 7-10-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 24-119. - Scope of article. 
The scope of this article shall include all dwelling units within the unincorporated areas of the county and within the incorporated areas of the county where service is not provided by another governmental entity. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2003, § 3) 
Sec. 24-120. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms with kitchen faculties designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for cooking, living and sleeping purposes and designated as such by the county. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2003, § 4) 
Sec. 24-121. - Payment of fees. 
The county will pay all fees necessary for the curbside service provided to all dwelling units within the unincorporated areas of the county and within the incorporated areas of the county where service is not provided by another governmental entity. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2003, § 5) 
Sec. 24-122. - Removal of curbside containers from right-of-way. 
In order to promote the safety of all the citizens of the county and all visitors driving on the county or state roads in the county, all garbage and trash containers shall be removed from the county or state right-of-way within 24 hours after collection. Violation of this section will be a misdemeanor with a minimum fine of $25.00. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2003, § 6) 
Chapter 26 - TAXATION AND FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power of county to levy and collect taxes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(a) and (b)(1); statutory regulation of ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXATION 

Sec. 26-19. - Ad valorem tax. 
(a)  Adoption of state law. The Official Code of the State of Georgia promulgates and sets forth the laws, rules and regulations as they might pertain to ad valorem taxation by counties of both real and personal property; therefore, said laws, rules and regulations, as they presently exist and as they may, from time to time, change are hereby adopted. 
(b)  Transfer of tax executions. Pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 48-3-19, a procedure for the transfer of tax executions ("Executions") issued for delinquent ad valorem taxes in groups, or lot blocks, is created for the county. 
(1)  The county reaffirms its procedure that upon the issuance of an execution by the tax officials of the county, and under the circumstances and procedures permitted by law, any person or corporation may request the officer whose duty it is to enforce the execution to transfer the execution to such person or corporation as may pay the execution; provided, however, that issuances, levies, sales or transfers of any kind of executions shall be in accord with state law with regard to homestead exemptions. 
(2)  Certain tax officials are prohibited from having such executions transferred to them, including: county tax receivers, tax collectors, tax commissioners, members of county boards of tax assessors, members of county boards of equalization, and county tax appraisers; provided further, that such action by any of these county employees or volunteers would make them guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(3)  The county tax officials are authorized to sell and transfer executions in lot blocks, so long as the aggregate principal amount of the executions is at least $10,000.00. Such purchasers of executions in lot blocks shall have the same rights, powers, liens and priorities as do the purchasers of individual executions in accordance with state law. 
(4)  Purchasers of executions in lot blocks may obtain such executions at discounts not to exceed ten percent of the principal amount and for the interest then due on the executions; provided, however, no part of the discount shall be deducted for the portion of the taxes payable to the state, and the portion of taxes payable to the state shall be absorbed by the county. 
(5)  No single execution or group of executions against the same person or corporation shall be included in any lot or block of tax executions if their principal amount exceeds 20 percent of the principal amount of the executions within the lot block. 
(6)  The county tax officials shall follow the procedures outlined in O.C.G.A. § 48-3-19 in transferring executions in lot blocks. 
(7)  Any person or corporation purchasing such executions shall follow the procedures outlined in O.C.G.A. § 48-3-19 for purchasing the executions, levying on the Executions, notification of the individual against whom the execution was issued, and all other requirements. 
(8)  The purchasers of lot block executions shall be subrogated to all rights and powers with respect to the executions possessed by, or which might later accrue to, the state, county, municipality, or city, by, for, or in the name of the executions, as if no transfer of executions had been made. 
(9)  No person may purchase executions against properties identified by the county tax officials as eligible for exclusion from transfer of execution, or against properties which have been the subject of a public hearing on the issue of excluding such properties from transfer of execution. 
(c)  Credit card payment. The tax commissioner is authorized by O.C.G.A. § 50-1-6 to accept a credit card as payment for ad valorem taxes and tag/decal fees pursuant to the following conditions: 
(1)  Any agreement with the credit card issuers or financial institutions must not result in a fee to the county for the services of the credit card issuers. 
(2)  If any agreement with the credit card issuers or financial institution does result in a fee to the county for the services of the credit card issuers, such fee may be imposed as a surcharge upon the person making a payment by credit card so as to wholly or partially offset the fee charged to the county. 
(3)  Credit card payments may not be accepted as payment for any other form of indebtedness to the county. 
(Code 1998, § 4-101) 
Sec. 26-20. - Gross direct premium tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy on life, accident and sickness insurers. 
(1)  There is hereby set and levied each year upon each company authorized to write life, accident and sickness insurance, and which is physically located within the unincorporated limits of the county, an annual tax equal to one percent of the annual gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year from policies insuring persons residing within the limits of said county. 
(2)  The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall have the same meaning as that used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4, as amended. The tax levied by this subsection (a) is in addition to any business license fee imposed by this Code. 
(b)  Rate of law on all other insurers. There is hereby set and levied each year upon each insurance company not taxed under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, and which is physically located within the unincorporated limits of the county, an annual tax equal to 2½ percent of the annual gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year from policies insuring persons residing within the limits of the county. The tax levied by this subsection is in addition to any business license fee imposed by this Code. 
(c)  Due date and required report. The gross direct premiums tax levied herein shall be due and payable. The required reports shall be made pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 33-8-8.1 and 33-8-8.2. 
(d)  False information. It is hereby declared to be a violation of this section for any person, firm, corporation or agent thereof to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any report herein required to be filed. 
(e)  Confidentiality of information. All reports required to be filed under this section shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be used solely by the officers of the county responsible for the administration of this section. 
(f)  Enforcement. The taxes levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of this county. 
(Code 1998, § 4-104) 
State Law reference— County taxes on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; county taxes on insurance companies other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 26-21. - Tax sales. 
(a)  Time, place, and manner of sale. The time, place and manner of the sale of property, real and personal, for taxes due said county shall be the same as that provided by law for sheriffs' sales for state and county taxes. 
(b)  Sale by parcels. When not impracticable, all property sold for county taxes shall be so offered for sale that the smallest amount that will bring the amount of taxes and costs shall alone be sold. 
(c)  Purchase by county. The county tax assessor shall attend all sales of property for taxes due the county, and in the event no one person bids for the property put up to be sold as much as the tax due thereon, the county clerk shall place a bid for such property for the county and, if the bid is accepted, take custody of the deed for the county. No property so purchased by the county shall ever be sold by the county except at a public sale thereof to the highest bidder. 
(d)  Redemption of property sold for taxes. Any person whose property is in obedience to an execution issued for the collection of municipal taxes shall have such rights of redemption of said property as are set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq., and any other provisions of law not inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1998, § 4-107) 
Sec. 26-22. - Excise tax for rental of motor vehicles. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle for 31 or fewer consecutive days, including the total cash and non-monetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver, but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers which is used primarily for the transportation of people and which is rented or leased without a driver, regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the state. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-90, the board hereby adopts, for enforcement purposes, the levy and collection of an excise tax on the rental of motor vehicles. 
(c)  The excise tax authorized by this section shall be effective within the geographical boundaries of the county as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-92 and shall include all of the territory within the county except territory located within the boundaries of any municipality which imposes an excise tax on charges to the public for the rental or lease of rental motor vehicles. 
(d)  The tax levied under this section shall be collected at the rate of three percent of the rental charge. 
(e)  The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be imposed only at the time and place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. 
(f)  The customer who pays a rental charge which is subject to a tax levied under this section shall be liable for the tax, and the tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts. 
(g)  The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the governing authority imposing the tax, and the tax remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to a tax levied as provided in this section shall be liable for the tax at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever is greater. 
(h)  In adopting this section, the board identifies the following projects and purposes for which proceeds of the tax are to be expended during the fiscal year in which such tax is collected: 
(1)  Promotion of industry, trade, commerce, and tourism; 
(2)  Capital outlay projects consisting of the construction of convention, trade, sports and recreational facilities, or public safety facilities including the acquiring, construction, renovating, improving, and equipping of parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, plazas, connections, and other public improvements associated with such convention, trade, sport, and recreational facilities or public safety facilities or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects; and 
(3)  Maintenance and operation expenses or security and public safety expenses associated with capital outlay projects funded pursuant to subsection (h)(2) of this section. 
(i)  Amounts collected pursuant to this section may be expended pursuant to a contract or contracts with a county, municipality, development authority, downtown development authority, urban redevelopment authority, recreation authority, or any combination of two or more of such entities. The county may also enter into intergovernmental contracts pursuant to the authority granted by article IX, section III, paragraph I of the Constitution of Georgia to accomplish the purposes described in subsection (h) of this section. 
(j)  The tax created under this section shall terminate on December 31, 2038, or earlier if determined by the board. In the event of termination of the tax, a tax pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-92 may not be thereafter again authorized. 
(k)  The excise tax created by this section shall not be imposed in connection with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the state and returns it within the county; or 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the county and returns it outside of the state. 
(l)  The county is not authorized to collect an excise tax on the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle outside the county. 
(m)  Each person collecting the excise tax authorized by this section shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying of the amount due if the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(n)  As part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-96, the auditor shall include a report of the revenues and expenditures pertaining to the excise tax authorized by this section. 
(Code 1998, § 4-108) 
Secs. 26-23—26-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL/MOTEL TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Counties authorized to impose, levy, and collect tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 

Sec. 26-42. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
County means the unincorporated areas of Greene County, Georgia. 
County manager means the county manager of Greene County, or his designee. 
Due date means the 20th day after the end of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Greene County means a body politic governed by the Greene County Board of Commissioners. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Monthly period means a calendar month. 
Motel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any motel, lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, hotel, motor hotel, auto court, campground, bed and breakfast inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. Such term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a motel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant or guest means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a motel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a motel in the county including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such motel. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Private sector nonprofit organization means any private, nonprofit quasi-governmental organization formed and operating in the county for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows, or for other purposes provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3) including but not limited to the Greene County Chamber of Commerce and its successors. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction there from whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(A); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-105) 
Sec. 26-43. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violations, fines and punishments. It shall be unlawful for any person or operator to violate a provision of this article, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof. Each such person or operator shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person or operator shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day or portion thereof such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county manager from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. The magistrate's court of the county shall have jurisdiction over violations of this article and all procedures for enforcement of this article shall be provided in O.C.G.A. title 15, chapter 10, article 4. Complaints of violations of any provision of this article shall be brought before the magistrate's court on a citation issued by the county manager or the chief magistrate of the county and shall be prosecuted through that court. Violations of this article will be tried upon citations either with or without a prosecuting attorney as determined by said county manager. Service of citation shall be performed by the county sheriff's office. Citations shall meet all of the requirements as specified in the O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, as amended. 
(c)  Other penalties. In addition to criminal penalties listed above, violation of the provisions of this article, shall be cause for denial of a business license, and where a business license has already been granted shall be cause of suspension, revocation, or denial of renewal of such business license. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(O); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-119) 
Sec. 26-44. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed, and there shall be paid a tax of five percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a motel in the county, provided that levy and collection of that portion of such tax amounting to two percent of the rent which is required to be expended for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows, or for other purposes provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3), may be suspended during periods of time during which the county has no contract for the expenditure of such funds with the state, a department of the state government, a state authority, or a private sector nonprofit organization, or a contract or contracts with some combination of such entities. Written notice of the dates of the beginning and end of such periods of suspension shall be given to each operator of a motel in the county on or before the date immediately preceding the date each period begins and ends by the county manager or such other person as may be designated by him to give such notice. Such notice shall be deemed sufficient if delivered to any person authorized to collect rent for the operator of the motel to whom notice is required to be given. 
(b)  Such tax shall be paid upon any occupancy occurring on or after December 1, 2007, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. Where rent is paid, or charged or billed, or falls due on either a weekly, monthly or other term basis, the rent so paid, charged, billed or falling due shall be subject to the tax herein imposed to the extent that it covers any portion of the month of December, 2007, and any portion of any monthly period thereafter. 
(c)  No tax shall be levied as provided in this section upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodging, or accommodations furnished to the same customer for a period of more than 30 consecutive days or for use as meeting rooms. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(B); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-106; Ord. of 11-14-2017(1) ) 
Sec. 26-45. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of a motel located within the county to collect from the occupants the tax levied and imposed upon the occupancy of guest rooms by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(D); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-107) 
Sec. 26-46. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tax shall be levied as provided in this article upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business provided that appropriate tax-exempt documentation is provided at the time of stay by the occupant or guest. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(E); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-108) 
Sec. 26-47. - Registration of operator. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a motel in the county shall immediately register with the county manager on a form provided by said county manager. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 15 days after the date this article becomes effective, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the county manager may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; by a member or partner in case of ownership by an association or partnership; and by an executive officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Should the county manager deem it necessary, in order to facilitate registration, he may prescribe administrative provisions therefor other than those provided in this section. Such provisions shall be made to effect the purposes hereof. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(F); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-109) 
Sec. 26-48. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator as hereinbefore provided, the county manager shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax from the occupants, stating the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. Such certificates shall be non-assignable and nontransferable, and shall be returned immediately to the county manager upon the cessation of business by the registered operator at the location name, or upon sale or transfer of such business at said location. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(G); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, §4-110) 
Sec. 26-49. - Due date of taxes. 
All taxes levied and imposed by this article shall be due and payable to the county monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period in which such taxes are collected. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(H); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-111) 
Sec. 26-50. - Returns and time of filing; remittance of tax. 
(a)  On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the county manager, in such form as the county manager may prescribe, by every operator liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
(b)  All returns shall show the gross rent, exempt rent, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the monthly period for which filed, and such other information as may be required by the county manager, and shall be accompanied when filed by remittance of the net amount of tax due. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(H); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-112) 
Sec. 26-51. - Collection of fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax levied hereunder shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and payment of the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(I); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-113) 
Sec. 26-52. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the county manager is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information in his possession or which may come into his possession. One or more than one deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the unpaid tax found to be due shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month from and after the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount should have been returned until the date of payment of such tax and interest. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the county manager may offset overpayments for a period, or periods, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period or periods, against penalties, and against the interest on such unpaid tax. 
(d)  Notice of determination; service of. The county manager or his designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at this address as it appears in the records of the county manager. 
(e)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-114) 
Sec. 26-53. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the county manager shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the county manager. Upon the basis of this estimate the county manager shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the county, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made of the amount due for one or for more than one monthly period. 
(b)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination the county manager may offset overpayments for a period, or periods, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period or periods, against penalties, and against interest on unpaid tax found to be due. The interest on such unpaid tax shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 4-114(b). 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the unpaid tax found to be due shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month from and after the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount should have been returned until the date of payment of such tax, penalties and interest. 
(d)  Notice of determination; service of. Promptly after making his determination, the county manager shall give to the operator written notice of his determination, which notice may be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(J); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-115) 
Sec. 26-54. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. When it is determined by a return filed, or by the county manager having made a determination under the provisions of section 11-125 or section 11-126 of this article, that tax is due and payable to the county under the provisions of this article, the county manager may at any time within three years after determination that such tax is due and payable bring an action in the courts of this state, of any other state, or of the United States in the name of the county to collect the amount of tax payable to the county together with interest thereon and penalties, court costs, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. The bringing of such an action shall not be a prerequisite for the issuance of a fi.fa. under the provisions of subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount of tax under this article sells or transfers his business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price of the business to cover such amount of tax, interest thereon, and penalties, and pay such sum over to the county unless the operator liable for such tax delivers to such purchaser or transferee, as the case may be, at the time of such sale or transfer, a certificate from the county manager showing that all tax returns required of such operator have been filed and all taxes shown as being payable on said returns have been paid in full. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser or transferee of a business fails to withhold the required amount of the purchase price, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells or transfers his business, or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. 
(d)  Issuance of fi.fa. The county manager is hereby authorized to issue a Fi.Fa for execution and levy to satisfy the amount of any tax, penalty or interest due but not paid under provisions of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(M), (N); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-116) 
Sec. 26-55. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of the secretary. The county manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The county manager shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other ordinances of the county, or the laws of the State of Georgia, or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from operators, etc., form. Every operator shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the county manager of the county may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The county manager or any person authorized in writing by him, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the county manager may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the county manager when required by the county manager and shall set for the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the county manager may require. 
(f)  Limitation on disclosure of business of operators, etc. The county manager or any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount of source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this article except in case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax hereby levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax, interest and penalties required to be collected. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105(L); Ord. of 2-3-2000, § 4-105; Ord. of 5-17-2005(1), § 4-105; Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-117) 
Sec. 26-56. - Agents for receiving notices. 
When registering pursuant to section 4-109 hereof, each operator shall appoint, in writing, an agent to receive for the operator any notice required to be given to the operator under the provisions of this article, stating the full name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of such agent. Such agent shall be either an individual resident of the county or an employee of the operator who regularly works at the operator's place of business on a daily basis, and the appointment of the agent must be accompanied by the written consent of such agent to serve as agent for the operator. Such agent may be changed from time to time by written appointment of, and consent of the successor agent. The operator is required to have such an agent at all times and should an agent cease to be a resident of the county or an employee regularly working at the operator's place of business in the county, as the case may be, the operator shall immediately file a written appointment of a new agent and such agent's consent to serve as such with the county manager. Any agent so appointed by an operator shall be authorized to receive for and on behalf of the operator any notice required to be given to the operator by the provisions of this article. Delivery of any such notice to such agent, in person or by mail, shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this article and such notice shall be binding on the operator. This method of giving notice to operators is supplementary and cumulative of the other methods of given notice set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2007, § 4-118) 
Chapter 28 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of county to regulate installation, construction, maintenance, removal, and relocation of poles, towers, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42. 

Sec. 28-1. - General. 
The purpose of this chapter is to amend the established and promulgated standards and regulations in regard to telecommunications antennas and towers in the county and establish general guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. 
(Code 1998, § 18-101; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 18-101) 
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
Preexisting towers and antennas has the meaning set forth in section 28-3(d). 
Public officer , as used in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8, means the chairman of the county board of commissioners. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. 
(Code 1998, § 18-102; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 18-102) 
Sec. 28-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  District height limitations. The requirements set forth in this chapter shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of, the height limitations specified for each zoning district. The height limitations applicable to buildings and structures shall not apply to towers and antennas. 
(b)  Public property. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the board shall be exempted from the requirements of this chapter, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the board. 
(c)  Amateur radio; receive-only antennas. This chapter shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. 
(d)  Preexisting towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter, other than the requirements for section 28-4(e) and (f). Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this chapter as "preexisting towers" or "preexisting antennas." 
(Code 1998, § 18-103; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 18-103) 
Sec. 28-4. - General guidelines and requirements. 
(a)  Goals. The goals of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the county. 
(2)  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites. 
(3)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact to the county is minimal. 
(4)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas. 
(5)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the county quickly, effectively, and efficiently. 
(b)  Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
(c)  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the planning and zoning department an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the board or within one-quarter mile of the border thereof including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The planning and zoning department may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals of special use permits under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the board, provided, however, that the planning and zoning department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(d)  Aesthetics; lighting. The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the location of all towers and the. installation of all antennas governed by this chapter; provided, however, that the board may waive these requirements if it determines that the goals of this chapter are better served thereby. 
(1)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and building environment. 
(3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(4)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the board may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(e)  Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed the current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then owners of the towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower and antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the board shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-3 through 41-2-17. 
(f)  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the board concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, under notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days, the board may remove such tower at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the board shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-3 through 41-2-17. 
(Code 1998, § 18-104; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 18-104) 
Sec. 28-5. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require administrative review or a special use permit. Nevertheless, all such uses shall comply with section 28-4(d) through (f) and all other provisions of the Code, as amended. 
(b)  Specific permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted: 
(1)  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, in any industrial or heavy commercial zoning district, provided, however, that such tower shall be set back from any existing off-site residence a distance equal to the height of the tower. 
(2)  Installing an antenna on an existing structure, other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other free-standing nonresidential structure), that is 50 feet in height or greater, so long as said additional antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing structure. 
(3)  Installing an antenna on any existing tower of any height, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower and said existing tower is not a preexisting tower; provided, however, that such specific permitted use shall not include the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna. 
(4)  All antennas shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any property lines of the property on which the tower is located and from all public roads. 
(Code 1998, § 18-105; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 18-105) 
Sec. 28-6. - Administrative approvals. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  The planning and zoning department may administratively approve the uses listed in this section. 
(2)  Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the planning and zoning department, providing the information set forth in section 28-7(b) and (d). 
(3)  The planning and zoning department shall respond to each such application within 30 days after receiving it, by either approving or denying the application. If the planning and zoning department fails to respond to the applicant within said 30 days, then the application shall be deemed to be approved. 
(4)  In connection with any such administrative approval, the planning and zoning department may, in order to encourage shared use, administratively waive any zoning district setback requirements by up to 50 percent. 
(5)  If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant may appeal said denial in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance set forth in appendix B to this Code concerning appeals of administrative decisions. 
(b)  Specific administratively approved uses. The following uses may be approved by the planning and zoning department after conducting an administrative review: 
(1)  Installing an antenna on an existing structure, other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding nonresidential structure), that is less than 50 feet in height, so long as such addition does not add more than 20 feet to the height of the existing structure. 
(2)  Installing an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including a preexisting tower, and further including the placement of additional building or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower. 
(3)  Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning district other than industrial or heavy commercial, that, in the judgment of the planning and zoning department, is in conformity with the goals set forth in section 28-4(a). 
(4)  Locating any tower in a zoning district other than industrial or heavy commercial, provided a licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the applicant; the planning and zoning department concludes the tower is in conformity with the goals set forth in section 28-4(a) and the requirements of section 28-4(d) through (f); the tower is to be set back from any existing off-site residence a distance equal to the height of the tower; and that the tower meets the following height and usage criteria: 
a.  For a single user, up to 90 feet in height; 
b.  For two users, up to 120 feet in height; and 
c.  For three or more users, up to 150 feet in height. 
(Code 1998, § 18-106; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 18-106) 
Sec. 28-7. - Special use permits. 
(a)  General provisions governing issuance. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits: 
(1)  If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under section 28-5 or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to section 28-6, then a special use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts. 
(2)  In granting a special use permit, the board may impose conditions to the extent the board concludes that such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
(3)  Any information of any engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
(b)  Information required. Each applicant requesting a special use permit under this chapter shall submit a scaled site plan, scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and documents, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjustment uses, and other information deemed by the board to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  Factors considered in granting special use permits. The board shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit, although the board may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the board concludes that the goals of this chapter are better served thereby: 
(1)  Height of the proposed tower; 
(2)  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(3)  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)  Surrounding topography; 
(5)  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(6)  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(7)  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
(8)  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures, as discussed in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates, to the reasonable satisfaction of the board, that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
(1)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements; 
(2)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements; 
(3)  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment; 
(4)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing tower or structure would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; 
(5)  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable (costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable); 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(e)  Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the board may reduce the standard setbacks and separation requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby: 
(1)  Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any property lines of the property on which the tower is located and from all public roads. 
(2)  Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
(3)  In zoning districts other than industrial or heavy commercial zoning districts, towers over 90 feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter of a mile from any existing tower that is over 90 feet in height. 
(f)  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device, provided, however, that the board may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate. 
(g)  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit is required, provided, however, that the board may waive such requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby: 
(1)  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. 
(2)  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether. 
(3)  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wood lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer. 
(Code 1998, § 18-107; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 18-107) 
Sec. 28-8. - Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. 
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the board notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said 90 days, the board may, in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-3 through 41-2-17, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(Code 1998, § 18-108; Ord. of 12-9-1999, § 18-108) 
Chapter 30 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Utility providers means individuals, partnerships, corporations, associations, cooperatives, and political subdivisions of the state that are in the business of furnishing utilities to the general public or who furnish utilities solely to themselves. 
(Code 1998, § 17-201; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-201) 
Sec. 30-2. - Utility providers—Use of right-of-way. 
All utility providers are granted the nonexclusive right to construct, install, and maintain utility infrastructure on, in or above the public road rights-of-way in the unincorporated areas of the county except for the following: federal aid primary routes, numbered state routes, secondary off-system projects and Georgia Highway Authority projects (formerly Rural Roads Authority projects); provided the construction and installation of such facilities meet the requirements for construction and installation contained in the current edition of Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards issued by the state department of transportation and under the terms and conditions hereinafter stated. 
(Code 1998, § 17-202; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-202) 
Sec. 30-3. - Same—Application for installation permit. 
Before installing any utility infrastructure, excluding service connections that will not involve the cutting of any paved surface, a utility provider shall be required to apply for and obtain written permission from the county. There shall be a fee schedule set by the board of commissioners designating a fee for the issuance of a permit by the county. Utility providers having the power of eminent domain shall be exempt from the fee requirements of this article, but must comply with all other requirements stated herein. The application shall be sent to the county in writing addressed to the attention of the building official, and must contain the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Name and address of the contractor, if any; 
(3)  Name of the road where work is to be performed and general location of the same; 
(4)  Construction drawings of the proposed utility infrastructure at a scale not exceeding one inch equals 100 feet; 
(5)  A plat or map showing the location of the utility infrastructure in relation to the existing roadway, pavement, or curve (curb); 
(6)  The date on which construction or installation is scheduled to begin; and 
(7)  A check in the amount of the established fee made payable to the county. 
(Code 1998, § 17-203; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-203) 
Sec. 30-4. - Same—Issuance of installation permit. 
An application by a utility provider shall be processed as follows: 
(1)  After review of the application by the building official, the applicant shall be notified whether or not the application has been approved. An application shall not be approved if the county determines that the project does not comply with the existing service delivery strategy and the applicant shall not be authorized to conduct any aspect of the project that would violate the adopted service delivery strategy. The building official shall consult with the county manager regarding service delivery compliance. 
(2)  If an application is approved by the building official, a permit shall be issued and delivered to the applicant. If the application has been disapproved, the applicant shall have the right to confer with the building official. After the conference, the building official may change the disapproval of the application. 
(3)  If the building official does not change the disapproval, the applicant shall have the right to appeal before the board of commissioners to be heard on the application. 
(4)  The board of commissioners shall have the discretion and right to issue a permit to the applicant irrespective of any provision in this article if the board thinks it is in the best interest of the county and the citizens of the county. 
(Code 1998, § 17-204; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-204) 
Sec. 30-5. - Same—Deviations from construction requirements. 
All utility providers installing and constructing utility infrastructure, including underground service connections, which cannot comply with requirements for construction and installation of section 30-2 and wish to deviate from the requirements of section 30-2 must obtain a separate written permit from the county, in addition to the permit required under section 30-3, authorizing such deviations. There shall be a fee schedule set by the board of commissioners designating a fee for the issuance of a permit by the county. Applications for permits shall be submitted in the same manner and shall require the same information as is set forth in section 30-3, except that the deviations shall be set forth separately together with a statement of the reason for such deviations. 
(Code 1998, § 17-205; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-205) 
Sec. 30-6. - Same—Emergency exemptions from construction requirements. 
In the event any emergency situation arises which may affect the welfare and safety of the citizens of the county and where unexpected conditions or obstructions such as rock, a utility line, or unexpected soil conditions occur during installation which, in the opinion of the building official and the county manager, necessitate a deviation from the requirements for construction and installation of section 30-2, the prior notice and permit requirements of sections 30-3 and 30-5 shall be waived. In such cases, however, the filings required under these sections shall be made as soon as possible and the waiver shall not be considered valid until it is provided in writing. 
(Code 1998, § 17-206; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-206) 
Sec. 30-7. - Same—Construction standards. 
(a)  The following requirements shall be complied with in the construction of utility lines and service lines, or any utility infrastructure: 
(1)  All lines underneath the ground shall be buried to a depth of at least 30 inches and should be separated as per Code governing placement of utilities, or at least two feet from any other utility line, whichever is greater; 
(2)  Whenever any underground line crosses a paved, curbed or guttered roadway or driveway the line shall be tunneled under each unless specific written approval for a pavement cut is granted by the county in accordance with section 30-5; pavement cuts will only be allowed when local conditions do not allow for any other option; such pavement cuts and repairs shall be conducted in accordance with state department of transportation standard 1401 addressing pavement patching details and the county may require the posting of a bond as hereinafter stated. Backfill in trenches within the right-of-way shall be compacted to 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry density. In addition, the top one foot of backfill to be located under pavement and curbs shall be compacted to 100 percent of the maximum laboratory dry density (the top one foot of backfill is as measured from the bottom of the graded aggregate base to one foot below that surface). In the case of pavement cuts, laboratory testing reports shall be submitted to the county indicating the required compaction density; 
(3)  All lines above the ground shall be a minimum of 16 feet above ground level; 
(4)  All lines or parts thereof shall be a minimum of six feet from the paved or unpaved road surface or behind the ditch line, whichever is greater; 
(5)  All excavations shall be filled, compacted and smoothed immediately; 
(6)  All debris and waste shall be removed immediately and deposited in a landfill; 
(7)  All ground areas shall be grassed immediately following work with permanent grass seed; 
(8)  Water systems in existence as of July 10, 2003, may be extended and serviced by the existing water system owner provided the same rules and/or regulations in effect at the time the water system installed are followed. The plans for each such extension, to assure compliance with the rules and regulations, must be approved by the building official. In the event no rules and/or regulations were in existence at the time the water system was installed, then the building official must approve all plans for an extension covered under this section for such existing water system. Each water system allowed an extension under this section is limited to a one-time extension of the platted subdivision the water system serves or a maximum 750-foot extension, whichever extension is less in terms of total feet added to the existing water system; 
(9)  Each approved installation will be inspected by the county for location prior to construction and for correct depth before the line is backfilled. A final inspection will be made to ensure that all construction debris has been removed and all soil erosion and sedimentation controls are in place prior to authorizing the utility provider to place the utility infrastructure in service; 
(10)  Prior to commencement of any land disturbance activity that requires a NPDES permit, the utility provider must provide proof to the county that a current NPDES general permit GAR 100002 for utility construction has been obtained for the proposed project. 
(b)  The building official, with concurrence of the county manager, may vary the construction standards in this article for sound engineering reasons and site-specific conditions following an on-site inspection. 
(Code 1998, § 17-207; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-207) 
Sec. 30-8. - Same—Time limit for completing construction. 
A permit issued to a utility provider shall expire and be null and void unless the construction or installation permitted thereby has been started within 90 days of the issuance of the permit. Construction pursuant to a permit, once started, shall be completed within six months unless an application for an extension has been applied for and granted by the county. 
(Code 1998, § 17-208; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-208) 
Sec. 30-9. - Same—Construction and maintenance bond. 
A utility provider may be required to post a bond payable to the county or pay a sum of money into an escrow account so as to assure the proper construction, installation, and maintenance of any utility line or infrastructure permitted pursuant to this article. The amount and terms of the bond or escrow account shall be determined by the building official, with concurrence of the county manager at the time the permit is approved, and the permit shall not be issued until the applicant submits proof of the bond or escrow account. 
(Code 1998, § 17-209; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-209) 
Sec. 30-10. - Right of county to require repair or relocation of utilities. 
(a)  The county reserves the right to require a utility provider, at the sole expense of the utility provider, to remove, relocate or repair any utility located in, on, or above any public road right-of-way, if in the opinion of the county manager, the utility constitutes interference with the safe use of the right-of-way by the traveling public, or will interfere with road construction or improvement. Should the utility provider fail to remove, relocate or repair its utility, upon due notice from the county, the utility provider shall be liable for any extraordinary costs or damages incurred by the county as a result thereof. 
(b)  If construction of new driveways requires that utility lines be relocated or lowered, the utility owner shall be required to accomplish the necessary changes to its facility. The costs of such relocation shall be borne as follows: 
(1)  Relocation made necessary due to construction of a single-family residential driveway shall be done at the expense of the utility owner, provided that in the discretion of the building official, the location of the proposed driveway could not reasonably be located such as not to interfere with existing utilities. Driveways serving a family owned agricultural operation, not including dairy barns or retail sales outlets, shall be treated as single-family drives for purposes of this section. This section shall not apply to overhead utilities or components thereof. 
(2)  Relocation made necessary due to construction of a driveway into a commercial development, residential subdivision or apartment complex shall be done at the expense of the developer. 
(3)  Driveways serving for a short period of time such as those serving the commercial harvesting of forest products or any other specific, limited time operation shall not be covered under this section. 
(Code 1998, § 17-210; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-210) 
Sec. 30-11. - Indemnification of county. 
The utility provider shall indemnify and hold harmless the county and all officers, employees, or agents of the county against any and all claims, damages, demands, actions, causes of action, costs and expenses, of whatever nature, which may result from any injury to or the death of any persons or from the loss of, or damage to, property of any kind or nature, when such injury, death, loss or damage arises out of the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, removal or relocation of utility pursuant to a permit issued under this article. 
(Code 1998, § 17-211; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-211) 
Sec. 30-12. - Liability for damages to utilities. 
The county, its engineers, officers or employees shall not be held responsible or liable for injury or damage that may occur to utilities covered by a permit issued under this article, or to any connections thereto, by reasons of road maintenance and construction activities or road contractors' or other utilities' operations. The county's contractor shall not be held liable for any damage that may occur to utilities if the utility provider has been notified of a construction conflict and given reasonable time to mark or relocate its utilities and has failed to do so. 
(Code 1998, § 17-212; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-212) 
Sec. 30-13. - Maintenance of signaling and safety devices. 
During the initial installation or construction of utilities authorized by a permit issued under this article, or during any future repair, removal or relocation thereof or any miscellaneous operations, the applicant shall at all times, maintain flagman, signs, lights, flares, barricades, and other safety devices as may be necessary to properly protect traffic upon the road and to warn and safeguard the public against injury or damage. 
(Code 1998, § 17-213; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-213) 
Sec. 30-14. - Verification of right-of-way limits and validity of permit. 
It is the responsibility of the utility provider to verify the limits of public right-of-way for location of the utility authorized by a permit issued under this article. Approval of a permit does not constitute approval of design or construction details for the proposed utility; and the utility provider is responsible for compliance with all applicable governmental codes and regulations including the provisions stated herein. Any permit issued under this article that does not comply with the provisions of this article, or that was not obtained in accordance with the provisions of this article is null and void upon discovery of the noncompliance, with notice to the utility provider of the same. 
(Code 1998, § 17-214; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-214) 
Sec. 30-15. - Rights of abutting property owners. 
Permits issued under this article shall not affect any inherent or retained right or privilege of any abutting property owner, nor will the county be responsible for any claim which may develop between the utility provider and any property owner concerning use of the right-of-way. The utility provider is responsible for maintaining reasonable access to private driveways during installation of its utility and for restoration of driveways to the owner's satisfaction. 
(Code 1998, § 17-215; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-215) 
Sec. 30-16. - Limitations on rights granted by permit. 
The issuance or a permit under this article is a license for a permissive use only and shall not be construed so as to give the grantee any permanent right or exclusive easement. A permit issued under this article shall only authorize that installation specifically shown in the application, and the installation shall be in strict compliance with the provisions herein and with the plans submitted with the application, unless the county manager has granted an exception in writing. 
(Code 1998, § 17-216; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-216) 
Sec. 30-17. - Violations; penalty; authority to stop work. 
If any provision of this article is violated the county may cause all work to be stopped by written or verbal order, removal of the underground utility, and the roadway to be repaired to its original condition. Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amendable to the process of the magistrate court of the county, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days or both by such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1998, § 17-217; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-217) 
Sec. 30-18. - Additional remedies. 
In the event any provision of this article has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or abate such violation. 
(Code 1998, § 17-218; Ord. of 7-19-2005(1), § 17-218) 
Secs. 30-19—30-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 30-40. - Purpose and intent. 
The county hereby adopts, for enforcement purposes, the Rules and Regulations for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, adopted by the county board of health on May 14, 1986, as amended. 
(Code 1998, § 10-101) 
Sec. 30-41. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person charged with violations shall be tried in the magistrate's court of the county, in accordance with the provisions of this article, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-4, and other applicable law. 
(b)  Prosecutions for such violations shall be upon citations issued and personally served upon the accused violator by the sheriff, any deputy so authorized by the sheriff or any other person authorized by this board and such citation shall be in substantially the form as established by the county board of health, from time to time. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violation of this article may be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 10-102) 
Chapter 31 - PERSONAL CARE HOMES AND NURSING HOMES 

Sec. 31-1. - Purpose and findings. 
The Greene County Board of Commissioners finds that nursing homes and personal care homes are uniquely situated among businesses located within this county because they provide shelter to individuals who are particularly vulnerable to fires and related emergencies. As a result, the Greene County Board of Commissioners finds that a regulatory framework that requires the implementation of fire safety measures and regular inspections of nursing homes and personal care homes is necessary to ensure the safety and welfare of their residents. Because the Greene County Board of Commissioners further finds that nursing homes and personal care homes serve an important societal interest and purpose, it seeks to protect the safety and needs of the individuals served by nursing homes and personal care homes without unduly burdening the operators of those establishments with unnecessary or excessive regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 31-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The singular or plural number each includes the other, unless the other is expressly excluded. 
Annual registration form: The form required by section 31-10. 
Approved fire-retardant materials: Brick, concrete or cement render. 
Congregate personal care home: A home for adults offering care to 16 or more persons. 
Exit door: A door that is used to depart from a structure. By way of illustration, a door a person must first open to gain access to the exit door is considered an exit access door, not an exit door. 
Family personal care home: A home for adults in a family-type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons. 
Greene County: The unincorporated portion of Greene County, Georgia. 
Group personal care home: A home for adults in a residence or other type building(s), non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven individuals through 15 persons. 
Multi-story structure: A building having two or more levels. 
Nursing home: A facility that in exchange for compensation provides food, shelter, and 24-hour medical care to three or more unrelated ill or aged persons in addition to meeting the physical, emotional, and social needs of the unrelated aged or ill persons. 
Personal care home: A facility, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related by blood or marriage to the owner or administrator of the home. Personal services includes, but is not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and toileting. This term includes family personal care homes, group personal care homes and congregate personal care homes. This term does not include buildings that are devoted to independent living units that include kitchen facilities where residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. 
Pressurized fire hydrant: A fire hydrant capable of providing fire flow in excess of 500 gallons per minute (GPM) at a minimum of 15 pounds per square inch (PSI). 
Quarterly inspections: The inspections contemplated and mandated by section 31-12. 
Regulated businesses: Personal care homes and nursing homes whether operated by an individual, group of individuals and/or an entity. The term includes "regulated businesses that come into existence after the enactment of this chapter" and "regulated businesses in operation prior to the enactment of this chapter." If the same individual(s) or entity owns or operates multiple regulated businesses in Greene County in different structures, each such business shall be considered a separate regulated business for purposes of this chapter. 
Regulated business: The singular form of regulated businesses. 
Regulated businesses that come into existence after the enactment of this chapter: A subcategory of regulated businesses that consists of a) regulated businesses that commence operations in Greene County for the first time after the enactment of this chapter; and b) regulated businesses in operation as of the date of the enactment of this chapter that apply for a new conditional use permit (or any other permit that a regulated business must obtain under the county's code to lawfully operate in the county with the exception of the license required under chapter 12). 
Regulated businesses in operation prior to the enactment of this chapter: A subcategory of regulated businesses that includes every regulated business that is legally operating within Greene County as of the date of this chapter's enactment. 
Resident: An individual who resides in a structure (other than an agent or employee of a regulated business). 
Sleeping area: A bedroom, sleeping room or regular sleeping location. 
Structure: The building which houses a regulated business. 
Structure property: The lot upon which the structure is situated. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 31-3. - Scope. 
This chapter shall only apply to regulated businesses in the unincorporated portion of Greene County. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 31-4. - Failure to comply. 
It shall be unlawful for regulated businesses and their agents and employees to fail to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 31-5. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)  The building official is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The building official is authorized and directed to conduct the quarterly inspections codified in section 31-12 of this chapter. 
(c)  In addition to possessing the right and responsibility to enter each regulated business in order to conduct the quarterly inspections, the building official shall also have the right to enter a regulated business during normal business hours when he/she has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any structure property a violation of this chapter. Prior to entering during one of these reasonable cause visits, the building official shall present proper credentials and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall forward written notice advising that a failure to permit entry at the time and date specified in the notice shall constitute cause for revoking the license issued to the regulated business under chapter 12 of the Code of Ordinances. Said notice shall either be personally served on the contact person and address identified in the most current annual registration form submitted by the regulated business or via U.S. mail (both certified and regular mail). 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 31-6. - Fire department accessibility. 
In order to legally operate in Greene County, regulated businesses that come into existence after the enactment of this chapter must satisfy one of the following criteria: 
(a)  The main entrance of the structure is located within 500 feet of a pressurized fire hydrant; or 
(b)  The structure includes a sprinkler system that is fed by a fire department connection (FDC). To satisfy this criteria, the FDC shall be (1) located within three feet of the boundary line of the structure property; and (2) at the point that is closest to the nearest road accessible to the fire department. In the event that there are multiple points on the structure property that are equidistant to the nearest accessible road, the FDC shall be placed at the point which is furthest away from the driveway servicing the structure property. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 31-7. - Multi-story structures. 
(a)  Regulated businesses that come into existence after the enactment of this chapter and which house residents in multi-story structures shall have at least two external stairways for every story with the exception of the ground floor. The external stairways shall be constructed using approved fire-retardant materials. 
(b)  The two external stairways have to be separated by at least 50 feet and accessible via separate exit doors. 
(c)  This section shall not apply if all residents are permanently housed on the ground floor of the multi-story structure. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 31-8. - Exit signs. 
(a)  All exit doors in a regulated business shall be marked by an exit sign readily visible from any direction of egress travel. The exit sign shall read "EXIT" in all block letters. 
(b)  Exit signs shall be internally or externally illuminated. 
(c)  All exit signs are required to be continuously illuminated for a duration of not less than 120 minutes in case of primary power loss. To ensure continued illumination for a duration of not less than 120 minutes in the event of primary power loss, all exit signs shall be connected to an emergency power system provided from storage batteries, unit equipment or an on-site generator. However, a glow-in-the-dark exit sign need not be connected to an external power source provided that said sign is viewable in total darkness for a duration of not less than 120 minutes after the occurrence of primary power loss. 
(d)  With respect to regulated businesses in operation prior to the enactment of this chapter, the exit signs shall be installed and fully operational on or before January 1, 2015. With respect to regulated businesses that come into existence after the enactment of this chapter, the exit signs shall be installed and fully operational prior to housing any residents. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 31-9. - Smoke alarms. 
(a)  Smoke alarms shall be located in each of the following locations of every regulated business: 
(1)  In each sleeping area whether occupied by a resident, staff member of the regulated business or owner of the structure. 
(2)  Outside of and in the immediate vicinity of each sleeping area. For purposes of this section, "immediate vicinity" means a location no further than seven and one-half feet from the entry point of the sleeping area. 
(3)  On every story of the structure including basements. For purposes of this provision only, in a structure that has split levels without an intervening door between immediately adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for both the upper and the immediately adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. 
(b)  With respect to regulated businesses in operation prior to the enactment of this chapter, the smoke alarms required by this section shall be installed and fully operational on or before January 1, 2015. With respect to regulated businesses that come into existence after the enactment of this chapter, the smoke alarms shall be installed and fully operational prior to housing any residents. 
(c)  When activated, all smoke alarms shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants of the sleeping area in which the alarm is installed. Audible alarms shall produce a sound level of not less than 85 dBA as measured ten feet from the smoke alarm. If a resident is deaf or hard of hearing, the smoke alarms located in that resident's sleeping area shall provide a visual alert upon activation, e.g., strobe light. 
(d)  The primary power source for a smoke alarm required under this section shall be household alternating current (AC) or a lithium battery with a functional life expectancy of ten years or more. When a hard-wired household alternating current (AC) alarm is installed, there shall also be lithium battery automatic backup in the event of a failure or interruption of the AC primary power source. When an alarm with a lithium battery with a life expectancy of ten years or more is installed as the primary power source, the alarm unit shall be one in which the battery is sealed within the unit and cannot be removed from the unit without causing serious damage to the unit. No seriously damaged or inoperative smoke alarm shall meet the requirements of this section. Smoke alarms powered by alkaline batteries or those powered by lithium batteries not sealed within the unit do not comply with the requirements of this section for required alarms. Additional smoke alarms which are installed but are not required by this article may be powered by alternating current or a battery. 
(e)  All smoke alarms installed in a structure, whether required or not by this section, shall be maintained in full operating condition at all times. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 31-10. - Annual registration. 
(a)  Each regulated business shall pay an annual regulatory fee in an amount as determined from time-to-time by the board of commissioners and published in the county's fee schedule. Said annual regulatory fee shall cover the cost of the quarterly inspections codified herein at section 31-12. 
(b)  A regulated business in operation prior to the enactment of this chapter shall pay its initial annual regulatory fee in its entirety on or before February 1, 2015. Thereafter, the annual regulatory fee shall be due and payable in its entirety on or before each successive January 1. 
(c)  A regulated businesses that comes into existence after the enactment of this chapter but before February 1, 2015, shall pay its initial annual regulatory fee in its entirety on or before February 1, 2015. Thereafter, the annual regulatory fee shall be due and payable in its entirety on or before each successive January 1. 
(d)  A regulated business that comes into existence after February 1, 2015, shall pay its initial annual regulatory fee at the time it applies for the license required under chapter 12. The amount of the annual regulatory fee due and payable at that time shall be the full amount then published in the county's fee schedule unless the license required under chapter 12 is sought on or after July 1 in any year, in which event the annual regulatory fee shall be 50 percent of the fee then published in the county's fee schedule. Thereafter, the annual regulatory fee shall be due and payable in its entirety on or before each successive January 1. 
(e)  The violations, penalties and recourse for late payment of the annual regulatory fee shall be the same as those set forth in section 12-5 of chapter 12 of the County Code. 
(f)  In addition to the documentation required under chapter 12, the annual regulatory fee shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  An annual registration form to be created by the county manager or his/her designee that, among other things, shall require the regulated business to affirm under oath that it is aware of this chapter, it is currently in compliance with this chapter and intends to remain in compliance for the entirety of the calendar year; and 
(2)  If the registered business is a personal care home, a copy of the most current comprehensive disaster preparedness plan that the regulated business has submitted to the State of Georgia pursuant to Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. r. 111-8-62.08(4) or any successor regulation; or 
(3)  If the registered business is a nursing home, any safety plan required to be submitted to the State of Georgia. 
(g)  By submitting a signed annual registration form, the regulated business is consenting to each and every inspection that is lawful and contemplated under this chapter. 
(h)  When issuing a license to a regulated business under chapter 12, Greene County is relying on the assertions in the annual registration form that the regulated business is in compliance with this chapter and intends to remain in compliance for the entirety of the applicable calendar year. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 31-11. - Revocation of licenses granted to regulated business under chapter 12. 
(a)  When Greene County determines: 
(1)  A regulated business has failed to comply with this chapter; or 
(2)  The annual registration form contains fraudulent information, a misrepresentation, an omission of a material fact, and/or a false and misleading statement; or 
(3)  A regulated business has refused to allow the building official to make an entry and inspection that is lawful under this chapter; 
the county manager or his/her designee shall give written notice to the contact person listed on the annual registration form via personal service or via U.S. mail (both certified and regular mail). Said written notice will advise the regulated business that a hearing shall be conducted to determine whether the license granted under chapter 12 shall be revoked. The notice shall state the time and place at which the hearing is to be held, which shall be no later than 30 days from the date of service of the written notice, unless continued by agreement. The hearing shall take place during a regular or special meeting of the Greene County Board of Commissioners. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the reason or reasons for the proposed revocation and a copy of the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  At the hearing, the regulated business shall have the right to be represented by counsel, the right to present documentary evidence and/or witness testimony and the right to cross-examine any adverse witness. After the conclusion of the hearing, a written decision will be rendered by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  In the event that a failure to comply with this chapter is the sole reason for the proposed revocation stated in the written notice, the regulated business can avoid revocation if the building official confirms that each of the deficiencies outlined in the notice has been remedied prior to the hearing date appearing in the written notice. In order to utilize this safe harbor provision, the regulated business will have to submit a written request for inspection. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 31-12. - Quarterly inspections. 
(a)  The building official shall inspect every regulated business one time during each of the four quarters of every calendar year that the business is in operation. 
(b)  The quarterly inspections shall be conducted to ensure that each regulated business is in full compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  Prior to conducting the quarterly inspections, the building official shall send via certified and regular mail a written notice announcing the time and date of the quarterly inspection. Said notice shall be sent at least ten business days prior to the inspection date set forth in the notice and addressed to the contact person listed in the most recent annual registration form filed by the regulated business. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 31-13. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of and all provisions adopted by reference in this chapter are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, unenforceability or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections, of and all provisions adopted by reference in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2014) 
Secs. 31-14—31-99. - Reserved. 
Appendix A - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the subdivision regulations of the county, effective August 8, 2017. Prior versions of the subdivision regulations were adopted October 17, 2006; and February 16, 2010, becoming effective March 1, 2010. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following the amended provisions. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Entry of approval of subdivision plat prior to recording, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d); procedures for approval of subdivision plats, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.; Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.1 - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known and be cited as the "Subdivision Regulations of Greene County, Georgia". 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 1.2. - Purpose and intent. 
These regulations are enacted for the following purposes: 
1.2.1  To encourage economically sound and stable development. 
1.2.2  To ensure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land developments. 
1.2.3  To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments. 
1.2.4  To ensure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes. 
1.2.5  To ensure that all development and construction plans will implement proper soil erosion controls. 
1.2.6  To promote a safe and healthy environment. 
1.2.7  To ensure adequate identification of property on the public records. 
1.2.8  To encourage, in general, the wise development of the county in accordance with adopted land use policies. 
1.2.9  To balance the interest in promoting the public health, safety, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of the property in question and whether the subdivision plat permits a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property and whether it will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 1.3 - Authority and jurisdiction. 
1.3.1  These regulations are adopted in accordance with, and under the power of, the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia (Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I and IV). 
1.3.2  By the same authority, the Greene County Board of Commissioners grants the Greene County Planning and Zoning Commission the right to review and recommend approving or disapproving plats of land subdivided prior to the recording of said plats in the Offices of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Greene County, Georgia within the unincorporated section of Greene County. 
1.3.3  By the same authority, the Greene County Board of Commissioners grants the Greene County Building Official the right to approve plats of land prior to the recording of said plats in the Offices of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Greene County, Georgia within the unincorporated section of Greene County, provided that the aforementioned approval is allowed and in accordance with these following subdivision regulations. 
1.3.4  By the same authority, the Greene County Planning and Zoning Commission does hereby possess and exercise the power and authority to review and recommend to approve or disapprove the development of a platted subdivision of land already recorded in the Offices of the Clerk of Superior Court of Greene County, if said plat was recorded after January 26, 1989 without prior approval of the planning and zoning commission and more than 50 percent of the platted lots have not been sold to individual owners for the purpose of providing residence for the owner, provided that any review, approval, or disapproval shall concern only the lots yet to be sold to individual owners. Subdivisions which are entirely developed or which received preliminary plat approval prior to adoption of these regulations shall be permitted to proceed in accordance with the standards in effect at the time of approval of the preliminary plat. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 1.4 - Interpretations, conflicts, and severability. 
1.4.1  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to the minimum requirements for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
1.4.2  Conflict with public and private provisions. 
1.4.2.1  Public provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul other ordinances, rules, regulations, statutes, or other provisions of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or provision of law, the more restrictive shall control. 
1.4.2.2  Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards than a private restriction, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
1.4.3  Severability. Should any term, part, provision, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or phrases of this ordinance be held unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective, in whole or in part, such determination shall not be deemed to invalidate the remaining terms, parts, provisions, section, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, or phrases of this ordinance. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 1.5 - Saving provision. 
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any subdivision development now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, resulting from such development. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 1.6 - Repeal of existing regulations. 
Upon the adoption of this ordinance, the existing land subdivision regulations of Greene County as amended are hereby repealed. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 1.7 - Amendments. 
For the purposes of protecting and providing for the public health, safety, and welfare, the Greene County Board of Commissioners may from time to time amend the provisions of these subdivision regulations. Before enacting any amendment to this ordinance, the Greene County Planning and Zoning Commission, acting for the Greene County Board of Commissioners, shall hold a public hearing. Not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days prior to the date of the said public hearing, the building and zoning office shall advertise the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Greene County. The Greene County Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold said hearing and make a recommendation to the Greene County Board of Commissioners within 30 days of the public hearing. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 1.8 - Resubdivision of land. 
For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, including variation of, part of, all of any plat, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any plat legally recorded prior to the adoption of these regulations, such parcel shall be reviewed and approved, or disapproved, in accordance with the procedures outlined in these subdivision regulations or as otherwise allowed by O.C.G.A. 15-6-67. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 1.9 - Variances. 
1.9.1  General. Where the Greene County Board of Commissioners finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations or the purpose of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may, after a public hearing before the Greene County Planning and Zoning Commission, approve a variance to these subdivision regulations; however, such a variance shall not nullify the intent and purpose of these regulations. Each variance must be viewed individually with no previous variance approved being precedent setting. The Greene County Board of Commissioners shall not approve a variance unless it shall find that all the following conditions are met: 
a.  The granting of the variance shall not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or injurious to adjacent property value or use. 
b.  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not generally applicable to adjacent property. 
c.  The variance shall not in any manner vary the provisions of the zoning ordinance of Greene County, Georgia, or official zoning map. 
d.  A public hearing be held by the planning and zoning commission on the proposed variance and it is advertised in the legal organ of the county not less than 15 days and no more than 45 days prior to the public hearing. 
1.9.2  Conditions. In approving variances, the Greene County Board of Commissioners may require such conditions that will secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. 
1.9.3  Procedures. A plat of survey and a petition for any variance shall be submitted in writing by the petitioner for the consideration by the Greene County Planning and Zoning Commission, along with payment for any applicable fees. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the request and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 1.10 - Appeals. 
1.10.1  Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision (including the failure to decide within 60 days upon submission of all documents required by this ordinance) of the building official shall have the right of appeal to the Greene County Planning and Zoning Commission, if such appeal is filed with the county manager within 30 days of the rendering of the decision by the building official. 
1.10.2  Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision (including the failure to decide within 60 days upon submission of all documents required by this ordinance) of the Greene County Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the right of appeal to the Greene County Board of Commissioners, if such appeal is filed with the County Manager of Greene County Board of Commissioners within 30 days of the rendering of the decision by the planning and zoning commission. 
1.10.3  Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Greene County Board of Commissioners shall have the right of appeal to a court of law if such appeal is filed with the clerk of court within 30 days of the rendering of the decision by the Greene County Board of Commissioners. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 1.11 - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
1.11.1  General. 
1.11.1.1  It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce these regulations, and to bring to the attention of the county manager any violation or lack of compliance herewith. 
1.11.1.2  No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision or an existing subdivision meeting the requirements of article I, subsection 1.3(3) shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a final plat of such subdivision has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and filed with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Greene County. 
1.11.1.3  No building permits shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or site subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations. 
1.11.2  Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of the ordinance is subject to trial and possible convictions, and shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or both provided that each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
1.11.3  Civil enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations; to prevent unlawful construction; to recover damages; to restrain, correct, or abate a violation; to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises; and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 1.12 - Meeting format. 
At any public hearing held hereunder, the following procedures shall be followed: 
a.  Minutes of the meeting will be taken by the Secretary of the Greene County Planning and Zoning Commission. 
b.  Public hearings shall be conducted with 15 minutes provided for the proponents and 15 minutes provided for the opponents of the proposed legislative action. If necessary, the chairman may allocate an equal amount of additional minutes for both the proponents and the opponents. 
c.  All materials which proponents desire to be considered shall be submitted by the conclusion of the proponent portion of the public hearing. 
d.  All materials or evidence which persons in opposition wish to be considered must be submitted by the conclusion of the opposition portion of the hearing. 
e.  When proponents and opponents have been heard in accordance with the foregoing procedures, the public hearing is closed and no further evidence, argument or testimony may be presented unless the record is left open based on a request for additional material or report. 
f.  Recommendations submitted by Greene County Planning and Zoning Commission to Greene County Board of Commissioners. 
g.  Decision rendered by Greene County Board of Commissioners. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of these regulations, except as specifically defined herein, all words used have their customary dictionary definitions. 

Sec. 2.1 - Definitions pertaining to grammatical usage. 
2.1.1  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
2.1.2  The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
2.1.3  The word "may" is always permissive. 
2.1.4  The word "temporary" shall mean a period of time not exceeding 180 days. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 2.2 - Definitions of specific terms. 
Alley: A platted service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
Applicant: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises. 
Average daily traffic (ADT): All traffic projected to travel along a street within one calendar day. 
Block: A continuous piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, but excluding alleys. 
Building: Any structure, either permanent or temporary, above or below ground having roof or other covering, designed, built or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building, height of: The vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the average height between the eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, measured from the average grade of the house plan, front to back and end to end. 
Building inspector: Greene County Building Official, deputy building official, or any other individual so authorized by the board of commissioners to enforce the county's building code. 
Building line: A line, parallel to the street line, beyond which the foundation wall and any roofed porch, vestibule or other such portion of a building shall not project. 
Building official: The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative. 
Central sewage system: A private sewage system including collection and treatment facilities to serve a new subdivision in an outlying area. 
Central water system: A private water system, which serves a new subdivision in an outlying area. It includes water treatment and distribution facilities. 
Common area: That portion of a site and building, which are collectively owned and controlled. 
Condominium: An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest with other purchasers in the common grounds together with a separate interest in a dwelling unit located on the common grounds. 
Construction plans: The engineering drawings submitted after approval of the preliminary plat showing the specific location, dimensions and design of the improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the design standards of these regulations. 
County: Greene County, Georgia and/or the Greene County Board of Commissioners. 
County commission: The Greene County Board of Commissioners. 
County sanitarian: The authorized county sanitarian for Greene, County Georgia. 
Crosswalk (pedestrian walkway): A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, ten feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor vehicles must yield to pedestrians. 
Cul-de-sac: A street having one end open to traffic, the other end permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
Developer: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises in order to undertake subdivision development. 
Diameter breast height (DBH): The diameter of a tree when measured at a height of approximately four feet above the ground. 
Double-frontage lot: A lot having frontage on two streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
DOT specifications: The Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for the Construction of Roads and Bridges, current edition. 
Drainage easement: An area set aside for the purpose of transporting stormwater. Maintenance of these easements is the responsibility of the private property owner unless dedicated and accepted by the county commission for maintenance. 
Driveway: An accessway connecting one or more dwelling units and their parking spaces with a street. 
Dwelling: A building that contains one or more dwelling units used, intended, or designed to be used, rented, leased, or let or hired out to be occupied for living purposes. 
Dwelling, multi-family: A building containing at least three dwelling units designed for residential use by three or more families living independently of each other. This includes apartments but not group homes, row houses, condominiums, or townhouses. 
Dwelling, single-family: A structure including site built, modular, manufactured homes, and mobile homes that contain one dwelling unit designed for residential use that is surrounded by open space on the same lot. "Single-family dwellings" that do not meet the definition of a "single-family, detached dwelling" do not need to meet the requirements for "single-family, detached dwelling" as defined below. 
Dwelling, single-family, detached: A structure including a site built or modular home that contains one dwelling unit designed for residential use that is surrounded by open space on the same lot, which meets or exceeds the following standards: 
a.  Minimum width in excess of 16 feet. 
b.  Minimum square footage required by the zone in which located. 
c.  The roof shall have a minimum roof pitch greater than 2:12 and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials. The roof overhang must be at least one foot when measured from the vertical side. 
d.  The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap. 
e.  Be attached to a permanent foundation. 
f.  Be constructed according to standards established either by the state minimum standard codes as amended from time to time or the standard building code. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex): A structure containing two dwelling units designed and arranged for residential use by two families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling unit: An enclosure containing sleeping, kitchen, and bathroom facilities designed for and used or held ready for use as a permanent residence by one family. 
Easement: A grant of one or more property rights by the owner to, or for the use by, the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
Engineer: A registered, professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia. 
Grade: The rate of change in elevation, in feet per 100 feet, between two points along the center line of a road or street and expressed as a percent. 
Grading: Altering surfaces to specific elevations, dimensions, or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Health department: Greene County Health Department. 
Improvements guarantee: A guarantee in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or a bond to insure completion of required subdivision improvements. 
Individual sewage disposal system: A septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device approved by the sanitarian. 
Individual well: Wells not covered by EPD standards. Normally this will mean wells that serve no more than three lots. 
Intra-family land transfer: A division of land within one or more specified land use districts that creates at least one additional lot but not more than four additional lots, each of which is not less than one acre nor more than five acres in size, where each and every lot within the subdivision is conveyed to the children, spouse and children, surviving heirs, in-laws, immediate relatives of the property owner, or some combination thereof, and where no more than one lot in the subdivision is deeded to any one individual. Each lot created in an intra-family land transfer is conveyed by final plat, and each lot meets the requirements of this ordinance for access, lot size, and lot width. This definition shall not include or authorize any land subdivision that involves or will involve the creation of lots for sale or otherwise involves a property transfer for money, tangible or intangible personal property, real property exchanges, or other conveyances for consideration. 
Land use plan: A development plan or any part thereof, adopted by the county commission that indicates the general location for the various physical classes of public works, places and structures, and depicts the general planned physical development and land use in Greene County, Georgia. 
Lot: A portion of, or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description, metes and bounds, intended for transfer of ownership or for building development and having a separate tax parcel reference number designated in the office of Greene County Tax Commissioner or Greene County Tax Assessor. 
Lot area: The service area inside the lot lines. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no portion of the right-of-way of a street or crosswalk may be included. 
Lot, corner: A lot abutting on two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot coverage: The service area occupied by all buildings within a lot. 
Lot depth: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot improvement: Any building, structure, work of art, or other object, or alteration of the land, constituting a physical betterment of real property. 
Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot or double frontage lot. 
Lot width: The horizontal distance between one side lot line and the other side lot line measured at the minimum front setback line. 
Minimum stopping sight distance: The shortest distance in which a driver, seated in a standard size automobile, can see a six-inch-high object lying in the same traffic lane and bring to a stop, before striking the object, while traveling at the design or posted rate of speed. 
Mortgage lot: A lot which is created for the primary or sole purpose of meeting the requirement of a bank or lending institution for a loan or mortgage in cases where the property descriptions must be smaller than the total acreage of the tract on which the principal building that is the subject of the loan is located. 
Nonresidential subdivision: A subdivision whose intended use is other than residential. 
Open space: Land that is designed, developed, or reserved for recreation, gardens, resource protection, amenity, or buffers that may or may not be accessible to the residents of the development and/or the public. In no event will any area of a privately owned residential lot, any existing or future road right-of-ways, any off street parking or loading space area be counted as open space. To encourage the use of parkways and green pathways, areas within right-of-ways that are in excess of the required Greene County right-of-way widths as stipulated in the zoning ordinance and in the subdivision regulations may be counted toward open space requirements. To encourage the use of buffers around commercial tracts, within the commercial planned unit development district, designated buffers and parks may be counted as open space. 
Outlot: A lot that is either unbuildable or not intended for development and allocated to be used for esthetic purposes, safety, or common public use. 
Owner: Any person who has title to real property. In the case where equitable title is vested in more than one person, authorization by all parties claiming a title to the property in question shall be provided to the governing authority prior to any review and application of the provisions of these regulations. Owners are not holders of security deeds or mortgages on the property. 
Parcel: A plot or plots of land that are shown with a separate identification on the official appraisal maps of Greene County. 
Permit: An official document or certificate issued by the authority having jurisdiction that authorizes performance of a specified activity. 
Person: An individual, trust, partnership, committee, association, corporation, company, labor organization, or any other organization or group of persons. 
Planning and zoning commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of Greene County, Georgia. 
Plat: A drawing, map or survey of a lot, tract or parcel of land including lot lines, street rights-of-way and easements, with the dimensions of these features inscribed thereon to scale, and prepared in accordance with the Georgia Plat Act. 
Plat, final: The final plan of the subdivision and any accompanying documents as required by these regulations that, once approved in accordance with the procedures outlined in these subdivision regulations, will constitute the plat of record that will be the basis for the authorization of building permits. The final plat will be prepared in accordance with the Georgia Plat Act. 
Plat, preliminary: The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these regulations, indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision that is to be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for recommendation for approval or disapproval to the board of commissioners. 
Principal building: A building in which is conducted the predominant use of the lot on which it is situated. 
Public improvement: Any drainage, ditch, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the county may ultimately assume the responsibility or liability, for maintenance or operation, or which may affect an improvement for which county responsibility and liability is established. 
Public street: A street over which the general public has acquired the right of use. 
Resubdivision: A change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout, easement, area reserved for public use, or lot line. 
Right-of-way: That area, distinguished from an easement, which is recorded in the clerk of the superior court in Greene County, for the present or future use of roads, streets, and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
Right-of-way line: The designated limits of a right-of-way, whether such right-of-way is established by usage, recorded easement, deed, and dedication or by an official right-of-way map of Greene County, Georgia. 
Right-of-way width: The distance between right-of-way lines measured at right angles. 
Sanitarian: A professional sanitarian appointed by the health department and authorized to perform health services in Greene County, Georgia. 
Shoulder: The portion of a street or road from the outer edge of the paved surface or curb to the inside edge of the ditch, gutter or original ground surface. 
Sidewalk: The portion of the right-of-way that is adjacent to a street or road that is intended for pedestrian traffic. 
Sketch plan: A generalized representation of the proposed subdivision submitted prior to the preliminary plat that will enable the developer to reach general agreement with the building official as to the form of the plat and the objectives of these regulations. 
Slope ratio: The rise or fall of a side slope expressed as a ratio of horizontal to vertical. 
Soil erosion and sedimentation ordinance: The soil erosion ordinance of Greene County, Georgia. 
Street: A right-of-way for vehicular traffic designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, freeway, road, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane place, circle, or otherwise. Various subclassifications are defined as follows: 
a.  Arterial: A street carrying a high volume of traffic and connecting two or more large areas or populated centers. Direct residential access from a subdivision is prohibited and commercial, industrial, or institutional lot access is controlled and limited. 
b.  Major collector: May carry the volume of at least two minor collector streets in addition to its own volume generated by development along the street. 
c.  Minor collector: May carry the volume of at least one local street in addition to traffic generated by development along the street. 
d.  Local street: Carries only the traffic generated on the street itself. 
e.  Cul-de-sac: A local street having one end open to traffic, the other being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
f.  Dead end: A stub street in a subdivision that may, at a later time, be continued into another portion of the subdivision. 
Street, county: A street that is owned or maintained by Greene County, Georgia. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to, the following: site built buildings, manufactured, mobile and modular homes, swimming pools, and signs. 
Structure, existing: A structure erected prior to the date of adoption of the appropriate code, or one for which a current legal building permit has been issued. 
Subdivision: A division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building development, whether immediate or future, including all division of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets. The word "subdivision" includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to the actual land or area which is subdivided. 
Subdivision, major: All divisions of land which meet the said definition of "subdivision" but is not a "minor" subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land may or may not involve the construction of a new public or private street. 
Subdivision, minor: A subdivision of not more than five lots, which does not involve the construction of a new public or private street. Any improvements to an existing public street abutting the tract proposed for minor subdivision, or the installation of utilities along said existing public road, as may be required to comply with this ordinance, shall be done according to plans and permit requirements of this ordinance, but said requirements shall not subject the minor subdivision to the requirements for a major subdivision as specified in this ordinance. 
Surveyor: A registered, practicing surveyor licensed by the State of Georgia. 
Variance: A minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading ordinances as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, not due to the fault of the owner of said property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
Yard: An open space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by this code, on the lot on which a building is situated. 
Zoning ordinance: The zoning ordinance of Greene County, Georgia. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATION AND DESIGN 

Sec. 3.1 - General requirements. 
3.1.1  Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules, regulations and ordinances: 
a.  All applicable statutory provisions, as amended; 
b.  The zoning ordinance of Greene County, Georgia, building and housing codes, and all other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdictions, as amended; 
c.  The standards balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of the property in question and whether the subdivision plat permits a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property and whether it will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
d.  Any and all rules of the Greene County Health Department or appropriate state agencies, as amended; 
e.  The regulations of the Georgia Department of Transportation, if the subdivision or any lot contained herein adjoins, or is directly adjacent to a state highway, as amended; 
f.  The soil erosion and sedimentation ordinance of Greene County, Georgia, as amended. 
3.1.2  Plats straddling political boundaries. Whenever access to a subdivision is required across land in another governmental jurisdiction, the Greene County Planning and Zoning Commission may request various assurances that access is legally established from the other governmental jurisdiction and the access road is adequately improved. 
3.1.3  Suitability of the land. Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, erosion, geological hazards, topographical limitations, for other reasons that classify land as unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or property destruction. 
3.1.4  Rejection of land dedicated. Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land for public use and it is determined by the planning and zoning commission that such land is not suitable for the proposed public use, the planning and zoning commission shall refuse to approve either the preliminary or final plat until such dedication is removed from the plat. 
3.1.5  Water retention structures. No water retention structure shall be shown to be dedicated or accepted by Greene County, Georgia. When the planning and zoning commission finds such structure is recorded on a plat, such dedication shall be stricken from the plat prior to approval. 
3.1.6  Subdivision name. The planning and zoning commission shall have final authority to approve the name of the subdivision, which shall be determined at the time of approval of the preliminary plat. 
3.1.7  Large scale developments. The requirements of these regulations may be modified in the case of a large scale community, commercial or neighborhood development in excess of 15 acres that is not subdivided into customary lots, blocks, and streets. Such modifications shall conform to the purpose and intent of these regulations, and shall follow the requirements for a planned unit development (PUD) or commercial planned unit development (CPUD) as included in the zoning regulations of Greene County, Georgia, in effect at the time they are revised. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.2 - Required improvements. 
3.2.1  General. The requirements of this section shall apply to every subdivision and shall be planned for and provided by the developer, by installation or payment prior to the approval of the final plat. 
3.2.2  Street names. All streets shall be named and marked with signs. Street names shall have the approval of the 911 director and county manager or said individuals' designees and shall not duplicate, nor closely approximate phonetically or visually, the name of any other street in Greene County, Georgia, nor the name of any other street within the applicable postal delivery area. A street that is in alignment with an existing street shall continue the name of the existing street. Approval of the street names by said county officials shall be furnished by the applicant to the building official upon submittal of the final plat for planning and zoning commission approval. 
3.2.3  Streets. All streets shall be designed, constructed and paved in accordance with the standards set forth in these regulations. No street shall be accepted by the county until it has been open for public use for two years or until one-half of the lots in the subdivision, or the section of the subdivision served by that street, have had residences constructed upon them, whichever occurs first. The developer shall be required to furnish and install all necessary traffic control signs prior to opening any street to the public. In addition, the developer shall be required to provide a viable ground cover such as grass on all unpaved areas of street rights-of-way or other public areas. Any necessary maintenance or repairs to streets shall be performed by the developer prior to county acceptance. Additionally, acceptance of any street into the county-maintained road inventory can only be accomplished by an affirmative vote of the board of commissioners. 
3.2.4  Street signs and traffic control devices. Street name signs and traffic control devices of a design approved by the county will be furnished and installed by the developer. Material and installation costs shall be paid for by the developer prior to the recording of the final plat and issuance of any building permits. 
3.2.5  Utilities. These provisions shall apply: (Utility requirements must meet the minimums specified in the zoning ordinance). 
3.2.5.1  All utility lines shall be installed along street rights-of-way. All utilities shall be underground whenever possible. Such utility installations may include water, sanitary sewer, electric power, natural gas, telephone, and cable television. Underground utilities shall be buried at locations not under pavement whenever possible. Where service lines to individual lots are required to cross streets, such lines shall be placed, extended to the opposite right-of-way line and backfilled prior to the placing of any base and pavement. Where local conditions dictate, the planning and zoning commission may approve installation of utilities in other locations. 
3.2.5.2  If a public or private water system with adequate capacity and water main sizes can serve the proposed subdivision (the proposed new subdivision must lie within 1,500 feet of an existing water system), water mains shall be installed by the developer within the subdivision with connections from the existing, neighboring system to each lot extended to the lot line. If a water system is not available, the developer shall provide a water supply through a community water system or allow individual wells in conformity with the regulations of the Greene County Health Department, EPD standards and this ordinance. 
3.2.5.3  If a public or private sanitary sewer system with adequate capacity and sewer main sizes can serve the proposed subdivision, sewer mains shall be installed by the developer with connections from the existing, neighboring system to each lot extended to the lot line. If a public sewer system is not available, the developer shall provide a community sewage collection system or allow individual septic tank systems in conformity with the regulations of the Greene County Health Department and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
3.2.6  Storm drainage. 
3.2.6.1  General. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings. Individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to connect to drainage easements. 
3.2.6.2  Connection to existing systems. If an existing stormwater drainage system can serve the proposed subdivision, then the developer must install an underground storm drainage system which will be connected to the existing system. If an existing storm drainage system is not present, then adequate surface drainage facilities shall be installed. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.3 - Residential subdivision design standards. 
3.3.1  Block lengths and widths. 
3.3.1.1  Blocks shall not be greater than 1,200 feet nor less than 400 feet in length, except in unusual circumstances. 
3.3.1.2  Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of minimum depth except where abutting arterial streets or railroads or other situations make these requirements impractical. 
3.3.1.3  Blocks shall have pedestrian walkways of not less than five feet in width where deemed essential by the Greene County Board of Commissioners to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. 
3.3.1.4  Except where topographical or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, as determined by the Greene County Commissioners, culs-de-sac (dead-end streets) shall not be greater than 1,200 feet in length. Paved temporary turnarounds shall be provided for dead-end streets, which are scheduled to be extended at a later date. 
3.3.2  Lots abutting public streets. Each lot shall abut upon a publicly dedicated and maintained street or a private vehicular way designated by the county as providing public access within a development. 
3.3.3  Lot size. All lots shall conform to the regulations of the Greene County Board of Commissioners including, but not limited to, the provisions of the zoning ordinances, specifically those provisions governing minimum area, frontage and setbacks. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with county regulations and in providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved street. 
3.3.4  Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the zoning ordinance. All lots approved under these regulations shall front on a street or private access drive. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the building official may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning ordinance and the regulations. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for construction of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setbacks. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the zoning ordinance. Commercial and industrial lots shall be of adequate size to provide for the intended use and for the yards, buffer areas, and the off-street parking and loading requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
3.3.5  Side lot lines. All side lot lines shall be as nearly perpendicular to or radial to street rights-of-way lines as possible, unless topographic or other features of the design require otherwise. 
3.3.6  Double and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of development from arterial streets or to overcome specific disadvantages or topographic and orientation. 
3.3.7  Front yard setbacks. A line meeting the front yard setback requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be established on all lots. Any projection beyond the front building line such as uncovered porches, steps, eaves, gutters, and similar fixtures shall be subject to provisions of the zoning ordinance and approved or disapproved by the appropriate county official for each individual application. 
3.3.8  Easements. The Greene County Board of Commissioners shall require all easements to have adequate widths and be located along the rear or side lot lines with provision for access from a public way. 
3.3.9  Reserve strips. Reserve strips which control access to public streets and public grounds shall be permitted only when the control of the reserve strip is placed in the hands of the county. No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. Every development shall be designed to facilitate access to adjoining properties that are developed or anticipated to be developed in a manner substantially similar to the subject property. 
3.3.10  Preservation of natural features and amenities. Existing features, which would add value to residential development or the local government as a whole, such as trees, as herein defined, watercourses and falls, beaches, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.4 - Non-residential subdivision design standards. 
3.4.1  If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision shall conform to these subdivision regulations. Land zoned for agricultural purposes is excluded from the regulations of this section. 
3.4.2  A non-residential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth in the zoning ordinance. Site plan approval and non-residential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the planning and zoning commission. 
3.4.3  In addition to the principles and standards in the subdivision regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning and zoning commission that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
a.  A preliminary plat of a commercial or industrial center development shall conform in all respects with the approved master development plan for the project and any conditions associated with the project's zoning. 
b.  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development associated. 
c.  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
d.  Special requirements may be imposed by the building official with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction. 
e.  Special requirements may be imposed by the building official with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and stormwater drainage. 
f.  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
g.  Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.5 - Design standards for streets. 
3.5.1  General. In order to provide for roads suitable in location, width, and improvement, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards for roads are hereby required and shall be planned for and provided by the developer, prior to the approval of the final plat. Road classifications may be indicated on the comprehensive plan, otherwise they shall be determined by the Greene County Board of Commissioners. 
3.5.2  Classification of streets. Streets shall be classified into a street hierarchy system and street design standards shall be based on road function and projected average daily trips (ADT), calculated with trip generation rates published in the "Trip Generation Manual," 1998 Edition. Residential lots shall require ten trips per day per single-family lot and 16 trips per day per two-family lots. Street classes and their corresponding average daily trips (ADT) are: 

 
3.5.3  Geometric design standards for streets. Geometric design standards for roads and streets shall be based on Table 3.5.3. 
GEOMETRIC DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS  TABLE 3.5.3 

 
Notes: 
(1) Terrain classification shall be as follows: 
Level—Cross slope range from 0% to 8% 
Rolling—Cross slope range from greater than 8% to 15% 
Hilly—Cross slope range from over 15% 
(2) Where curb and gutter is not required, the shoulder shall slope away from the pavement at a slope of six percent. Where curb and gutter is required, the shoulder shall slope toward the curb at a slope of four percent. 
(3) All shoulder widths are measured either from the edge of pavement or back of curb. 
(4) No existing or proposed cut or fill slope shall [be] 3:1 within 11 feet of the roadway shoulder as specified above. Beyond said 11 feet, the slope is preferred to be 3:1, but may increase to a maximum of 2:1 until intersecting existing grade. All cut and fill must be confined to the right-of-way or slope easements. 
3.5.4  Base and paving design. Base and paving design standard specifications shall be based on Table 3.5.4. 
TABLE 3.5.4  MINIMUM BASE AND PAVEMENT DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS 

 
Notes: 
(1) Pavement widths do not include curb and gutter. 
(2) Pavement in tangent sections shall have a parabolic crown of at least one-eighth inch per foot. 
(3) Curves shall contain no reverse super elevation with the exception of turnarounds, alleys, access drives, and local streets. 
(4) Curb and gutter shall be Standard 9032B of the Georgia Department of Transportation or roll curbing. 
(5) If the finished pavement on any street has a total thickness of less than four inches, the underlying base course shall be primed. 
(6) On any paved street that does not have curb and gutter, the underlying base course shall be of a design thickness and compaction such that it extends to six inches outside the pavement edge. 
3.5.5  Continuation of existing streets. Where feasible, existing streets shall be extended for access into the subdivision. Such extensions shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case shall be less than the required width. 
3.5.6  Vertical curves. 
1.  All transitions in profile grade, between successive vertical tangents having an algebraic difference greater than one percent, shall be by means of a parabolic curve. 
2.  All changes in street profile grades having algebraic difference greater than one percent shall be connected by a parabolic curve having a minimum length (L) equal to the product of the algebraic difference between the grades in percent (A) and the design constant (K) assigned to the street according to its category (i.e., L=KA). 
3.  Constant (K) values are shown in the Table 3.5.6 for minimum acceptable values. 
TABLE 3.5.6  CONSTANT (K) VALUES FOR VERTICAL CURVES 

 
3.5.7  Clear sight distance at intersections. There shall be a minimum clear sight distance at intersections when measured from a height of six feet, as follows: 
Arterial streets: 400 feet 
Collector streets: 300 feet 
Local streets (nonresidential): 250 feet 
Local street (residential): 200 feet 
Alleys: 150 feet 
Where two or more streets of different classifications intersect, the sight distance requirement for the highest classification street shall be used. 
Where any street intersection will involve slopes or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by reducing sight distance below specified minimums, the developer must cut such ground or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to comply with the sight distance of these regulations. 
3.5.8  Intersection design. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees. For minor collector and arterial streets, street intersections must be separated from each other by at least 125 feet measured along the right-of-way line. For major collector and arterial streets, street intersections must be separated as defined in the "Georgia Department of Transportation Design Policy Manual" where feasible, but in no case be spaced less than 600 feet apart as measured between centerlines of said streets. 
3.5.9  Culs-de-sac. All culs-de-sac shall meet street requirements for local streets (residential) except any cul-de-sac approved for a length greater than 1,200 feet or more than 25 dwelling units shall meet design criteria for a minor collector street. 
3.5.10  Turnaround. Turnarounds shall be provided at the end of cul-de-sac or dead-end roads with the exception of private access drives. The preferred method of turnaround is to provide a cul-de-sac. Local streets may utilize alternate turnaround designs such as "T", "Y", or "Branch" turnarounds. Turnaround dimensions shall meet the dimensional requirements illustrated in Figure 3.5.10 and defined on Table 3.5.19 below. 
1.  Rights-of-way: The right-of-way width at the turnarounds will be a minimum of the required for the street classification or a minimum of ten feet beyond the edge of turnaround pavement, whichever one is greater. 
2.  Parking is not permitted within the area of the required turnaround. If parking is provided it must be outside the turnaround travel lanes. 
FIGURE 3.5.10  CUL-DE-SAC AND TURNAROUND REQUIREMENTS 

TABLE 3.5.10  CUL-DE-SAC AND TURNAROUND DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

 
3.5.11  Private access drives. Private access drives shall be permitted to serve no more than three land-locked residential lots where, due to special circumstances created as a result of necessary unusual platting configuration, or as a result of special physical features, the property could not otherwise be developed. No more than one such drive shall be approved per subdivision development submission and must be approved as part of the original plat for the subdivision, section, or phase. These drives are exempt from paving requirements but shall be, as a minimum, surfaced with crusher run stone, six-inch depth and a minimum width of 16 feet. Private access drives shall have the same right-of-way as is required for local streets. 
3.5.12  Subdivision entrance from an existing street. When a subdivision entrance ties into an existing public street or road this entrance shall meet all state and local requirements for intersection design. This shall include adding required turn lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes, additional right-of-way and all necessary signs and signals that may be required for the existing public road as well as those required for the subdivision street. 
3.5.13  Alleys. Alleys, 20 feet in width, may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial, or industrial development. Alleys in single-family residential subdivisions shall not be permitted, unless the developer provides evidence satisfactory to the Greene County Board of Commissioners of the need for such alleys Dead-end alleys without a turnaround are prohibited. Alleys shall conform to the design requirements for local streets except that the county may require that the base and paving structure be equal to that of a higher street classification if the anticipated loading of the pavement warrants. 
3.5.14  Development along arterial street. Where a subdivision abuts an existing arterial street or railroad right-of-way, an access street approximately parallel to and on either or both sides of the existing right-of-way may be required by the Greene County Board of Commissioners. Direct access from a subdivision to the arterial street will not be permitted. A buffer zone restricting access to the arterial right-of-way may be used in conjunction with or in lieu of the access street. 
3.5.15  Slope maintenance easements. Slope maintenance easements shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide finished slopes that conform to the requirements of Table 3.5.3. 
3.5.16  Sidewalks. The inclusion of sidewalks within subdivisions is encouraged. When included, sidewalks shall be within a dedicated non-paved right-of-way of roads within the subdivision or other prescribed areas. The minimum paved width of sidewalks shall be five feet and a median strip of grassed or landscaped areas shall generally separate all residential sidewalks from adjacent streets except when contiguous to parking areas. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed to the requirements of Georgia Department of Transportation Construction Standard 9031-W. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.6 - Slopes. 
3.6.1  General requirements. Development of subdivisions is to be accomplished with minimal earth moving and disruption to the natural topography of the site. It is the intent of these regulations that existing or man-made slopes be modified or designed in such a way as to minimize potential for erosion and to maximize ease of maintenance. Subdivision development shall conform to provisions of the erosion, and sedimentation and pollution control ordinance. 
3.6.2  Design standards. 
3.6.2.1  Streets shall be planned so that finished slopes, cut or fill, will have a slope no steeper than 3:1. If conditions mandate steeper slopes the following will apply: no finished cut slope shall exceed a rate of slope of 2:1 unless the slope is composed of rock, and no fill slope will exceed a rate of 2:1. All cut and fill shall be within the prescribed right-of-way of the road or slope easements. All grading as provided within this section shall be completed and approved by the building official prior to the installation of any utilities. 
3.6.2.2  All fill slopes created for the purpose of street construction shall have a compaction of not less than 95 percent relative density as established engineering practices. 
3.6.2.3  Slopes flatter than those set forth in the foregoing paragraphs may be required when, in the opinion of the building official, the general nature of the soil involved warrants a flatter slope. To control surface drainage on existing and proposed slopes, berm ditches may be required at the top and the intersection of the slope and ground line. 
3.6.2.4  All manmade slopes within the subdivision shall be planted or otherwise protected from erosion and failure. Such planting or other protection shall commence immediately upon completion of any individual slope and proceed without delay until completed. The type of grass or ground cover shall be in accord with subsection 3.19.1.2 of these regulations. Any other protection used shall be specified by the developer and approved by the building official prior to work commencing on the site. In addition, the developer may be required to provide suitable protection along the top of natural slopes within the subdivision that have a slope greater than 2:1 in order to protect children and other residents of the subdivision from falls. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.7 - Drainage. 
3.7.1  General requirements. The stormwater drainage system and easements shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and easement. The planning and zoning commission shall not recommend for approval any plat of a subdivision which does not make adequate provision for stormwater or floodwater runoff channels or basins. Stormwater runoff and storm sewer or channel design shall be designed and certified by a professional licensed by the State of Georgia to perform such design, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted to the building official along with the construction plans. Inlets shall be provided in curbs or in curb and gutter at a maximum spacing of 600 feet. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at any point, no further allowance shall be made for flow at that point and water shall be diverted from the street. Natural drainage channels existing within a subdivision shall be improved by the developer to specifications approved by the building official (if erosion, flooding, or hazard will be created by the continued existence thereof, as determined by the building official). 
3.7.2  Nature of stormwater facilities. 
3.7.2.1  Location. The applicant may be required by the building official to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previous to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the building official. 
3.7.2.2  Accessibility of public storm sewers. When a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of stormwater, subject to the specifications of the building official. If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the building official, the developer shall make arrangements for future stormwater disposal by a public utility system at the time the final plat receives final approval. 
3.7.2.3  Accommodation of upstream drainage facilities. A culvert or other drainage facility shall be, in each case, large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area whether inside or outside the subdivision. The building official shall provide the necessary requirements, which have been designed by a professional engineer, based on 110 percent of the current storm runoff for the 100-year storm for culverts under streets, and the 25-year storm for all other culverts. Minimum pipe size shall be 18 inches, inside diameter for streets and 15 inches, inside diameter for individual residential drives. 
3.7.2.4  Effect on downstream drainage areas. The developer shall study and the building official shall review and approve the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Drainage studies, together with such other studies deemed appropriate shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the Greene County Board of Commissioners shall withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of said condition. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage is provided to an adequate watercourse or facility. 
3.7.2.5  Stormwater management report required. 
a.  Every project shall provide a stormwater management report prepared by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia. The purpose of this report shall be to formulate a plan to manage stormwater runoff so that stormwater runoff hazards are not created and existing runoff-related problems are not exacerbated, either upstream or downstream from or within the boundaries of the property being developed. 
b.  The stormwater management report shall identify the locations and quantities of stormwater runoff entering and exiting the site for both pre- and post-development in addition to addressing existing conditions. Analysis of the off-site properties shall anticipate future development in addition to addressing existing conditions, it shall contain drainage area delineation maps and other exhibits at satisfactory scale and sufficient in quantity and scope to define the boundaries of the site relative to watercourses, drainage divides, drainage structures, and other pertinent features. 
c.  The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainageway "immediately" downstream from the project. This area shall generally extend a flow distance of about one-half mile from the project's boundary line, but shall be longer for projects contributing relatively large amounts of runoff to the study area, and shorter for small runoff contributors. In all cases, the most critical downstream area investigation shall be conducted relative to existing and anticipated land uses on tracts, which adjoin the project site. 
3.7.2.6  Storm detention required. 
a.  Whenever a stormwater management report indicates that adverse stormwater runoff related impact is expected to result from the development of property, that project shall be required to provide stormwater detention facilities such that peak flows from the developed site do not exceed those associated with predevelopment conditions. 
b.  The following criteria shall be evaluated by the engineer preparing the stormwater management report, and in determining whether or not detention should be required for any portion of any site: 
1.  Existing land uses downstream. 
2.  Anticipated future land uses downstream. 
3.  Magnitude of increase in peak flows due to development. 
4.  Presence of existing drainage problems. 
5.  Capacity of existing and anticipated drainage problems. 
6.  Creation of concentrated flows where none had occurred previously. 
7.  Availability of feasible locations for detention facilities. 
8.  Existing flows generated off-site which pass through the project site. 
9.  Anticipated future flows generated off-site that pass through the project site. 
10.  The nature of the recovering watercourse. 
c.  Stormwater drainage facilities shall be required for any portion of any site for which development activities will result in increased flows, unless the registered professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia certifies and provides certified documentation supporting the conclusion to the building official that the following is true and correct as applicable: 
1.  The nondetained, post-development runoff will leave the project sites sheet flow, and will not have an adverse impact upon downstream properties. 
2.  The effect of detention would be to concentrate flows where sheet flow had occurred under pre-developed conditions, and any impact of increase sheet flows upon downstream properties would be less adverse than that which would result from the concentrated flows from a detention facility even if energy dissipation devices were employed. 
3.  The runoff will flow directly into a floodplain without crossing off-site properties, and the runoff will constitute less than five percent of the total runoff in the watercourse at the point where the watercourse crosses the project site's downstream property line. 
4.  The undetained flow will pass through downstream properties, in drainage easements obtained by the developer, to an existing detention facility, which has been designed to manage the upstream property's runoff. 
d.  In the event that the professional engineer has concluded that stormwater detention may not be necessary and compliance with subsection (6)(c) is not anticipated, a pre-design conference with the building official shall be required before the submittal of plans. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.8 - Detention design criteria—General. 
3.8.1  All stormwater detention design calculations shall be certified by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia. 
3.8.2  All stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to control the peak flow rates associated with storms having two-year, ten-year and 25-year return frequencies. Where conditions warrant, the 100-year storm shall also be regulated. 
3.8.3  A variety of method of achieving stormwater management goals shall be acceptable in providing detention facilities. The type of facility provided shall be based on the following criteria: 
a.  The type of development for which the detention facility is being provided. 
b.  The type of development, which the detention facility is designed to protect. 
c.  Volume of stormwater to be stored. 
d.  Origin and magnitude of the flows to be managed. 
e.  Topographic opportunities and limitations. 
f.  Safety considerations. 
g.  Maintenance requirements. 
h.  Aesthetic considerations. 
i.  Likelihood of facility operation interfering with access to public or private facilities. 
j.  Proximity of facility to property lines, utilities, buffers, etc., and 
k.  Similar site-specific constraints. 
3.8.4  Detention facilities may be of any of the following types, and two or more types may be used in combination with one another: 
a.  Normally dry basins, whether excavated or created by damming a natural drainage feature, or a combination of both methods; 
b.  Lakes and ponds, whether excavated or created by damming a natural drainage feature, or combination of both methods; 
c.  Parking lot facilities; 
d.  Underground facilities; and 
e.  Roof top facilities. 
3.8.5  Reservoir routing methods shall be used for all detention facility design. 
3.8.6  The detention methodology required for any given project shall conform to the following table. Although the various methods shown are authorized, it shall be the responsibility of the design engineer to use the correct coefficient and applications that will result in compliance with the requirements of this article and the intent of these specifications. 
TABLE 3.8.6  DETENTION METHODOLOGY BY DRAINAGE BASIN SIZE 

 
a.  For the purpose of these regulations, a drainage basin includes all of the acreage which will contribute flow to a study point (or area) along a downstream property line of the site being developed. 
b.  All sub-basins draining a project which fall within the same size category above should be analyzed using the same methodology. 
c.  Under no circumstances will the "bowstring" method be acceptable. 
3.8.7  If either the rational method or the SCS method is used for detention design, calculations shall be provided showing how all times of concentration or lag times were computed, both for pre- and post-developed conditions. Likewise, adequate support must be provided for all composite runoff coefficients or curve numbers used. 
3.8.8  If a computer program is used for detention design, including generating and routing hydrographs, the output from the program shall be summarized in the stormwater management report, and the name and version of the program shall be indicated. Computer output sheets may be attached to the report if desired by the design engineer or if requested by the planning and zoning commission. 
3.8.9  The design of every detention facility of any type shall consider the effects both of inflows in excess of those the facility is designed to accommodate and of malfunctioning of the primary outlet system. A safe path for overflow condition flows shall be provided. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.9 - Dedication of drainage easements. 
3.9.1  General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Whenever possible, it is desirable that drainage be maintained by appropriate means of adequate width for maximum potential volume or flow. 
3.9.2  Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road right-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. Easements less than 20 feet may be approved by the building official. When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision and outside a natural drain, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plat. The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee simple or by drainage easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainageways. Final plats for all subdivisions shall show (or include by note) a ten-foot-wide drainage easement along every property line whether the developer intends to channel water in these easements or not. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.10 - Water facilities. 
3.10.1  General requirements. 
3.10.1.1  Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create a water-supply district for the purpose of providing domestic water use and fire protection. 
3.10.1.2  Water distribution system, either public or private shall conform to the following: Where a public water supply system is proposed, service laterals through the curb line for each parcel and lot, and fire hydrants shall be provided. When a public water line is available within 1,500 feet of said subdivision, the subdivision system shall be connected to said public system, based on the provisions of the utility services delivery, intergovernmental contract. 
3.10.1.3  Detailed information must be provided by the developer that the water and sewer system has adequate capacity to supply water and treat sanitary sewage from the proposed development. 
3.10.1.4  To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed districts, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the construction drawings and the costs of installing same shall be included in the improvement guarantee to be furnished by the developer. 
3.10.1.5  A copy of the as-built water plans shall be submitted to the building official. 
3.10.2  Individual wells and central water systems. If no public water or sanitary sewer system is available within 1,500 feet of the proposed development, lots may be served by individual wells and/or a central water system. Such wells and central water system must meet all applicable local, state and federal requirements for such facilities. Applicant shall furnish copy of EPD permit. Applicant shall also furnish certified documents showing of the number of lots to be served by the permit, the number of lots presently existing and the number of additional lots proposed with the application. 
3.10.3  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants or provisions for fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions except those served by individual wells. Fire hydrants shall be located in areas of development no more than 900 feet apart for fire insurance rating purposes and within 500 feet of any structure and shall be approved by the fire official. For residential lots deeper than 300 feet, the fire hydrant shall be located within 200 feet of a property pin of the lots it is to serve. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with fire hydrants themselves and all other water supply improvements shall be installed before placement of any base or pavement on any street within a subdivision. All fire hydrants shall be set plumb with outlets 18 inches above finished grade or 12 inches above a finished concrete surface. All fire hydrants shall have at least two, two and one-half-inch discharge outlets and one, four and one-half-inch discharge outlet. All threads shall comply with local and state firefighting equipment standards. Subdivisions without a water tower must provide fire protection via installing necessary appurtenances (i.e., lines, stubs, gates, etc.) for future connection to a water tower. In the event the water system serving the subdivision is incapable of producing optimal flow for fire protection, the planning and zoning commission and building official are also authorized to accept alternate arrangements such as dry hydrants that further the intended goal of providing adequate water supply for fire protection purposes. These appurtenances shall be in compliance with the current International Fire Code. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.11 - Sewage disposal systems. 
3.11.1  Individual disposal system requirements. If public or private sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance and soil analysis study shall be made as directed by the county sanitarian and the results submitted to the health department. The individual disposal system, including the size of the septic tanks and size of the tile fields or other secondary treatment device, is required to be approved by the county sanitarian prior to installation. 
3.11.2  Design standards. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the EPD. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.12 - Utilities. 
3.12.1  Location. Overhead utility lines shall be located along the front, side or rear property lines, or such other location as may be approved by the utility companies involved. The facilities for underground utilities or conduits for their construction shall, whenever possible, be in place prior to the construction of any base or paving on streets. All facilities for utilities shall, where possible, be placed in easements provided for that purpose in the subdivision or located as approved by the building official. 
3.12.2  Easements. Utility easements for electric and telephone service lines, sewerage lines, water lines, or other such utilities located along rear lot lines or side lot lines or passing through a lot shall be a minimum of ten feet wide. Easements along lot lines shall be centered on the lines. Additional width may be required if determined necessary by the building official. Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the installation of utilities along the rear lot lines, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided alongside lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Secs. 3.13—3.17 - Reserved. 
Sec. 3.18 - Lot development. 
3.18.1  Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of drainage water from any lot to adjacent lots. 
3.18.2  Debris and waste. No waste materials of any kind shall be buried. 
3.18.3  Soil stabilization. All lots shall have the dirt stabilized from the roadside edge of the unpaved right-of-way to a distance of 25 feet behind the principal structure on the lot. Sod or any approved grass seed, mulch or other approved method may be used to comply with any requirement of soil stabilization set forth herein. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.19 - Construction standards for roads and streets. 
The following minimum specifications for the construction of roads and streets are hereby required and shall be adhered to by the developer: 
3.19.1.  Clearing and grubbing. This work shall consist of the removing and disposing of all vegetation and debris within the right-of-way except such objects that may be designated on the plans to remain. 
a.  Clearing. Clearing consists of the removal and disposal of all visible objectionable matter within the right-of-way. Clearing may be done by any method the developer elects to use provided that no damage results to items selected to remain. 
b.  Grubbing. Grubbing consists of the removal and proper disposal from the right-of-way of objectionable roots and abandoned objects imbedded within the underlying soil. 
1.  Objectionable roots: Matted tree and brush roots regardless of size, and individual roots greater than one inch in diameter or more than 36 inches in length shall be removed. 
2.  Abandoned objects: Manmade objects within the right-of-way such as fences, underground tanks, old paving, sidewalks, etc., shall be removed. 
3.19.2  Erosion control. This work shall consist of pollution control measures shown on the plans or as ordered by the building official during the life of the project to control water pollution through the use of dikes, dams, silt fences, sediment basins, grasses, mulches or other erosion control devices. Temporary erosion control devices shall be shown on the plans and may consist of dikes, dams, silt fences, sediment basins, grasses, mulches or other erosion control devices. Installation of temporary erosion control devices shall begin as soon as clearing and grubbing operations within an area are complete. Some temporary erosion control devices such as silt fences, sediment basins shall be installed prior to any other work after clearing and grubbing operations. 
a.  An erosion control plan, prepared by a Georgia-licensed professional, shall be a part of the construction plans for a subdivision and shall be approved by the State of Georgia and the building official prior to any work other than clearing of rights-of-way and of survey lines. This plan shall specifically indicate the sequence of clearing, grubbing, earthwork operations and the construction of permanent erosion control features. It shall also indicate the proposed use of temporary erosion control features. It shall also specify the permanent grasses to be used. 
b.  The desired ground cover, unless specified otherwise in the plans and approved by the building official, will be common Bermuda grass. Seed will be applied at the rate of two pounds per 1,000 square feet. Seeding of Bermuda will take place between February 1 and November 15. Seeding done between September 1 and November 15 will also contain annual ryegrass at the rate of one pound per 3,000 square feet. 
c.  Areas to be seeded will be plowed thoroughly to a depth of six inches, disked until pulverized and all roots and rocks removed and the areas smoothed prior to planting. Fertilizer and lime will be added at the rates indicated by soil tests. 
d.  All seeded areas will be mulched. 
e.  The developer may elect to use sod rather than seeding to establish a permanent ground cover. 
f.  Fording of live streams with heavy equipment will be prohibited. 
g.  All erosion control measures shall be in place and a successful inspection must be completed before any earth moving operations can begin. 
h.  Final stabilization of the site must be completed before a final plat can be recorded, unless acceptable guarantees are provided in accordance with section 3.20. 
3.19.3  Pipes and other structures. This work will consist of the installation of storm drain pipe and pipe arch culverts of the proper size and type as required to provide for adequate handling of stormwater runoff and small stream crossings. 
a.  General. Each pipe installed shall be of the size and type shown on the final construction plans. The pipe size will be determined by a professional licensed by the State of Georgia to perform such duties. Calculations documenting the required size of each pipe will be furnished to the building official. No cross drain pipe smaller than 18 inches inside diameter or side drain pipe of less than 15 inches inside diameter will be used in any location unless approved by the building official. 
b.  Materials. Pipe used will meet the requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, 2001 Edition as shown below: 

 
c.  For concrete, corrugated steel and aluminum pipes see Ga. Std. 1030D for minimum thicknesses, minimum cover, maximum fill, allowable pipe diameters and trench construction detail. For HDPE and PVC pipes see Ga. Std. 1030P for minimum cover, maximum fill, allowable pipe diameters and trench construction details. 
d.  Pipe used underneath arterial streets will be reinforced concrete. The developer has the option to use reinforced concrete, a bituminous-coated corrugated steel or aluminum pipe, HDPE (if 24" or less), or aluminum pipe under all other streets. Nonreinforced concrete or galvanized corrugated steel pipe can only be used under single-family residential driveways. 
e.  Installation. All pipe shall be laid in a prepared trench with the socket or bell ends pointing upstream. Concrete pipe sections may be joined with mortar joints or bituminous plastic cement joints with inside of each joint wiped clean. Pipe may also be joined with gasket joints, O-ring joints or coupling bands furnished by the manufacturer. All pipes will be laid on a smooth bed prepared in such a manner that the pipe is uniformly supported throughout its entire length. 
f.  Foundation backfill. Natural ground will be undercut throughout the location of all cross drain pipes to a minimum of six inches below the outside bottom surface of the pipe. The undercut material shall be replaced with backfill material meeting the requirements of Section 812.2.01 (Foundation Backfill Material Type I) or Section 812.2.02 (Foundation Backfill Material Type II) of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, 2001 Edition. Type I backfill is required under pipe placed in dry areas. Type II is required under pipe placed in wet or swampy areas. 
g.  Double lines of pipe. When installation of double lines of pipe are required, the two lines of pipe will have a clearance between the pipes of one inside diameter or 36 inches whichever is smaller. The space between the two lines of pipe will be backfilled in uniform layers not to exceed eight inches. Each layer will be thoroughly compacted by mechanical means before the succeeding layer is placed. 
h.  Backfill. All pipe will be backfilled with a suitable local material, placed in uniform layers not to exceed eight inches with each layer being thoroughly compacted prior to the succeeding layer being placed until the top of the pipe is covered. All backfill material will be compacted to 95 percent of its maximum relative density. No rock greater than four inches in diameter will be placed within two feet of pipe being backfilled. 
i.  Cover. No pipe will be placed at an elevation that will not yield one foot of cover between the top of the pipe and the top of the subgrade. 
j.  Required treatments. Flared end sections, headwalls or other suitable treatments shall be required on all exposed pipe ends. 
3.19.4  Grading. This work shall consist of the removal of stumps, excavation, hauling and satisfactory placement of all materials within the limits of construction. All stumps having a diameter of four inches or more, measured six inches above the ground must be removed from fill sections. 
a.  Excavation. All excavation will conform to the lines, grades and cross-sections specified on the plans. 
b.  Embankment. This work consists of the construction of all fill areas within the streets to line, grade and cross-section shown on the construction plans. The fill material will be placed as nearly as possible in uniform, parallel layers of eight inches with each layer being thoroughly compacted before the succeeding layer is placed. Sheepsfoot rollers will be required on fills composed of clay soils. A compaction test shall be required for every two vertical feet of fill. Smooth drum rollers may be used on sandy soils. Boulders larger than two feet in diameter shall be broken before being placed in fills. A bulldozer or motor grader may be required on the fill areas as they are being constructed to keep the layers smooth and uniform. Fills (embankments) shall be compacted to 95 percent of the maximum relative density of the material being placed. 
c.  Stumps. Stumps shall be removed to a depth of two feet below the ground line. Areas containing objectionable roots shall be raked to a depth of six inches below ground line. Stump holes and holes caused by removal of objectionable objects shall be backfilled in fill areas with a suitable local material. 
3.19.5  Subgrade. Subgrade is defined as the six inches of roadbed immediately beneath any base or subbase course. This area will be uniformly mixed, with all rock exceeding four inches in diameter, roots or other objectionable matter being removed. The subgrade will then be compacted to 95 percent of its maximum relative density. If the subgrade will not form a firm surface but begins to ravel a stabilizer, material shall be added and blended uniformly into the failing sections. This stabilizer material shall meet the requirements of Section 803.2.01 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. The finished subgrade shall be test rolled by driving a loaded dump truck along the roadway, making sufficient passes to cover the entire width of the subgrade. If the subgrade shows a pumping movement under the test load, that section shall be plowed up and repaired regardless of any passing compaction tests. The test rolling shall be done under the direct supervision of the building official. 
3.19.6  Base and paving. This work consists of placing of all base material and pavement to the cross section specified in the construction plans. The width and depth (thickness) of any base or paving will meet or exceed the minimums shown in Table 3.4.2 of these regulations. 
3.19.7  Finishing operations. All completed streets and roads will be finished to the lines and grades specified on the construction plans. All construction debris will be removed from the site. All temporary erosion devices shall be removed and their locations repaired. Street and traffic control signs shall be in place before the finishing and dressing operations are deemed complete. 
3.19.8  Certification of work. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to ensure that any contractor engaged in the construction of any part of the roads and drainage structure in a subdivision complies fully with requirements of section 3.5 and all its subsections. The developer shall be prepared to furnish upon the request of the building official records, invoices and test results documenting materials used, construction methods, and field tests performed as part of the construction activities. It is also the responsibility of the developer to ensure that his contractor notifies the building official of any necessary joint inspections at least one working day before the inspection is to be performed. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.20 - Responsibility for improvements. 
3.20.1  General. In lieu of the required improvements in a subdivision, the developer may deposit surety for the completion of such improvements with the county and present a final plat for approval. 
3.20.2  Requirements. To ensure the construction and installation of required improvements, the developer shall deliver to the county a surety bond, letter of credit, or other acceptable security in such aggregate amount as is estimated by the county to be the total cost of the construction and installation of all required improvements. In addition, the developer shall, if applicable, deposit surety for road maintenance for a period of 12 months. 
3.20.3  Conditions. Bonds, bank letter of credit, or other surety posted shall run to the Greene County Board of Commissioners and provide that the developer, his heirs, successors, assigns, their agents, shall comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions, and requirements of these and other regulations and the final plat; will faithfully perform and complete the work of constructing and installing all required improvements; that the developer shall be responsible to the county for any unnecessary expenses incurred through the failure of developer, his heirs, successors, assigns, or their agents, to complete the work of said installations and construction in an acceptable manner, and from any damages growing out of negligence in performing or failing to perform said installation and construction. If a bond is offered, it shall be executed by a surety or guaranty company qualified to transact business in the State of Georgia. Where a bond is required for a road construction project and is to be other than a bond issued by a commercial fidelity bonding company, the surety must meet the following conditions: 
a.  The surety must be posted by an individual or group of individuals. 
b.  The surety or sureties must be worth at least the estimated cost of all improvements including paving the road. 
c.  The bond must be accompanied by an affidavit setting forth the facts in (1) and (2) above. 
d.  If there is more than one surety, all sureties shall be jointly liable and severable liable. 
3.20.4  Duration and release. Bonds and surety posted pursuant to this ordinance shall be released or returned, as the case may be, at such time as the facilities guaranteed thereby have been installed and accepted. Acceptances shall be in writing accurately identifying the improvements covered. Facilities shall not be accepted unless they conform to the applicable specifications and requirements. The Greene County Board of Commissioners or building official, when applicable, shall make the decision as to whether a proposed bond, bank letter of credit, or other surety offers adequate security for the faithful completion of the required work. 
3.20.5  Default procedures. If the construction or installation of any improvements of facilities for which a bond or other surety is posted is not completed within three months after substantial completion of any buildings or structures which said improvements or facilities are designed to serve, or within three years after the date of recording of final plat, whichever is sooner, or if said construction of installation is not in accordance with the applicable specifications and requirements, the county shall, using proceeds from such surety deposits, pay for such work. Such work may be done under contract or by county personnel. To the extent that any portion of a cash deposit is not required or used, said excess cash shall be repaid to the person making the deposit. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS 

Sec. 4.1 - General procedure. 
4.1.1  When any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any lot or part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the developer, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with these subdivision regulations. 
4.1.2  If such use is for commercial or industrial purposes, then such subdivision shall comply with all applicable provisions of these regulations. If such use is for agricultural purposes, the provisions of these regulations shall not apply. All submittals shall be consistent with provisions of the zoning ordinance and other codes, ordinances and regulations of the county. 
4.1.3  Special review of subdivisions along state routes: No subdivision plat containing land that abuts a state route shall be approved until such plat has been submitted for review and comment by the Georgia Department of Transportation, in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 32-6-151. When the county receives such a plat, it shall submit two copies of the proposed subdivision plat to the Georgia Department of Transportation if such proposed subdivision includes or abuts on any part of the state highway system. The Georgia Department of Transportation, within 30 days of receipt of the plat, shall recommend approval and note its recommendation on the copy to be returned to the building official or recommend rejection. Failure of the Georgia Department of Transportation to act within this 30-day period shall constitute approval. If the plat is recommended for rejection, the reasons for rejection and requirements for approval shall be given the building official in writing. A recommendation for rejection shall be binding on the building official and the planning and zoning commission unless the planning and zoning commission, by official action recorded in its minutes, overrules the recommendation for rejection. 
4.1.4  Exemptions from plat approval: The following types of land subdivisions, transfers, and sales are specifically exempted from the plat approval requirements of this ordinance; provided, however, that such exemptions shall not apply to land development requirements and improvement requirements of this ordinance. 
a.  The creation and sale of cemetery plots. 
b.  The sale of lots consistent with previously approved and recorded plats or deeds. 
c.  The creation of leaseholds for space within a multiple-occupancy building or the division of property into leaseholds for commercial, industrial, or institutional use. 
d.  The creation of leaseholds for the agricultural use of property where the use does not involve the construction of a building to be used as a residence or for other purposes not directly related to agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon. 
e.  Any division of land to heirs through a judicial estate proceeding, or any division of land pursuant to a judicial partition, or any division of land occurring from the foreclosure of a deed of trust; provided, however, that such exemption shall not require the county to issue permits if the resulting lots or parcels fail to meet any applicable regulations of the local jurisdiction concerning lot size, lot width, and other dimensional requirements. 
f.  The creation of small parcels less than 0.1 acres for utility substations, lift stations, or other similar facilities. 
g.  Intra-family land transfers and mortgage lots, as defined by this regulation. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 4.2 - Subdivision review. 
4.2.1  Minor subdivisions. 
a.  If the proposed subdivision would create additional lots in an approved minor subdivision such that it would then be considered a major subdivision, the proposed change would go to the planning and zoning commission and board of commissioners for their review and be subject to the planning and zoning schedule of fees' final plat fee amount. 
b.  The developer shall submit a reproducible original of the final plat to the building official and pay all appropriate fees. 
c.  The building official shall review the final plat and approve or disapprove said plat within 14 days, or 45 days in the event the plat requires review by the Georgia Department of Transportation. The building official and developer's surveyor should ensure the proposed plat satisfactorily complies with sections 5.4 and 5.5 and O.C.G.A. 15-6-67 before presenting said plat for recordation. 
d.  The approved final plat is to be recorded by the developer in the office of the clerk of superior court within 30 days of the date of approval. 
e.  Minor subdivision submittal schedule: 
A.  Final plat. By advance appointment with the building official. 
4.2.2  Major subdivision. 
a.  Three copies of the sketch plat may be submitted to the planning and zoning department. 
b.  By appointment, the developer and his/her professional representative may meet with the building official to review the sketch plan. Approval of the sketch plan shall constitute permission to prepare a preliminary plat. 
c.  No later than 30 days prior to the meeting date of the planning and zoning commission, the developer shall submit one electronic and eight hard copies of a preliminary plat to the building official for review, local distribution, and appropriate fees shall be paid. In the event the preliminary plat requires Georgia Department of Transportation review, the number of copies of the plat provided shall be increased to ten, and said copies shall be submitted 60 days prior to a regular meeting date of the planning and zoning commission. 
d.  The building official shall review the preliminary plat, and the building official will provide said copies of the plat with his or her review to the planning and zoning commission members one week before the meeting. The developer may be notified if any changes are necessary to achieve compliance with these regulations. If notified of necessary changes needed to the plat, the developer shall be responsible for having all changes made and a revised plat submitted prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting date. 
e.  At the meeting, the planning and zoning commission shall make its recommendation to approve, table, or disapprove the preliminary plat. 
f.  Relying on the information furnished to it, the Greene County Board of Commissioners shall make the decision regarding the preliminary plat and notify the developer of the decision. 
g.  Preliminary plat approval is tentative and is pending submission of eight copies of construction plans within six months of preliminary plat approval or within six months from the date of each allowed preliminary plat extension. The county building official may approve up to two, one-year extensions of the preliminary plat before the preliminary plat expires. Failure to submit construction plans or requests for preliminary plat extensions within these time periods shall void the plat. Preliminary plat extensions must be applied for in writing by the developer. 
h.  A grading permit shall be issued subsequent to approval of construction plans. No improvement may be installed prior to approval of construction plans. Constructions plans must be submitted to the building official for review at least 30 days prior to the date of the meeting of the planning and zoning commission and all appropriate fees paid. Construction plans must be approved by both the building official and the planning and zoning commission, but they do not have to be reviewed by the board of commissioners. 
i.  Within 12 months from the date of preliminary plat approval or 12 months from the date of each allowed preliminary plat extension, one electronic copy and eight hard copies of a final plat for one or more phases of the subdivision shall be submitted to the building official at least 30 days prior to the date of the meeting of the planning and zoning commission and all appropriate fees paid. The developer shall also provide the necessary improvements guarantees. In the event the final plat requires Georgia Department of Transportation review, the number of copies of the final plat provided shall be increased to ten, and said copies shall be submitted 60 days prior to a regular meeting date of the planning and zoning commission. 
j.  At the meeting, the planning and zoning commission shall determine whether all requirements of these or all other governing laws, ordinances, and regulations have been met and recommend to approve, table, or disapprove the final plat. Relying on the information furnished to it, the Greene County Board of Commissioners shall make the decision regarding the final plat and notify the developer of the decision. 
k.  Recordation. The building official and developer's surveyor should ensure the proposed plat satisfactorily complies with sections 5.4 and 5.5 and O.C.G.A. 15-6-67 before presenting said plat for recordation. An approved final plat shall be filed by the developer with the clerk of superior court within 30 days after final approval. However, if the final plat is approved during the month of December it shall be filed with the clerk of superior court for recordation no later than 12:00 p.m. on the last business day of December. Failure to comply with this provision shall void any approved plat. 
l.  Major subdivision submittal schedule: 
a.  Sketch plan. By advance appointment with the building official, if desired. 
b.  Preliminary plat. Thirty days prior to the date of the planning and zoning commission meeting at which the plat shall be reviewed, unless otherwise required by these regulations or other state or federal laws. 
c.  Construction plans. Within six months subsequent to preliminary plat approval or any extension thereof, but prior to installation of any required improvements. 
d.  Final plat. Thirty days prior to the date of the planning and zoning commission meeting at which the final plat shall be reviewed but not later than 12 months from the date of preliminary approval or any extension thereof, unless otherwise required by these regulations or other state or federal laws. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 4.3 - Resubdivision and/or recombination. 
4.3.1  A resubdivision plat, or replat, is the process of a creating a new land subdivision, and thereby increasing the number of legal lots, from a previously platted parcel. One important aspect of a resubdivision plat is that all of the restrictions which were applicable to the original subdivision will also apply to the resubdivision. Covenants, easements, notes, setbacks, and restrictions which are shown on a subdivision plat cannot be removed through the resubdivision process and must instead be addressed through a plat vacation and new final plat. Resubdivisions meeting the definition of a minor subdivision will follow the minor subdivision process. All other resubdivisions will follow the major subdivision process. 
4.3.2  The revised lots will comply with lot dimensional requirements for the zoning district and the lot size of resubdivided lots should be comparable to other lot sizes in the original platted subdivision, section, phase, or immediate surrounding neighborhood. 
4.3.3  Plat revisions. A plat revision, allows a property owner to move lot lines between two or more contiguous lots, address minor documentation errors, make known any changes in property monuments, lot combinations, or similar purposes. With limited exceptions, plat revisions do not require a public hearing prior to approval. Plat revisions shall be reviewed for decision by the building official for approval or disapproval. Similar to the resubdivision process, all of the restrictions which were applicable to the original subdivision will also apply to the plat revisions. 
4.3.3.1  If in a residential subdivision, the lot size of resubdivided lots should be comparable to other lot sizes in the original platted subdivision, section, or phase. 
4.3.3.2  No change, erasure, or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat, nor on accompanying data sheets after approval of the Greene County Board of Commissioners or building official. In no case shall the Greene County Board of Commissioners or its building official approve a revision unless the fact that it is a revised plat is clearly stated thereon. 
4.3.3.3  Plat corrections: Errors or amendments may include but are not limited to: 
a.  Typographical and spelling errors or transpositions; 
b.  Incorrect seals; 
c.  Incorrect dates; 
d.  Monumentation incorrectly noted, drawn, or missing; 
e.  Incorrect or missing interior bearing(s) and/or dimensions(s) on the drawing; 
f.  Missing or incorrectly displayed arrows or symbols; 
g.  Street name changes; 
h.  Title of plat already in use; 
i.  Additions to or deletions from the legal description of dedicatory language that are not typographical in nature; 
j.  Incorrect certificates or signatures; 
k.  Missing certificates, seals, or signature blocks; 
l.  Other items of a similar nature. 
4.3.4  Lot combinations. An existing lot line forming the boundary between two conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that have merged to form one building lot may be removed or eliminated through a final plat revision process which conforms to the requirements of this regulation. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination shall be required to be approved by the building official and recorded as a final plat. Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the replat is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. 
4.3.5  Property line adjustments. One or more existing lot lines forming boundaries between conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision, or one or more lot lines between abutting lots or parcels may be adjusted through a final plat revision process that requires the approval of the building official and recording of a plat meeting the specifications of a final plat. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat of the entire lots involved in the boundary line adjustment shall be required to be approved by the building official and recorded. Such plat showing said boundary line adjustment shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision and shall include thereon that the replat is for the purpose of adjusting the lot lines between specific lots. 
4.3.5.1  Any adjusted property line that is not eliminated by the property line adjustment remains common to the same lots or parcels before and after the property line adjustment; 
4.3.5.2  The proposed property line adjustment will not result in any of the following: 
a)  An increase or transfer of development density within the plat; 
b)  An increase to utility service requirements; 
c)  A reduction in areas reserved for public use; 
d)  A change in street layout; or 
e)  An alteration of the character of the surrounding area in a manner which substantially limits, impairs, or precludes the use of surrounding properties for the primary uses listed in the underlying district. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 4.4 - Mortgage lot. 
This provision addresses situations where a bank requires the creation of small (e.g., one-acre to five-acre) tract of property from a larger existing parcel (usually farmland or timber land) in order to provide a mortgage or loan on a home or other principal building, rather than referring to the entire existing lot of record. 
4.4.1  In cases where a person can show the building official in writing that an application for loan or mortgage involving real property has been filed with a bank or lending institution, and said bank or lending institution requires, for purposes of the loan or mortgage, a description of property that encompasses less land area than the lot of record, one or two mortgage lots (see definition) may be lawfully created from the parcel of record without constituting a subdivision. Minimum lot sizes established by any land use district or other ordinance requirement of the county shall not be construed to prevent the creation of mortgage lots pursuant to this subsection, even if the resulting mortgage lot created is less than the minimum lot size required by said land use district or other ordinance requirement. The applicant shall be required in the case of a mortgage lot to file with the building official a copy of the survey plat creating the mortgage lot, and may be recorded in the records of the Greene County Superior Court Clerk as a mortgage lot plat of record. 
4.4.2  If created, a mortgage lot shall be no less than one acre and no larger than five acres in size. This provision shall not allow for the creation of a mortgage lot from any lot of record that is five acres or less in area. 
4.4.3  No mortgage lot shall be created unless it has a minimum 30-foot wide access easement from a road abutting the property frontage of the larger lot of record to the boundary of the mortgage lot. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 4.5 - Plat vacations. 
Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises, at any time before sale of any lot described therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the plat or part of the plat to be vacated. 
4.5.1  Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated. 
4.5.2  A final plat may be vacated, or canceled, through the final plat vacation process. The only way to remove easements dedicated by plat, notes, covenants, or restrictions from a subdivision plat is to vacate the plat in its entirety or to partially vacate the plat in full lot increments. 
4.5.3  Single legal lots which are not right-of-way may not be partially vacated (one lot cannot be partially vacated and remain a legal lot). However unimproved right-of-way which was dedicated by plat can be partially vacated from other contiguous right-of-way dedicated with the same plat using a metes and bounds description. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED 

Sec. 5.1 - Preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall represent the entire area, which the developer contemplates developing, including possible unit divisions not scheduled for immediate development. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be transmitted by the developer to the appropriate county agency. 
The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor, registered professional engineer or licensed landscape architect and includes as a minimum the following: 
1.  Content. The preliminary plat, submitted to the planning and zoning commission shall be in ink on a reproducible medium, prepared in accordance with acceptable professional standards. The submittal copies shall consist of black-line prints or blue-line prints on a white background, and the submittal shall include such documents as necessary to meet the requirements of these regulations. If the preliminary plat is prepared by a registered professional engineer, reference must be made to the legal survey of the parcel. If the preliminary plat is not certified by a licensed land surveyor, a copy of a plat of the legal survey must be attached. The preliminary plat shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger for a subdivision with a maximum lot size of five acres or smaller. For subdivisions with any lots exceeding five acres in area, the plat shall be prepared at a scale that will show each lot in its entirety on one single page of the plat. Any scale selected must be such as to clearly delineate setbacks, easements, rights-of-way and other required features of the drawing. Text size shall be no smaller than 0.08 inch in height and drawn to an accepted engineering scale. The drawings will be prepared on media no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. If the entire preliminary plat cannot be depicted on one sheet, the plat may be divided and an index provided. 
2.  The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name of subdivision. 
b.  Names and right-of-way width of all proposed streets. 
c.  Name, address and telephone number of the owner or owners of the land to be subdivided and the name, address and telephone number of the developer. 
d.  The seal, name, and address of the licensed land surveyor or registered professional engineer. 
e.  Date, graphic scale, numeric scale, north arrow and space for revisions. 
f.  Vicinity map indicating streets and highways, railroads and other significant features within, or adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
g.  Proposed use of property to be subdivided. 
h.  Total acreage, outlet acreage if applicable and the acreage of the smallest lot. 
i.  Present zoning of subject property and adjacent properties. 
j.  The location of property with respect to surrounding streets, and the names of adjoining developments. 
k.  The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property to be expressed in feet. 
l.  Unit divisions if known or staged development if proposed by the developer. 
m.  Contour lines at intervals not to exceed two feet, based on mean sea level datum. The basis for development of contour lines shall be indicated on the plat. 
n.  The approximate location and sizes of existing sewers, water mains, drainage or other underground structures within, and immediately adjacent to the subject property. 
o.  The location of existing and proposed streets, easements, water bodies, flood hazard areas and flooding, streams and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, building parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, bridges and rock outcrops. 
p.  Reference points from proposed intersections to permanent features. 
q.  The location and scaled dimensions of all proposed or existing lots. The minimum front yard setback on all lots and side lot setback for corner lots. 
r.  The location and scaled dimensions and acreage of all property proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public or private reservation, with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation. 
s.  All maps or plats shall show the direction and distance from a point of reference to a point on the boundary of the individual survey, and such additional data as may be required to relocate the boundary point from the point of reference with the same degree of accuracy required of the parcel surveyed. The point of reference shall be an established, monumental position that can be identified or relocated from maps, plats, or other documents on public record. 
t.  Blocks shall be lettered in alphabetical order. Blocks in numbered additions to the subdivision bearing the same name shall be lettered consecutively throughout the several additions. 
u.  All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered in a logical sequence. 
v.  List of proposed utilities to be located underground. 
w.  A statement of the proposed method of water supply, major drainage provisions, detention areas, and proposed sewage disposal plans. If the development is to utilize a private sewer system, all information required by the health department shall be provided. 
x.  The total number of units if not a single-family subdivision. 
y.  All required setback lines for all parcels. 
z.  The lack of information under any item specified herein, or improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be cause of disapproval of a preliminary plat. Note: This is a temporary plat and shall not be used for final recording. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 5.2 - Construction plans. 
Prior to installation of any required improvements, the developer shall construction plans to the planning and zoning commission. No improvements shall be installed until the building official and planning and zoning commission formally approve the construction plans. Construction plans shall be prepared only by a registered professional engineer, registered land surveyor, or registered landscape architect. 
1.  Content. All construction plans submitted to the planning and zoning commission shall be prepared in accordance with acceptable professional standards in ink, on a reproducible medium. The submittal copies shall consist of black-line or blue-line prints on a white background. Construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the design standards contained in these regulations and shall be drawn at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet with a contour-interval not to exceed two feet. Drawing sheets size shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. Construction plans shall be submitted for all required improvements and amended when necessary. 
2.  The following shall be depicted: 
a.  Profiles shall be accompanied by plan views of street intersection, significant cuts and fills end intersections with existing property lines. This includes all known geographical features such as faults and rock formations. 
b.  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevation along centerlines of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads, the elevation along the centerline of the existing road or roads shall be shown. The radii of all curves, lengths of tangents and central angles on all streets. 
c.  Where slopes in excess of 20 percent occur on cross slopes, the building official may require that cross sections of all proposed streets at 50-foot stations shall be shown at five points as follows: 
1.  On a line at right angles to the center line of the street, and said elevation points shall be at the center line of the street, each property line and points 50 feet inside each property line. 
d.  Plans and profiles showing the location and typical cross section of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks if provided, drainage easements, right-of-way, manholes, and catch basins; the location, size and invert elevations of existing and proposed storm sewers, drains, and exact location and size of all existing water, gas or underground utilities or structures. All utilities proposed for location underground shall be duly noted. 
e.  Location and size of all existing and proposed drainage structures including retention ponds, catch basins, grates, headwalls and any extensions thereof. The acreage of the drainage area and all pipe and ditch sizing calculations shall be provided. 
f.  The engineer preparing the construction plans shall certify the centerline of all streets and drainageways based upon a field run survey. 
g.  Plans for water systems and plans and profiles for sewer system and storm drainage pipes. 
h.  All information required by Greene County construction standards and specifications. 
i.  An approved sedimentation and erosion control plan. 
j.  A hydrological study including the drainage plan for the area. 
k.  Title, name, address, stamp, and signature of professional engineer and date, including revision dates. 
l.  Typical street section to include asphalt and base thickness, curb, road width, shoulder slope, and right-of-way width. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 5.3 - Final plat. 
The final plat must be submitted in accordance with these subdivision regulations. The final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat. It may represent only that portion of the approved preliminary plat that the developer proposed to develop and record at this time. 
1.  Content. The final plat submitted shall conform to the preliminary plat and shall be in ink on a reproducible medium prepared in accordance with accepted professional standards. The submittal copies shall consist of black-line or blue-line prints on a white background, and the submittal shall include such other documents as necessary to meet the requirements of these regulations. The final plat shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger for a subdivision with a maximum lot size of five acres or smaller. For subdivisions with any lots exceeding five acres in area, the plat shall be prepared at a scale that will show each lot in its entirety on one single page of the plat. Any scale selected must be such as to clearly delineate setbacks, easements, rights-of-way and other required features of the drawing. Text size shall be no smaller than 0.08 inch in height and drawn to an accepted engineering scale. Sheet size shall be 12 inches by 16 inches for a minor subdivision and 17 inches by 21 inches for a major subdivision. 
2.  If the entire final plat cannot be depicted on one sheet, the plat may be divided and an index provided showing the following: 
a.  Name of subdivision. 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of the developer. 
c.  Date of survey, date of plat drawing, and revision dates, graphic scale; north arrow with reference of bearings to magnetic, true, or grid north; the longitude and latitude and state plane coordinates; and the mean sea level datum. 
d.  Location of tract (land district and land lot) and acreage. 
e.  If part or all of the tract is a portion of a former subdivision, reference shall be made to the former plat, with identification of the former lots and blocks being resubdivided. 
f.  Index map, when more than one sheet is required to depict plat. 
g.  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street lines, bench marks or other recognized permanent monuments which shall be accurately described on the plat. 
h.  All maps or plats shall show the direction and distance from a point of reference to a point on the boundary of the individual survey, and such additional data as may be required to relocate the boundary point from the point of reference with the same degree of accuracy required of the parcel surveyed. The point of reference shall be an established, monumented position that can be identified or relocated from maps, plats, or other documents on public record. 
i.  The error of closure, as calculated by latitudes and departures, shall be stated. Surveys shall be coordinated and vertically tied into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey Elevations. The benchmark used shall be provided. 
j.  Municipal, county lines accurately tied to the boundary line of the subdivision by distance and angles, when such lines transverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision, boundary line of the subdivision by distance and angles. 
k.  Exact location, right-of-way, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all cross angles of intersections, radii, length of tangents, and arcs and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
l.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth foot, necessary internal angles, arcs and chords, and tangents of radii of rounded corners. 
m.  Building setbacks, with dimension. 
n.  When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines arc at angles other than 90 degrees, the lot width at the building lines shall be shown. 
o.  Blocks lettered alphabetically within each block; lots or sites numbered in numerical order. 
p.  The acreage of the smallest lot. 
q.  Location, dimensions and purposes of: 
1.  Easements, including slope easements, public service utility right-of-way lines, areas (other than streets) to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to the public; 
2.  Sites for other than residential use, with notes stating their purposes and limitations; and 
3.  Of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners. 
r.  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. Monuments to be placed after final street improvements shall be designated as "future." 
s.  Location of central mailbox pavilions, if required by the United States Postal Service. Central mailbox pavilions can be located within the principal building setbacks. 
t.  Present zoning of subject property and adjacent properties. 
u.  Required setback lines for all parcels. 
v.  The following certification: In addition to any other powers that Greene County may have, this subdivision is a special drainage district. See Article 2, Section 2, Paragraph 2, Georgia Constitution, 1953. 
w.  Certifications for final plat approval by the county manager or building official. 
x.  Owner's certification. The final plat shall contain, in addition to a licensed land surveyor's certification, a statement as follows: 
"I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described herein and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish the minimum building restriction lines, dedicate all streets, easements, alleys, walks, parks and other open spaces to provide directly or indirectly for maintenance of all common areas or outlets." 
This statement shall be signed and dated by the owners, proprietors, or trustees, if any, prior to the final plat submittal. The final plat shall be accompanied by statements of deed restrictions (covenants) that the developer intends to apply to the subdivision, if any. All deed restrictions shall meet or exceed the requirements contained in this regulation and the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 5.4. - Digital submission requirements for final plats. 
In addition to any applicable final plat review fees, final plats presented for final approval signatures of the building official shall be assessed an administrative fee based on the format of the submission. Plans submitted in hardcopy format only will be assessed an administrative data entry fee of $200.00 plus $5.00 per parcel, or as otherwise specified in the published fee schedule established by the board of commissioners. Digital format files shall be submitted in accordance with the standards established by the building official. Properly submitted digital format files will not be assessed an administrative fee. Digital format submissions that do not meet the standards established by the building official may be subject to the aforementioned data entry fees. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
ARTICLE VI. - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 6.1 - Installation of improvements, improvements guarantees. 
Before the final plat is approved, all applicants shall be required to complete or produce improvement guarantees for all improvements as required in these regulations. 
6.1.1  Completion of improvements. The building official must certify that all improvements required by the county have been satisfactorily installed or the installation guaranteed. 
6.1.2  Improvement guarantees. The developer shall provide improvement guarantees at the time of application for final plat approval. Said guarantee amount shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission for the assurance of the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the uncompleted portion of improvements. Improvement guarantees shall comply with the requirements of section 3.20. The guarantee shall be released only after the county has accepted the work. 
6.1.3  Costs of improvements. All required improvements should be made by the developer, at his expense, without reimbursement by the county. 
6.1.4  Failure to complete improvements. In those instances where an improvement guarantee has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such guarantees, the county shall call the improvement due and collect all funds or require that all improvements be immediately installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the improvement guarantee is declared to be in default. If the building official finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the county's construction standards and specifications, the developer shall be responsible for removing any defects and completing the improvements or forfeiting the guarantee. 
6.1.5  Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, public area, easements, and parks shall be an act of the board of commissioners. The recommendation for approval by the planning and zoning commission of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the county of any street, easement, or park shown on said plat. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 6.2 - Inspection of improvements. 
The building official shall provide for inspection of required improvements during and upon completion of installation to ensure satisfactory compliance with provisions of this regulation. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 6.3 - Maintenance of improvements. 
The subdivider shall be responsible for all improvements on the individual lots and for maintenance and warranty repairs constructed by the developer for a period of one year from either the completion of construction or the recording of the final subdivision plat, whichever is the latest. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 6.4 - Acceptance of improvements into county road system. 
The board of commissioners shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street unless it has been accepted as, opened as, or otherwise received the legal status of, a public street through formal acceptance at a public meeting of the board of commissioners. When a petitioner requests formal acceptance of any street into the county's list of public roads, the board of commissioners shall determine whether acceptance of said street is in the public's best interest. The requestor shall provide plans indicating all land designated for street purposes or street widening and proof of right-of-way not less than the width specified in these regulations. All completed streets shall comply with the specifications and standards in these regulations. Applicants seeking to dedicate a street to the county shall fill out an official street dedication form and submit it to the county manager. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 7.1 - General. 
The following provisions shall govern the submittal and review of all construction plans or plats. 
7.1.1  Monuments. Permanent reference monuments shall be placed at block corners and other points such as street intersections, lot corners, curve points and angle points, and shall be marked with a solid iron rod or an iron pipe not less than one-half inch in diameter, at least 18 inches long, driven flush with the ground. Monuments shall be indicated on the final plat. Removal of monuments and resetting by anyone other than a registered land surveyor is prohibited. 
7.1.2  Character of the land. Land which the building official finds to be unsuitable for subdivision development due to potential for flooding, poor drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse topography or landforms, or other features which could be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods to alleviate these problems are formulated by the developer with concurrence of the building official. 
7.1.3  Other requirements. Compliance with all other county regulations or ordinances including, but not limited, to those governing subdivision plats both preliminary or final. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
ARTICLE VIII. - CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE 

Sec. 8.1 - Prior approval. 
No construction activity of any kind including finished grading, installation of improvements, or building shall begin on any land subject to these subdivision regulations without prior approval of the preliminary plat and construction plans. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 8.2 - Grading. 
Grading operations limited to clearing and grubbing may commence once approval of the preliminary plat is granted. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 8.3 - Utilities. 
Utility installation shall not occur until the building official has received the certification that the streets were graded as designed by the design engineer and has approved the rough grade of the street and shoulder preparation. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 8.4 - Inspections. 
Periodic inspection during the installation of the required improvements in a subdivision shall be made by the building official to insure conformity with the approved plans and specifications. The developer shall notify the building official when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 8.5 - Sale and transfer. 
No lot or parcel of land shall be sold or transferred or a building permit issued until the final plat, of which said lot or parcel is a part, shall have been approved and recorded as provided for in these subdivision regulations. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 8.6 - Building permits. 
The building official shall not issue any permit for the construction of any building or structure to be located in any subdivision, a plat whereof is required to be recorded pursuant to the provisions of these subdivision regulations, until such plat shall have been approved and recorded as provided for in these subdivision regulations. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 8.7 - Occupancy. 
Within each phase of development, no building may be occupied for dwelling or other purposes, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued for any building until final grading and required utility installations, including the water supply and sanitary sewer systems, have been completed and approved by the building official. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
ARTICLE IX. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9.1 - Repealer. 
Previous Greene County Subdivision Regulations are hereby repealed. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Sec. 9.2 - Effective date. 
It is hereby ordained by the Board of Commissioners of Greene County, Georgia, that, after a public hearing was held on the 25th day of July, 2017, this ordinance shall take effect and shall be in force from the 8th day of August, 2017. 
( Ord. of 8-8-2017 ) 
Appendix B - ZONING[1] 
PREFACE 
The following analysis entitled Zoning Ordinance, Greene County, Georgia, is designed to provide the governing authority or authorities of Greene County with a regulatory measure designed to meet present-day and anticipated future needs for the promotion of the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or general welfare of the county by the control of such matters as the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of a lot which may be occupied, the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density and distribution of population, and the uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, water supply, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes. 
This ordinance is made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and shall be designed to lessen congestion in the street, to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers, to promote health and the general welfare, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. 
Said ordinance is made with reasonable consideration, among other things of the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to promoting desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods, protecting property against blight and depreciation, securing economy in governmental expenditures, conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and other buildings and structures throughout Greene County. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the county, effective February 16, 2017 . Prior versions of the zoning ordinance were adopted July 17, 2007; December 30, 2009; and effective April 6, 2016. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND ENACTMENT 

Sec. 1.1. - Objectives. 
This ordinance is for the purpose of setting forth standards and permissible uses designed to conserve and protect the natural, economic and scenic resources of Greene County; health, aesthetics, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to promote desirable living conditions and stability of neighborhoods; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements by dividing Greene County into districts of such size and shapes as may be best suited to carry out the purposes of the legislative act and of this ordinance. 
Sec. 1.2. - Legislative authority. 
The Board of Commissioners of Greene County, Georgia under the authority of Article IX, Section 2, Paragraph 4 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Chapter 66, Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, or the general welfare of the county and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to avoid undue concentration of population; ordains and enacts into law the Official Zoning Ordinance for unincorporated Greene County, (for planning, zoning and subdivision control purposes). 
Sec. 1.3. - Method of regulation. 
The Board of Commissioners of Greene County, Georgia, as authorized by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, adopts zoning regulations for the following purposes: to define certain words used therein; to create zoning districts; to regulate the location of trades, professions, businesses, and industries; to regulate the density in distribution of population; to provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures; to provide for the method of administration, amendment and enforcement; to provide for the imposition of penalties for violations; repeal conflicting ordinances and resolutions; and for other purposes. 
Sec. 1.4. - Jurisdiction. 
This zoning ordinance shall govern the use of all land and development within the unincorporated limits of Greene County, Georgia and within the limits of any inactive municipality in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-70-5. 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE 

[Sec. 2.1. - Short title.] 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance for Greene County, Georgia". 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITION OF TERMS 

Sec. 3.1. - Definitions. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have their customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust or partnership. The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel". The word "building" includes "structure". The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "used" or "occupied", as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied". The term "erected" shall be deemed also to include "constructed", "reconstructed", "altered", "placed", or "moved". The word "land use" and "use of land" shall be deemed also to include "building use" and "use of building". The word "adjacent" means "nearby" and not necessarily "contiguous". The word "map" means the "Official Zoning Map of Greene County, Georgia", dated 1986, and as may be amended. 
When used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this Section. 
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to, and reasonably related to, a main building on the same lot or to the primary use of the property. The accessory building shall be of a size and nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal. Accessory buildings shall not include open air structures such as gazebos, pole barns, and pavilions. Signs and fences are not to be considered as accessory buildings. A "detached" accessory building shall be one that does not have a common wall, attached walkway, or roof connection with the main building on the same lot. 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: Any structure subordinate to the principal building on a lot which are open in nature such as a deck, fence, landscape wall, trellis (open roof), swimming pool, or other similar structures. Pools and spas are also considered to be accessory structures for zoning purposes. 
ACCESSORY USE: A use on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use. 
AGRICULTURE or AGRICULTURAL: A parcel used primarily for soil-dependent cultivation of agricultural crop production, the raising of livestock excluding poultry and other Confined Animal Feeding Operations, growth of a field, or forestry. 
AIRPORT: An area of land designed and set aside for landing and take-off of aircraft, including all necessary facilities for the housing and maintenance of aircraft. 
ALLEY: A platted service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting member of a building, any modification or change in construction, any addition which increases the area or height, any change in use of or moving of a building from one location to another, or any increase in the amount or volume of space used for any activity. 
ANIMAL SHELTER: A public or private facility exclusively for the temporary housing of stray or unwanted domestic animals. 
ANIMAL UNITS: The number of all such animals or fowl allowed on a non-commercial lot shall be limited to the square footage of the animal or fowl confinement area, less the lot square footage devoted to yard setbacks and the house, divided by the total minimum area required per animal or fowl. Total minimum area required per animal or fowl shall be as follows: horses - 43,560 square feet (one (1) acre), cow - 43,560 square feet, sheep or goat - 20,000 square feet, fowl - twenty (20) per 43,560 square feet. (Area requirements are based on minimum acreage averages for grazing such animals in the State of Georgia.) Total minimum area required per animal or fowl shall be a yearly average. Fluctuations in herd or flock size associated with general farming practices shall be permissible under this provision. 
APARTMENT: A suite of 2 or more rooms and a bath which is designed according to the Standard Building Code and designed or intended for occupancy by 1 family or 1 person doing its cooking therein. For zoning purposes, an apartment is regarded as a dwelling unit. A structure containing two (2) apartments is a duplex. A structure containing 3 or more apartments is a multi-family dwelling. 
APPLICANT: Any person who applies for a rezoning action, variance, conditional use permit, sign permit, or building permit, and any attorney or other person representing or acting on behalf of a person who applies for a rezoning action. 
ASSISTED LIVING HOME: See Personal Care Home. 
AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT: A premises designed or used for storage and display for sale of automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or other motorized vehicles. Motorized vehicles for sale will typically be stored outside. All other activities must be in an enclosed building. 
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil, automobile accessories and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, hand or automatic washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but excluding painting or major repairs. 
BED AND BREAKFAST: A dwelling unit, other than a hotel, motel or boarding house, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging rooms and meals are provided to registered guests for compensation. The operator of the Bed and Breakfast must live on the premises. 
BLOCK: A contiguous piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, but excluding alleys. 
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: Greene County Board of Commissioners. 
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where lodging and meals are provided for compensation or by pre-arrangement for at least 3 and not more than 20 persons at any one time. A building other than a hotel is not considered a boarding house by reason of a contribution to or an expense sharing arrangement with the owner or tenant occupying the dwelling by a person related by blood or marriage. 
BORROW PIT: An extracted area where naturally occurring earthen materials are to be removed for use as ordinary fill at another location. 
BUFFER AREA: A landscaped or naturalized area used to separate and partially obstruct the view of a development from adjacent or contiguous development. This area shall be in addition to any required area, yard, and height requirements for the zoning district as specified in Article VIII. 
BUILDING: Any structure, either permanent or temporary, above or below ground having roof or other covering, designed, built or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the average height between the eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, measured from the average grade of the house plan, front to back and end to end. 
BUILDING INSPECTOR: Greene County Building Inspector. 
BUILDING LINE: A line, parallel to the street line, beyond which the foundation wall and any roofed porch, vestibule or other such portion of a building shall not project. 
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building, in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted. 
BUSINESS ENTITY: Any corporation, partnership, limited partnership, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, or trust. 
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION: A contribution as defined in paragraph (6) of O.C.G.A. § 21-5-3. 
CAMPGROUND: An area or tract of land on which accommodations for temporary occupancy are located or may be placed, including cabins, tents, and major recreational equipment, and which is primarily used for recreational purposes and retains an open air or natural character. 
CARETAKER DWELLING OR EMPLOYEE RESIDENCE: An accessory single-family dwelling placed on an occupied tract for use by a farm worker or other tract owned by the same owner of the agricultural activity and that is a part of the same farming operation. 
CEMETERY, RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure owned by a religious institution and used for the burial of deceased persons who are generally members of that religious institution. 
CEMETERY, PRIVATE: Any plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure used for the burial of deceased persons of one collateral line of descent. 
CEMETERY, PUBLIC: A plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure not located on property owned by a religious institution but used for the burial of deceased persons. 
CHURCH: See "Religious Institution." 
CLINIC: A building where human patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment. 
CLUB: Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, or persons for social, educational or recreational purposes. 
COMMERCIAL USE: An occupation, employment, or enterprise that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee, or licensee. 
COMMUNITY CENTER: A place, structure, area, or other facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community. 
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The "Comprehensive Plan for Greene County and the cities of Greensboro, Siloam, Union Point, White Plains, and Woodville, adopted August, 1994," and as may be amended. 
CONDITIONAL USE: A use which is not permitted inherently but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to approval by the Board of Commissioners. 
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: The permit issued by the County following approval of the conditional use by the Board of Commissioners. 
CONDOMINIUM: An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest with other purchasers in the common grounds together with a separate interest in a dwelling unit located on the common grounds. 
CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION: Any animal feeding operation where animals are fed at the place of confinement and crop or forage growth in production is not sustained in the area of confinement, and the number of animals, including chickens, exceeds 999 at any given time. 
CONFINEMENT AREA: Any building, structure, or other facility in which chickens, hens, chicks, any type of poultry, or hogs are raised, hatched, or maintained in a live condition as part of a commercial operation involving the sale of such birds or animals on a large-scale basis, such as contract growers. 
CONSERVATION AREAS: Environmentally sensitive and valuable lands protected from any activity that would significantly alter their ecological integrity, balance, or character, except in cases of overriding public interest. Conservation areas include groundwater recharge areas, watersheds, wetlands, and river corridors. 
CONTIGUOUS PROPERTY: Two or more parcels of land with a common boundary or separated solely by a public or private roadway, or other public or private right-of-way, waterway or water body. 
CONVENIENCE CENTER: A location provided by the County government for the use of the citizens of Greene County to dispose of household waste in the proper provided receptacles. 
CONVENIENCE STORE: A one-story, retail store containing less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a supermarket). It is designed to attract and depends upon a large volume of stop-and-go traffic. Illustrative examples of convenience stores are those operated by "7-11" and "Golden Pantry." 
COUNTY: Greene County, Georgia. 
COUNTY OFFICIAL: Any member of the Greene County Board of Commissioners or Greene County Planning Commission. 
DAY CARE CENTER: A building operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution, or group that receives for group care fewer than twenty-four (24) hours per day without transfer of legal custody, children under eighteen (18) years of age. 
DAY CARE HOME: A private dwelling operated by any person who receives pay for supervision and care, fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, 3 but not more than 6 children under 18 years of age who are not related to such person and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private dwelling. 
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units permitted per net acre of land. (Net acre equals gross acre less streets, easements, water, open space, etc.) 
DISTRICT: A section of Greene County, Georgia where the zoning ordinance is uniform. 
DRY CLEANERS: A business that provides laundry cleaning, excluding self-service, and contains on the premises, equipment necessary for laundry processing. 
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building containing at least 3 dwelling units designed for residential use by 3 or more families living independently of each other. This includes apartments but not group homes, row houses, condominiums, or townhouses. 
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A structure including site built, modular, manufactured homes, and mobile homes that contain one (1) dwelling unit designed for residential use that is surrounded by open space on the same lot. "Dwelling, Single-family" does not include "Dwelling, Single-Family, Detached." 
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED: A structure including a site built or modular home that contains one (1) dwelling unit designed for residential use that is surrounded by open space on the same lot, which meets or exceeds the following standards: 
1.  Minimum width in excess of sixteen (16) feet. 
2.  Minimum square footage required by the zone in which located. 
3.  The roof shall have a minimum roof pitch greater than 2:12 and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials. The roof overhang must be at least 1 foot when measured from the vertical side. 
4.  The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap. 
5.  Be attached to a permanent foundation. 
6.  Be constructed according to standards established either by the State Minimum Standard Codes as amended from time to time or the Standard Building Code. 
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX): A structure containing 2 dwelling units designed and arranged for residential use by 2 families living independently of each other. 
DWELLING UNIT: An enclosure containing sleeping, kitchen, and bathroom facilities designed for and used or held ready for use as a permanent residence by one family. 
EASEMENT: A grant of 1 or more property rights by the owner to, or for the use by, the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
FAMILY: One (1) or more individuals permanently occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a boarding house, group home, or hotel, as defined in this ordinance. 
FINANCIAL INTEREST: All direct ownership interests of the total assets or capital stock of a business entity where such ownership interest is 10 percent or more. 
FLEA MARKET: An occasional or periodic sales activity held within a building, structure, or open area where groups of individual sellers offer goods, new and used, for sale to the public, not to include private garage sales. 
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the total number of floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of the walls separating two buildings, including stairwells and elevator shafts, but not including: attic space providing headroom for less than six (6) feet six (6) inches, unusable basement or cellar space not used for retailing, uncovered steps or fire escape, open porches, accessory water or cooling towers, accessory off-street parking spaces, or accessory off-street loading berths. 
FRONTAGE: The distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. For the purpose of corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage. 
FRONTAGE STREET: The street coincident to the front boundary line of the parcel. 
GARAGE, PARKING: A building or portion thereof designed or used for storage of motor-driven vehicles, and at which motor fuels and oils may be sold, and in connection with which general automotive servicing may be performed as distinguished from automotive repairs. 
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or a portion of a principal use building used for parking or storage of motor vehicles of the principal building's occupants. A carport is considered a private garage. 
GARAGE, REPAIR: A building and premises designed or used for the purpose of service or commercial repair of motor vehicles. All body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings. The storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies shall be solely for the purpose of repairing motor vehicles and not as a salvage or junkyard business. The storage of junk, wrecked or unclaimed vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies shall not be visible beyond the premises. 
GARAGE APARTMENT: A dwelling unit for 1 family erected above a private garage detached from the principal dwelling. 
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The total area of a building measured by taking the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage. 
GROUP HOME: A residence under the ownership and supervision of a public, educational, or governmental institution occupied or intended for occupancy by several unrelated persons or families but where separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons or families. 
GUEST HOUSE: A lodging unit for temporary guests in a building accessory to a detached, single-family dwelling unit, and which is not rented or otherwise used or occupied as a separate dwelling. A guest house is an accessory use to a detached, single-family dwelling. 
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: Greene County Health Department. 
HOME OCCUPATION, RESIDENTIAL: An occupation or profession conducted in accordance with § 9.7 of this ordinance and for financial gain, which is clearly subordinate to the use of the dwelling and which does not change the character thereof. 
HOME OCCUPATION, RURAL: An occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling unit or accessory building and for financial gain, which is clearly subordinate to the principal use of the parcel and which does not change the character thereof. 
HOME OFFICE: An office use conducted entirely within a dwelling unit, which is carried on solely by the unit's occupant and is incidental and secondary to the principal use of the dwelling. The office may be for the purpose of service or trade workers who customarily work at various locations, such as electricians, plumbers, appraisers, real estate salespersons, or individuals who work at home, such as writers or computer programmers. "Home Office" shall not include any business that involves the sale, manufacture or repair of merchandise on the premises. Home Offices shall also not include any business requiring access by the public, including, but not limited to, customers, clients or vendors. 
HOME INDUSTRY: The manufacture of products of a light industrial nature, primarily involving the assembly of previously manufactured items by members of a family residing on the parcel of land on which the industry is located. Home industry includes the repair of automobiles, small motors, and appliances. No more than three (3) non-family related employee may be employed on the premises and all home industry activity, including repair and storage, must occur in an enclosed building and no pollution or excess noise shall be involved. 
HOTEL: A building or group of buildings (single or multiple ownership) offering transient lodging accommodations for more than 20 persons on a daily rate which may provide additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities. 
INDUSTRIAL PARK: A tract of land subdivided and developed according to a comprehensive development plan in a manner that provides a park setting for industrial establishments. 
INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING: A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed for incorporation into a permanent structure at a building site on a permanent foundation to be used for residential purposes. A modular home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the approval of the State Building Administration Board (SAAB) to meet the same requirements as a site built home within Greene County. 
INSTITUTION: A non-profit corporation or a non-profit establishment. 
JUNK: Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris or waste, junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, or iron, steel, and old scrap ferrous or nonferrous metal. 
JUNK YARD: A lot, land or building, or part thereof, used primarily for the collection, storage, and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material, or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof. 
JUNKED VEHICLE: Any wrecked, dismantled, or non-operating motorized vehicle that does not bear a current license plate. Also includes non-operational farm equipment and farm implements. 
KENNELS: Any location where, for commercial purposes, 4 or more adult dogs, cats, rabbits or other domestic animals are kept for the purpose of boarding, caring for, raising, grooming, breeding, training or sale. 
KINDERGARTEN: A school for pre-elementary school children ranging in age from 4 through 6 years, which operates for less than 4 hours per day. 
LAUNDROMAT: A business that provides home-type washing, drying, ironing machines or coin operated dry cleaning machines for hire and use by customers on the premises. 
LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING PICK-UP: A business that provides only for the convenience of taking and picking up laundry and which does not have any on-site equipment for processing laundry. 
LODGING HOUSE: See "Boarding House". 
LOADING SPACE: A space within the principal use or on the same lot that provides for standing, loading or unloading of trucks and other carriers. 
LOT: A portion of, or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description, metes and bounds, intended for transfer of ownership or for building development and having a separate tax parcel reference number designated in the office of Greene County Tax Commissioner or Greene County Tax Assessor. 
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting 2 or more public streets or county maintained roads at their intersection. 
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE or THROUGH LOT: A lot with frontage on 2 public streets and/or county maintained roads that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot. 
LOT LINE, REAR: The rear lot line is generally opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front lot line, not less than 10 feet long, and lying wholly within the lot and farthest from the front lot line. 
LOT OF RECORD: A lot whose existence, location, and dimensions have been legally recorded or registered in a deed or on a plat in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Greene County. 
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between one side lot line and the other side lot line measured at the minimum front setback line. 
LUNCH COUNTER: A retail establishment where the preparation and serving of food is not the principal business of the retail establishment, defined as not generating the largest percentage of gross sales or occupying the largest percentage of the retail floor area. Food served in the establishment shall be unpackaged, in individual servings, and in a ready-to-consume state. Customers shall be served while seated at tables or counters located within the building. 
MAJOR UTILITY FACILITY: All utility facilities other than minor utilities. Including public utilities serving regional areas and public utility service and storage yards. Examples include, but are not limited to, uses such as electrical substations, water and sewer treatment facilities, and water towers. This definition excludes public utility transmission lines. 
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 U.S.C. §5401, et seq. The definition at the date of adoption of this part is as follows: 
"Manufactured Home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. Except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary and complies with the standards established under this title. 
MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE: Land within a manufactured home park that is reserved or leased for the placement of an individual manufactured home, accessory structures and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A tract of land that is used, designated, maintained, or held out for rent to accommodate 3 or more manufactured homes. Manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park are used only to provide living and sleeping accommodations. A manufactured home park does not include an automobile or manufactured home sales lot on which unoccupied manufactured homes are parked for inspection or sale. 
MANUFACTURING, PROCESSING AND ASSEMBLING: The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. The land uses engaged in these activities are usually described as plants, factories or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Establishments engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered under this definition if the new product is neither a fixed structure nor other fixed improvement. Also included is the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastic resins or liquors. 
MARINA: A facility for storing, servicing, fueling, berthing, and securing and launching of private pleasure craft that may include the sale of fuel and incidental supplies for the boat owners, crews, and guests. 
MEMBER OF THE FAMILY: The spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of a county official. This definition applies to Article XIV only. 
MINE DEVELOPMENT: The preparation of a surface or subsurface area for commercial mining including non-commercial extraction of ore bearing or non-ore bearing rock, excavation for open pit, declines, adits, drifts, shaft construction, or any surface construction or excavation. 
MINING: The removal from the earth of materials, minerals and other solid matter that will be further processed, refined, cleaned or altered in any way and then incorporated into manufactured products either in the County or other commercial markets. Water acquired for personal or commercial uses and earthwork necessary for normal grading operations are exempted from this definition. 
MINI-WAREHOUSE: A building consisting of individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods or contractor's supplies. 
MINOR UTILITY FACILITY: Any structures or facility (other than buildings, unless such buildings are used as storage incidental to the operation of such structures or facilities) owned by a governmental entity, a nonprofit organization, a corporation, or any entity defined as a public utility for any purpose by the Georgia Public Service Commission and used in connection with the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, or electronic signals. Examples include, but are not limited to, pump stations, community well houses and above ground utility cabinets. Minor utilities are exempt from minimum lot size and setback requirements. Excepted from this definition are Major Utilities. 
MOBILE HOME: A transportable, factory-built structure designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to the enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976. 
MODULAR HOME: See "Industrialized Building." 
MOTEL: A building or a group of buildings designed and used primarily for offering transient lodging accommodations and having a parking place adjacent to each sleeping room and having separate outside entrances for each guest room. A motel is used primarily for automobile transients and includes such terms as "auto court" and "motor lodge" but not "boarding house" as defined in this section. 
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any lawfully existing building or structure which does not conform to these ordinances governing the type, bulk, location, height or size of buildings or structures permitted in the district prior to the adoption of this ordinance but which is in full compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and ordinances, and for which all required federal, state and local permits have been issued. 
NON-CONFORMING LOT: A lot, the area, width, or other characteristics of which fails to comply with applicable ordinances and which was of record and in full compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and ordinances prior to the enactment of these or other ordinances, but which does not comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
NON-CONFORMING USE: A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use ordinance for its zoning district but which complied with applicable ordinances at the time the use was established. 
NURSING HOME: A facility for 3 or more unrelated ill or aged persons not operating as the functional equivalent of a family, that provides food, shelter, and 24-hour medical care for compensation in addition to meeting the physical, emotional, and social needs of the unrelated aged or ill persons. 
OFF STREET PARKING: An area exclusive of a public or private thoroughfare where motor vehicles may be stored for the purposes of temporary, daily, or overnight parking. Parking within the road or street right-of-way is not Off Street Parking. 
OPEN SPACE: Land that is designed, developed, or reserved for recreation, gardens, resource protection, amenity, or buffers that may or may not be accessible to the residents of the development and/or the public. In no event will any area of a privately owned residential lot, any existing or future road rights-of-way, any off street parking or loading space area be counted as open space. To encourage the use of parkways and green pathways, areas within rights-of-way that are in excess of the required Greene County right-of-way widths as stipulated in the Zoning Ordinance and in the Subdivision Regulations may be counted toward open space requirements. To encourage the use of buffers around commercial tracts, within the Commercial Planned Unit Development District, designated buffers and parks may be counted as open space. 
OPPONENT: Any person who opposes a rezoning action or any attorney or other person representing or acting on behalf of a person who opposes a rezoning action. 
OPPOSE: To appear before, discuss with, or contact, either orally or in writing, a Greene County official and argue against a rezoning action. 
OVERBURDEN: means all of the earth and other materials which lie above natural deposits of ores or minerals, and includes all earth and other materials disturbed from their natural state in the process of surface mining. 
PERMITTED USE: Any use by right that is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
PERSON: An individual, partnership, committee, association, corporation, labor organization, or any other organization or group of persons. 
PERSONAL CARE HOME: A building or group of buildings, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for 2 or more adults who are not related by blood or marriage to the owner or administrator of the home. The facility must meet all requirements of Article 9.21 of this ordinance and must comply with all regulations and requirements of the State of Georgia Department of Human Resources and of the Federal Government. Personal services includes, but is not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and toileting. This term does not include buildings that are devoted to independent living units that include kitchen facilities where residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. 
Personal Care Homes are categorized as follows: 
Family Personal Care Home means a home for adults in a family-type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to 2 through 6 persons. 
Group Personal Care Home means a home for adults in a residence or other type building(s), non-institutional in character, which offers care to 7 through 15 persons. 
Congregate Personal Care Home means a home for adults offering care to 16 or more persons. 
Memory Care Unit or Home means the specialized unit within any personal care home or home that either holds itself out as providing additional or specialized care to persons with diagnoses of probable Alzheimer's Disease or other dementia who may be at risk of engaging in unsafe wandering activities outside the unit or home (eloping) or charges rates in excess of those charged other residents because of cognitive deficits which may place the residents at risk of eloping. Any personal home containing memory care unit or units must be located in a district that designates memory care units or homes as a permitted or conditional use. 
PLANNING COMMISSION: Greene County Planning Commission. 
PLAT: A sketch, map or survey of a lot, tract or parcel of land including lot lines, street rights-of-way and easements, with the dimensions of these features inscribed thereon. 
PLAY SCHOOL: A school for pre-kindergarten children ranging in age from 3 to 4 years of age. 
PRINCIPAL USE: The primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
PROFESSIONAL: When used in connection with "use" and "occupancy", a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in rendering personal, executive, sales, or administrative services or activities, including accountants, architects, professional engineers and land surveyors, doctors, lawyers, insurance offices, real estate offices, religious organizations, stock brokers and administrative agencies considered professional in character. The term, however, does not include repairs or sales of tangible personal property stored or located within the building nor any use that would create any loud noise or noxious odors within Greene County. 
PROPERTY INTEREST: The direct ownership of real property, including any percentage of ownership less than total ownership. 
REAL PROPERTY: Any tract or parcel of land and, if developed, any buildings or structures located on the land. 
RECLAMATION: means the reconditioning or rehabilitation of affected land under an approved mining land use plan. 
RECREATIONAL CAMPGROUNDS: Any public or private property that is used on a continuing basis for camping, or camping in conjunction with fishing or hunting shall be considered a recreational campground. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use that has its own motor power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle. The basic entities are: travel trailer, folding camping trailer, park trailer, truck camper, motor home, and custom van conversions. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Any parcel where 2 or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles or tents, as temporary living quarters by the general public for recreation or vacation purposes. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SITE: A plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park intended for the accommodation of either a recreational vehicle, tent, or other individual camping unit on a temporary basis. Sites shall be rented by the day or week only, and the occupant of the space and his/her vehicle, tent or camper shall not remain in the same recreational vehicle park for more than 30 days in a 60-day period. 
RECYCLING CENTER: A facility designed and operated to receive, store, or process recyclable materials that have been separated from residual solid waste. Materials may include, but are not limited to: newspaper, corrugated cardboard, aluminum, glass, metal, plastic, motor oil and batteries. 
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A religious institution that has been granted 501-C tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service and whose property is deemed tax exempt by the Greene County Tax Assessor. 
REMOVAL: The actual process of digging or otherwise removing the substance being moved. 
RESTAURANT: An establishment where food and beverages are sold for consumption on the premises. A snack bar or refreshment stand at a public or non-profit community swimming pool, playground, or park operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility is not a restaurant. 
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: An eating or drinking establishment that caters to motor-driven vehicle business where the person being served consumes his food or drink while sitting in a motor driven vehicle, as opposed to a restaurant serving exclusively inside an enclosed building. 
RESTAURANT, FAMILY: An establishment, privately owned and operated where food & beverages are sold primarily for consumption on the premises and is not part of a chain restaurant or franchise. 
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD: An establishment that offers quick food service, which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared and held for service, or prepared, fried, or griddled quickly, or heated in a device such as a microwave oven. Orders are not generally taken at the customer's table and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers. 
REZONING ACTION: An action by the Board of Commissioners adopting an amendment to the zoning map that has the effect of rezoning real property from one zoning district to another. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY: That area, distinguished from an easement, for the present or future use of roads, streets, highways and utilities, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE: Designated limits of a right-of-way, whether such right-of-way is established by usage, recorded easement, deed, dedication or by an official right-of-way map of Greene County, Georgia. 
ROOMING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where lodging for 3 but not more than 20 persons is provided for compensation or by pre-arrangement but no meals are served. 
SCHOOL: A public or private facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction including kindergartens and pre-kindergartens. 
SCREENING: A method where a view of one site is shielded, concealed, or hidden from another site. Screening techniques include fences, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, natural vegetation or other features. Screening must provide a visual and acoustical barrier that is of such nature and density that it provides year-round maximum shielding, concealment or hiding from the ground to a height of at least eight (8) feet or from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot. 
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY: See "mini-warehouses." 
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the lot or property right-of-way line and the nearest front, side or rear line of the building, including terraces or any covered projections but excluding steps. 
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of retail business and service uses on a single site planned and developed as a unit, with common off-street parking facilities. 
SIGN: A structure or device designed or intended to convey information to the public in written or pictorial form. 
SIGN AREA: The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure or similar character, together with any frame of other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate this sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which this sign is placed, provided, however, that any open space contained within the outer limits of the display face of a sign, or between any component, panel, strip or fixture of any kind composing the display face shall be included in the computation of the area of the sign whether this open space is enclosed or not by a frame or border. 
SIGN FACE: The surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message of the sign is exhibited. 
SIGN HEIGHT: The vertical measurement from the highest part of a sign, including all support structures, to the average ground level. Any earth berm or elevated foundation that supports a sign, sign post, or sign support is included in the height of the sign. 
SIGN STRUCTURE: Any construction used or designed to support a sign. 
SITE BUILT: A building constructed on-site with approved building materials, inspected periodically during construction, and constructed according to locally adopted building codes. 
SOLAR PANEL: A solar panel is any part of a solar farm that absorbs solar energy for use in the solar farm's energy transformation process. 
SOLAR FARM: An energy facility or area of land used to convert solar energy to electricity, which includes, but is not limited to, the use of one or more solar panels or similar solar energy systems for the purpose of generating electricity to be used off site. 
SOLID FENCE: An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials generally manufactured for fencing, erected to enclose or screen areas of land in a manner where the area inside the fencing is not readily visible at any distance. 
SOLID WALL: A wall constructed in such a manner to prohibit viewing of land, materials, buildings, etc., located behind the wall, from an individual standing outside and parallel to the wall. 
SOLID WASTE LANDFILL: Any disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, as amended, occurs, whether or not mixed with or including other waste allowed under Subtitle D of the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, is deposited by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
SPECIAL EVENTS: Circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, or other types of special events that (1) run for longer than one day but not longer than two weeks, (2) are intended to or likely to attract substantial crowds, and (3) are unlike the customary or usual activities generally associated with the property where the special event is to be located. 
STORAGE TRAILER: A prefabricated portable storage building commonly attached to a cab or chassis for transportation. 
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of the floor and the ceiling above it. 
STREET: A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of ingress and egress to abutting property and is classified as follows. See § 6.5 for street classifications. 
STREET, PUBLIC: A street that is titled by description or deed and vested in Greene County. 
STREET LINE: The legal line between street right-of-way and abutting property. 
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to, the following: site built buildings, manufactured, mobile and modular homes, swimming pools, and signs. 
SUBDIVISION: The division of a tract, lot or parcel into 3 or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the immediate or future purpose of sale, lease, offer or development. Also see Greene County Subdivision Ordinance. 
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE: Greene County Subdivision Ordinances dated April 1989 and as may be amended. 
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: Any structure used in conjunction with construction work which may not be used as a residence, and must be removed immediately upon completion of construction. 
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE: A manufactured home used as a temporary residence during reconstruction of a permanent home that has been destroyed by fire, natural disaster, or condemnation. A temporary residence must be removed immediately upon completion of construction or no later than 30 days after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
THEATER: An indoor commercial facility used for the sole purpose of showing commercially produced movies to a paying audience. Generally, theaters contain a concession facility. 
TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
TOWNHOUSE: A single-family attached dwelling unit that is erected in a row as part of a single building, on adjoining lots, each separated from the adjoining unit or units by approved fire resistant party wall or walls extending from the basement or cellar floor to the roof along the dividing lot line. Each unit shall have its own front door, which opens to the outdoors, and shall have a minimum of 2 floors. There is no access between adjoining units. 
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT: A compact, mixed-use neighborhood where residential, commercial and civic buildings are within close proximity to each other. 
TRANSFER STATION: A facility used to transfer solid waste from one transportation vehicle to another for transport to a disposal facility or processing operation. The purpose of this type facility is to allow consolidation of smaller loads into larger vehicles, thereby reducing overall community truck traffic. A transfer station must comply with the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, §391-3-4, Solid Waste Management, effective June 27, 1993, and as amended. 
VARIANCE: A minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading ordinances as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, not due to the fault of the owner of said property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a principal use, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where projections and accessory buildings are expressly permitted in these ordinances. 
YARD, FRONT: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal use, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the right-of-way line and the building line projected to the side lines of the lot. Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, are considered part of the principal use and shall not project into a required front yard. On corner lots, the front yard is considered parallel to the street upon which the lot has its largest dimension. 
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the building. Rear yard depth shall be measured at right angles to the rear line of the lot. 
YARD, SIDE: A yard lying between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or in the absence of either of such front or rear yards, to the front or rear lot lines. Side yard width shall be measured at right angles to side lines of the lot. 
ZONING ACTION: A request for any action under the Zoning Ordinance, including, but not limited to, rezoning, variance, conditional use permits, tower ordinances, and sign ordinance. 
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The individual or his/her designated representative, who is vested with the duty of administrating land use regulations within the unincorporated areas of Greene County. 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 4.1. - Establishment of districts. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, unincorporated Greene County, Georgia is divided into zoning districts as follows: 
A1 - Agricultural District (Intensive Farming) 
A2 - Agricultural-Residential District 
B1 - Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District 
B2 - General Commercial Highway Oriented District 
C3 - Heavy Commercial District 
CPUD - Commercial Planned Unit Development District 
LI - Light Industrial District 
HI - Heavy Industrial District 
OI - Office-Institutional District 
PUD - Planned Unit Development District 
R1 - Low-Density Residential District 
R2 - Medium-Density Residential District 
RM - Multi-Family Residential District 
LR1 - Lakeshore Single-Family Residential/Recreation District 
LR2 - Lakeshore Multi-Family Residential/Recreation District 
LC - Lakeshore Commercial District 
LP - Lakeshore Park District 
AP - Airport Corridor District 
STRO - Short Term Rental Overlay District 
( Ord. of 10-2-2017 ) 
Sec. 4.2. - Zoning map. 
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown in the "The Official Zoning Map of Greene County, Georgia". Said map is hereby made a part of this Ordinance. As evidence of its authenticity, the official zoning map shall be signed by the Chairman of Greene County Board of Commissioners and attested to by the Clerk of County Commissioners. A copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Greene County Zoning Administrator as well as copies for sale. 
Sec. 4.3. - Map amendment. 
If, in accordance with provisions of this Ordinance, changes are made in the boundaries or other information portrayed in the Official Zoning Map, such changes must be made on the Official Zoning Map within 30 days after the amendment has been approved by the Board of Commissioners together with a numerical entry on the Official Zoning Map referring to the application on file which states the date of the official action and the brief description of the nature of the changes. No amendment to this Ordinance that involves a matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map is effective until after such change and entry is made on the map. All changes made to the official zoning map or matters shown thereon must be in conformity with the procedures set forth in this zoning ordinance. Any unauthorized change by any person is considered a violation of this Ordinance and punishable as provided by law and this ordinance. 
Sec. 4.4. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
The following rules apply where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the zoning districts shown on the Official Zoning Map for Greene County, Georgia. 
4.4.1  Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines, land lot lines, center lines of streets, highways, alleys or railroads, center lines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or civil boundaries, and they shall be construed to follow such lines. 
4.4.2  Where district boundaries are approximately parallel to or extend to the center lines of streets, highways, railroads, including their rights-of-way, or the center lines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the Official Zoning Map. If no distance is given, dimensions shall be determined by the scale shown on the Official Zoning Map. 
4.4.3  Where a district boundary line divides a lot that is under single ownership at the time of enactment of this Ordinance, the use classification of a larger portion may be extended by the Board of Commissioners to the remainder without recourse to the amendment procedure. 
4.4.4  Where a public road, street or alley is officially abandoned, the ordinances applicable to the parcel to which it reverts shall apply. 
4.4.5  In case the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the Board of Commissioners shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
ARTICLE V. - APPLICATION OF ORDINANCES 

Sec. 5.1. - Use. 
No building, structure, premises, or land shall be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, extended, enlarged, constructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with these ordinances for the district in which it is, or will be, located. 
Sec. 5.2. - Building height. 
No building or structure shall be erected, constructed or altered that exceeds the height limit for the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 5.3. - Lot area and lot size. 
Unless acquired for public use, no lot shall be reduced in size so that it does not comply with the applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 5.4. - Yards. 
No part of a yard or lot required for one building shall be included as part of a yard or lot similarly required for another building. Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projection of sills, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features, chimneys, flues, and eaves, provided such projections do not extend more than 2 feet into the yard area requirements. 
Sec. 5.5. - Corner lots. 
Minimum side yard requirements for corner lots shall not be less than the minimum front yard requirements for such lots. 
Sec. 5.6. - Principal buildings. 
In all Commercial, Industrial, and Office-Institutional zones, more than 1 principal building containing a permitted or conditional use may be erected on a single lot or tract of land provided that all yard and other space requirements of this Ordinance are met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. In the Agricultural zones, more than one principal building housing a permitted single-family residential use may be erected on a single-family residential lot or tract of land provided all yard and other space requirements of this Ordinance are met for each structure and each building shall be located on a lot or parcel which abuts a public street or road or has access to a public street or road by means of a recorded easement. 
The owner must record a plat of subdivision of the lot(s) with the Clerk of the Superior Court before a building permit can be issued. A parcel of land divided into 3 or more lots for sale or legacy may be subjected to the Greene County Subdivision Regulations. 
Sec. 5.7. - Minimum distance between buildings. 
The following minimum distances between structures are required unless otherwise specified within this Ordinance. 
5.7.1  There shall be a distance of not less than 20 feet between a principal and accessory building located on the same lot or parcel. 
5.7.2  No building or accessory building shall be located closer than 10 feet to any lot line in any district, with the exception of well houses. 
Sec. 5.8. - Temporary structures. 
Temporary structures used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any district and shall be removed within seven (7) days of the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL CONDITIONS 

Sec. 6.1. - Non-conforming buildings and uses. 
The elimination of existing buildings and structures or uses that do not conform to this Ordinance is as much a subject of health, safety and general welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of new uses that would violate the provisions of this Ordinance. It is also the intent of this Ordinance to administer the elimination of non-conforming uses, buildings, and structures so as to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights. 
Any structure or use of land lawfully existing at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance and its amendments, but not in conformity with its use ordinances and provisions is "grand-fathered" and may be continued subject to the following provisions. 
6.1.1  Unsafe Structures. Any structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by an appropriate governing authority may be restored to a safe condition, provided the requirements of Section 6.1 are met. 
6.1.2  Alterations. Any change in a lawfully existing non-conforming building, use, building site or yard area is subject to the following: 
6.1.2.1  No lawfully existing non-conforming building, can be structurally altered, except repairs on the building or installation of plumbing fixtures required by law, the changing of interior partitions, and interior remodeling. Structurally altering a lawfully existing non-conforming building shall not exceed 50 percent of the value of the building as determined by the Building Inspector. Restorations and remodeling of existing non-conforming agricultural buildings is permitted. 
6.1.2.2  No lawfully existing non-conforming building or lands, except those residential dwellings needing repairs on the building or installation of plumbing fixtures as required by law, can be substantially added to, moved, or extended in any manner unless such building or land is changed to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
6.1.2.3  If a lawfully existing non-conforming building is moved, all non-conforming minimum yard requirements, as defined in Article VIII or elsewhere in this ordinance, must be eliminated. 
6.1.2.4  Whenever an owner of a lawfully existing residential dwelling must make repairs on or installation of plumbing fixtures which will force the location of the future addition of the dwelling nearer the lot line, the addition to the dwelling shall be allowed to extend to the existing building line but no nearer the property line than any existing portion of the dwelling. 
6.1.3  Extension. A lawfully existing non-conforming use is restricted to the lot occupied by such use as of the effective date of this Ordinance. A non-conforming use must not be extended to include either additional building or land, except as permitted in § 6.1.2.4, or unless the owner applies for and is granted a variance. 
6.1.4  Restoration of Damaged Buildings. Unless otherwise specified, a lawfully existing non-conforming structure that is destroyed (damage equals or exceeds 50 per cent of the structures' replacement value, as determined by the Building Inspector), through no intent of the owner, may not be reconstructed or restored to the same non-conforming use except upon approval of the County Building Inspector. This does not apply to damage due to wind storms, i.e., tornados. 
6.1.5  Discontinuance. A lawfully existing non-conforming use that has been discontinued for a continuous period of, five (5) years shall not be reestablished and any future use shall be in conformance with this Ordinance. Where government action impedes access to land, the time of any resulting discontinuance of a non-conforming use shall not be counted towards the time periods of this section. 
Sec. 6.2. - Off-street automobile parking. 
Within Greene County, Georgia, off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any permitted or conditional use is established in accordance with this ordinance. 
6.2.1  General Requirements. For the purpose of this Ordinance the following general requirements are specified: 
The term "Parking Space" means a space for parking vehicles that meets the following dimensional requirements: 
Parking Dimensions 

 
Note: Overhang (Dimension "F") may be utilized to reduce parking length if a solid curb is installed and the overhang is landscaped with plant material that does not exceed 12 inches mature height. If an attached sidewalk and curb are proposed as a wheel stop, the sidewalk must be a minimum of 4' wide plus the overhang width. 
6.2.1.1  Credit for "Off-street Parking Space" requirements may be given in the following zoning districts; PUD, CPUD, LR2 and RM. The amount of off-street parking required shall be reduced by one off-street parking space for every on-street parking space directly abutting and on the same side of the street as the development. On-street parking spaces that are not directly abutting the development site may be counted towards the minimum parking space requirements only if specifically authorized by the Zoning Administrator. The following constitutes an on-street parking space; 
a.  On-street parking spaces are located outside of the road travel lanes. 
b.  On-street parking spaces credited for a non-residential use may not be used exclusively by that use, but shall be available for general public use at all times. 
c.  On-street parking shall follow the established configuration of existing on-street parking within the block. 90-degree (perpendicular parking) on-street parking is only permitted on local streets. 45-degree diagonal parking may be allowed with the approval of the Zoning Administrator, taking into account traffic flows and street design. 
6.2.1.2  Tandem parking for off-street parking - where one vehicle is parking in front of another and effectively blocked from moving without first moving the other - is permissible only for residential uses. 
Subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator, tandem parking is permissible for non-residential uses where valet parking, or fleet parking or other similar attended parking use is provided. If approved, it shall be a continuing condition of the permit authorizing development on such lot that should the valet parking discontinue, then the permit-holder is obligated to provide the required "off-street" parking. 
6.2.1.3  If an off-street parking space cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the County Building Inspector may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property, provided such space lies within 600 feet of the property line of the principal use. The parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
6.2.1.4  The required number of parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time. 
6.2.1.5  Area reserved for off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which it serves is discontinued or modified, and unless equivalent parking space is provided to the satisfaction of the County Building Inspection Office. 
Off-Street parking existing at the effective date of this Ordinance in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use. 
6.2.2  Parking Space Requirements for All Districts. 
6.2.2.1  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Zoning Administrator may allow deviations from the parking requirements above when it finds; 
a.  A residential development is irrevocably oriented toward the elderly or other demographic group that, due to the driving characteristics of the group, requires fewer or more parking stalls than the general populace, or 
b.  A sole business (not part of a larger mall) is primarily oriented to walk-in trade. 
6.2.2.2  Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley, and shall be equal to the minimum requirements for the specific land use set forth. 

 
For specific buildings or uses not scheduled above, the Administrator shall apply the unit of measurement set forth in the above schedule which is deemed to be the most similar to the proposed building or use, or approve site specific parking based on developer submitted data (subject to Administrator approval), or apply an appropriate standard from an accepted reference manual. 
6.2.3  Shared Parking. Two or more uses may share parking facilities without providing the minimum number of on-site required spaces for each use, provided the following conditions are met: 
6.2.3.1  The minimum required number of parking spaces for the combined uses may be reduced by 20 percent where hours of operation overlap with approval of the Planning and Zoning Board. 
6.2.3.2  Off-site spaces shall be within 600 feet of the property line of the principal use. If the pedestrian access is to cross an arterial street, appropriate safety measures must be present to help the pedestrian cross the street. In any event, safe and convenient pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or path, must exist or be provided from the structure or use to the parking lot. 
6.2.3.3  The parking facility to be shared must contain at least the minimum required spaces of the largest individual use sharing the lot and shall be developed to the extent of at least being paved and striped according to the standards of this ordinance. 
6.2.3.4  The parking facility to be shared must be owned by the owner of one of the uses or leased for at least a 20-year term or through a permanent easement by the owner of the uses being served. 
6.2.3.5  No changes shall be made to the shared parking facility which would reduce the parking provided for the uses, unless the owner of one of the uses makes other arrangements to provide parking. No such changes shall be made without approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
6.2.3.6  Parking spaces to be shared must not be reserved for a specific person, individual, or use on a twenty-four hour basis. 
6.2.3.7  Handicap parking spaces cannot be shared, unless the establishments that are to share the spaces are adjacent to the handicap spaces and not inconvenient to the users of such spaces. 
6.2.3.8  Loading space shall not be used for general parking. 
6.2.3.9  Any proposed change in the use of a structure that shares a parking facility will require proof that adequate parking is available. 
6.2.3.10  Off-site and shared parking may be used in combination to develop parking facilities, provided all the requirements of this section are met. 
6.2.4  Stacking Space for Drive-through facilities. 
6.2.4.1  Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through facility or areas having drop-off and pick-up areas. The following general standards shall apply to all stacking spaces and drive-through facilities: 
1.  Stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through stations shall not impede on and off site traffic movements, shall not cross or pass through off-street parking areas, and shall not create a potentially unsafe condition where crossed by pedestrian access to a public entrance of a building. 
2.  Drive through lanes shall be separated from off-street parking areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked or otherwise distinctly delineated. 
3.  Approach lanes for drive-through facilities shall have the following minimum widths: 
One lane, feet per lane\12 
Two or more lanes, feet per lane\10 
4.  All drive-through facilities shall be provided with a bypass lane with a minimum width of 10 feet. 
5.  Alleys or driveways in residentially zoned areas adjacent to drive-through facilities shall not be used for circulation of customer traffic. 
6.  Each stacking space shall be a minimum of 10 feet by 20 feet. 
6.2.4.2  The number of stacking spaces shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Financial institutions with drive-through windows: 2 stacking spaces for each window. 
2.  Drive-in or Fast Food Restaurant: 6 stacking spaces per drive-through window measured from the order board or station. 
3.  All other uses: 3 stacking spaces for each window. 
6.2.5  Parking Area Site Requirements. 
6.2.5.1  All off-street parking shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained according to the following requirements for B1, B2, B3, L1, OI, & CPUD. This requirement shall not apply to property annexed into a PUD or CPUD unless the development of that property is integrated into the PUD or CPUD master plan after annexation. Off-street parking includes parking spaces or lots for customers and employees. 
6.2.5.2  All parking areas shall be hard surfaces with concrete or plant mix material. Parking areas may consist of gravel or crusher-run with the approval of the Planning & Zoning Board. Parking areas without hard surfaces shall install parking blocks each perpendicular or diagonal parking space except where the parking space is adjacent to concrete curbs. 
6.2.5.3  Parking lots of more than four (4) parking spaces shall have adequate turn-around areas so that all vehicles may enter the street in a forward manner. 
6.2.5.4  Parking lots shall be designed so that sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles can serve such developments without the necessity of backing unreasonable distances or making other dangerous or hazardous turning movements. 
6.2.5.5  Required parking shall not be encroached upon by refuse containers, signs or other structures, nor used for parking of equipment or outdoor storage of goods for sale or storage. Required parking spaces shall be provided with vehicular access to a public street or alley. 
6.2.5.6  Lighting facilities, if provided, shall be arranged so that light is reflected away from adjacent properties and streets. 
6.2.5.7  The parking area shall be adequately drained. 
6.2.5.8  No sign shall be placed within the public right-of-way. Signs and planting strips shall not obstruct the visibility of drivers or pedestrians. 
6.2.5.9  All parking lots must be maintained in a clean, litter free condition. 
6.2.6  Landscape Standards for Parking Lots. Parking lots should be effectively landscaped with trees and shrubs to reduce the visual impact of glare, headlights, and parking lot lights from the public right-of-way and from adjoining properties. In addition, parking lots should be adequately shaded to reduce the amount of reflected heat. 
6.2.6.1  When a lot is located adjacent to a public right-of-way, a minimum of 10 feet of landscaped land will be provided between the right-of-way and the parking lot to reduce the visual impact of the parking lot. The landscaping site plan must be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
6.2.6.2  Along the perimeter of the parking lot, to reduce its visual impact: 
1.  Provide a ten-foot wide landscape strip around the perimeter of the lot, to be planted with shade trees and low shrubs. Provide a minimum of one shade tree per every 40 feet of lot perimeter. However, this does not mean that shade trees must be located 40 feet on center. Additional shade trees may be necessary to effectively shade/screen the parking lot. 
6.2.6.3  For the purpose of calculating off-street parking lot square footage, all areas within the lot's perimeter are counted, including the planting islands, curbed areas, corner lots, parking spaces, and all interior driveways and aisles except those with no parking spaces located on either side. Landscaped areas outside the parking lot may not be used to meet the interior planting requirement. Landscape provisions only apply to parking areas for customers or employees. The amount of landscaping required is based on the following sliding scale: 

 
The above percentage must be planted in shade trees. This is necessary to break up the visual expansiveness of lots and to reduce glare and heat. Landscaping requirements will be to plant a minimum of 1 overstory or 2 understory trees per 200 square feet of required interior planting area. The trees shall be the following criteria; 
a.  Overstory trees shall be a minimum of 2½ inches caliper. Overstory trees include but are not limited to oaks, pines, and maples. 
b.  Understory trees shall be a minimum of 1 inch caliper. Understory trees include but are not limited to dogwoods, crepe myrtles, and redbuds. 
c.  No more than one third of the trees can be understory trees. 
d.  No more than 50 percent of the trees can be of a single variety. 
To achieve these objectives, the following alternatives should be considered: 
1.  Provide a continuous landscape strip between every four rows of parking. This should be a minimum of eight feet in width to accommodate a low hedge and overstory trees. 
2.  Create large planting islands (over 600 square feet) to be located throughout the lot and planted with shade trees, low shrubs, and/or ground over. These should preferably be located at the ends of parking rows. 
3.  Provide planting islands (a minimum of nine feet wide) between every 10 to 15 spaces to avoid long rows of parked cars. Each of these planting islands should provide at least one shade tree having a clear trunk height of at least six feet. 
6.2.6.4  Within the interior of the parking lot, landscaping should be used to delineate vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns. Clear and legible signs, different color and texture paving materials, raised areas, and other techniques should be used to further direct the flow of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the lot. 
6.2.6.5  The general guidelines listed below should be followed for all parking lots. 
1.  Use shade trees with ground cover of low shrubs as the primary landscape material within parking lots. Avoid tall shrubs or low branching trees that will restrict visibility. 
2.  For planting islands that are parallel to spaces, islands should be a minimum of nine feet wide to allow doors to open. 
3.  For planting islands that are perpendicular to spaces, islands should be a minimum of eight feet wide to allow for overhang of parked cars. If parking is only on one side of the island, an eight-foot width is still required. 
4.  Screening of mechanical equipment, trash, and loading areas should be provided. This can be achieved using walls, fences, and/or landscaping. 
5.  Where appropriate, the use of porous pavement and/or specially designed brick or block should be considered to increase on site water retention for plant material and groundwater supplies and to reduce problems associated with runoff. 
6.2.7  Maintenance of Perimeter and Interior Parking Lot Landscaping. The owner, tenant, and their agent, if any, are jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. All landscaped areas must be watered via an underground sprinkler systems or be provided with a readily available water supply with at least one (1) outlet located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of all plant material to be maintained. 
6.2.7.1  All plant growth in landscaped areas must be controlled by pruning, trimming, or other suitable methods so that plant materials do not interfere with public utilities, restrict pedestrian or vehicular access, or otherwise constitute a traffic hazard. 
6.2.7.2  All planted areas must be maintained in a relatively weed free condition and clear of undergrowth. 
6.2.7.3  All planting must be fertilized and irrigated at such intervals as necessary to promote optimum growth. 
6.2.7.4  All trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other plant materials must be replaced during the next suitable planting period if they die or become unhealthy because of accidents, drainage problems, disease, or other causes. 
6.2.7.5  Replacement plants must conform to all standards that govern the original installation of plantings. 
Sec. 6.3. - Off street loading and unloading space. 
Off street loading and unloading spaces shall be provided as hereinafter required by this Ordinance. 
6.3.1  Size of Off Street Loading Spaces. Each off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of 14 feet in height, 12 feet in width, and 55 feet in length. However, upon sufficient demonstration that a particular loading space will be used exclusively by shorter trucks, the Zoning Administrator may reduce the minimum length accordingly to as little as 35 feet. 
6.3.2  Connection to Street or Alley. Each required off street loading space shall have direct access to a street or alley or have a driveway that offers satisfactory ingress and egress for trucks. 
6.3.3  Floor Area Over 10,000 Square Feet. Sufficient space for off-street loading and unloading must be provided for each hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building or similar use requiring the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise, and having a floor area of more than 10,000 square feet of floor space. Such space must be located so as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street or alley. 
6.3.4  Floor Area less than 10,000 Square Feet. Sufficient off street loading space (not necessarily a full space if shared by adjacent establishments) must be provided for each commercial or industrial building requiring the receipt or distribution of materials for merchandise and having a floor area of less than 10,000 square feet. The space must be located so as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street or alley. 
6.3.5  Bus and Trucking Terminals. There shall be provided sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of busses or trucks to be stored or loaded at the terminal at any one time. 
6.3.6  Location of Off Street Loading Spaces. All required off street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building which they are intended to serve, or on an adjacent lot when the loading spaces are shared with the use occupying said adjacent lot. 
6.3.7  Permanent Reservation. Area reserved for off-street loading in accordance with this Ordinance must not be reduced or changed to any other use unless the permitted use that the off-street loading serves is discontinued or modified. However, equivalent loading space may be provided and approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 6.4. - Control of curb cuts and vision clearance. 
The requirements for controlling curb cuts and maintaining vision clearance shall be as follows: 
6.4.1  Curb Cuts. No curb cut shall be less than 9 feet nor exceed 30 feet in length unless the property will primarily serve tractor-trailer traffic. Except in residential districts, no curb cut shall be closer than 100 feet to another curb cut or access point. At street intersections, no curb cut or other access point shall be located closer to the intersection than is necessary to serve the property but in no case shall be closer than 50 feet from the intersecting point of the two street rights-of-way or property lines involved (or such lines extended in case of a rounded corner), whichever is the least restrictive. 
A permit must be obtained from the Georgia Department of Transportation before curb cuts or any other point of access is authorized onto state owned highway rights-of-way from abutting property. Individuals requesting a development permit for property that abut a state owned highway must contact the District Traffic Engineer for consultation and DOT permit issuance before a local permit will be issued. 
6.4.2  Vision Clearance. In all use districts, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, marquee or other obstruction to vision between the heights of 2½ and 10 feet from the ground level is permitted within 50 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets or railroad lines, of a street intersection with a railroad line, or of curb cuts or driveways. 
Sec. 6.5. - Classification of streets. 
All streets in Greene County, Georgia, shall conform to the Greene County Subdivision Regulations. 
Sec. 6.6. - Storage and parking of recreational vehicles, trailers, and other vehicles. 
Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, boat, camping and hauling, shall not be parked or stored on any lot or parcel in any residential zoning district except in accordance with the following requirements: 
6.6.1  No commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquefied petroleum products is permitted in any residential district. 
6.6.2  Recreational vehicles, hauling trailers, or boat trailers are permitted if parked or stored behind the front yard building line in residential districts. 
6.6.3  A recreational vehicle shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area except in a recreational vehicle park authorized under this Ordinance, or as otherwise stated in this Ordinance. 
6.6.4  No automobile, recreation vehicle, trailer, or other vehicle for sale shall be parked in the right-of-way. 
Sec. 6.7. - Buffer areas and lighting. 
All required buffer areas and landscape strips are in addition to area, yard, and height requirements for the zoning district as specified in Article VIII. 
6.7.1  In any business (B1, B2, C3) or industrial (LI & HI) district, any operation not conducted within a building, such as outdoor recreation, outdoor storage of materials, and outdoor servicing activities, a ten (10) foot vegetated landscaped buffer area is to be maintained on the front property line. Twenty per cent (20%) of the total area is to consist of landscaped materials of not less than two (2) feet tall or a decorative fence of not less than two (2) feet in height. The Planning and Zoning Board shall, based on the character of the area, determine whether the applicant must install the landscape material or the decorative fence. All non-operating inventory must be stored behind the landscaped area or the decorative fence. 
6.7.2  In any district not subject to the requirements of § 6.7.1 but requiring screening of a specified operation, said screening shall be a solid wall or solid fence or tight evergreen hedge not less than six (6) feet in height. The tight evergreen hedge shall grow to at least six (6) feet in height within five (5) years. There shall be a perimeter landscape strip at least ten (10) feet wide, unless otherwise specified, that conforms to the planting requirements of § 6.2.6.5(2). All buffer area requirements are in addition to the area, yard, and height requirements for that district (Article VIII). Prior to any site construction or grading, the Planning and Zoning Board must approve a landscaping plan. 
6.7.3  A perimeter landscape strip of ten (10) feet in width, or six (6) feet if the commercial or industrial site is less than 15,000 square feet and not regulated by §§ 6.7.1 and 6.7.2, shall be planted in accordance with § 6.2.5.6(2) adjacent to the lot line when the following conditions exist or are created. 
6.7.3.1  A proposed structure will exist on a lot where the side or rear lot line is a district boundary other that B1, B2, B3, or LI. 
6.7.3.2  The lot or parcel on the opposite side of the boundary is zoned R1, R2, LR1, LR2 or RM. 
6.7.4  All outdoor lighting must reflect away from all residential dwellings and shall be situated to not directly reflect into any public rights-of-way. 
6.7.5  Any grading, improvement or construction adjacent to the buffer must not disturb or encroach on the buffer area. 
6.7.6  A manufactured home park shall be screened by a tight evergreen hedge or suitable landscaping and contain a perimeter landscape strip at least thirty (30) feet wide, unless otherwise specified. All perimeter landscape strip requirements are in addition to the area, yard, and height requirements for that district (see Article VIII). Prior to any site construction or grading, the Planning and Zoning Administrator must approve a landscaping plan. 
6.7.7  A ten (10) feet rear and side yard vegetated buffer is required for all multi-family development in addition to required side and rear yards specified in Article VIII or IX. 
ARTICLE VII. - USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT 

Sec. 7.1. - A1 Agricultural District (Intensive Farming). 
This zoning district is comprised primarily of open farm land and land used for intensive agricultural and livestock and poultry production. The intent of the regulations is to encourage the maintenance of the general rural character of openness and discourage the subdivision of land that is better suited to agricultural usage. Residential subdivisions are inappropriate in this district. A farm or farming operation shall not be found to be a public or private nuisance if the farm or farm operation alleged to be a nuisance conforms to generally accepted agriculture and management practices. The intent of this ordinance is to prevent the non-agricultural resident from encroaching on existing, approved, or projected expansion of farms or farming operations. 
7.1.1  Permitted Uses. Within the A1 District, only the following uses are permitted: 
7.1.1.1  Dwelling, Single or two family detached. 
7.1.1.2  Individual manufactured home. 
7.1.1.3  Industrialized building qualifying as dwelling, single family detached. 
7.1.1.4  Caretaker dwelling (single family or two family) for farm workers when located on the same lot or tract of land as the principal residence, on the basis of one residential structure per 5 acres in addition to the minimum lot area required for the principal residence, and subject to all the minimum space requirements of the A1 District. 
7.1.1.5  Accessory buildings and uses incidental to the operation of the farm, including private garages, sheds, barns or other storage structures provided said structures are located on the same lot or farm and are not used for conducting a business or service inconsistent with A1 allowed practice and provided that requirements under §§ 9.2.1.5 and 9.6 are met. 
7.1.1.6  Agricultural, forestry, livestock, hog or poultry production excluding operations that qualify as a Confined Animal Feeding Operation, and general farming. Confined Animal Feeding Operations are specifically excluded as a permitted use in A1 Agricultural District. 
7.1.1.7  Daycare home. 
7.1.1.8  Sale of agricultural products grown or processed on the premises, provided that adequate pull off lanes and parking are provided at the site, and the use does not adversely affect existing or future adjacent residential uses or seriously impede traffic in the area. 
7.1.1.9  Any agriculturally oriented business, including, but not limited to, the sale and repair of farm implements, feed and seed wholesale and retail stores and warehouses and feed and seed storage bins. 
7.1.1.10  Automobile service stations provided the requirements of § 9.8 are met. 
7.1.1.11  Produce markets and farmers' markets. 
7.1.1.12  Swimming pools, above and below ground, for home use, provided that the location is not closer than 20 feet to any property line. 
7.1.1.13  Home office. 
7.1.1.14  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.1.1.15  Signs, provided that requirements of Article X are met. 
7.1.1.16  Special events. 
7.1.1.17  Rural home occupation, provided that requirements of § 9.7 are met. 
7.1.1.18  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
7.1.2  Conditional Uses. Within the A1 District, the following uses may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. Also see Article XI. 
7.1.2.1  Bed and Breakfast provided the requirements of § 9.12 are met. 
7.1.2.2  Religious institutions and their customary related facilities, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum of two (2) acres and fronts on a public right-of-way or a private street which connects with a public right-of-way. The minimum building front setback is 50 feet. A ten (10) ft. wide buffer area is required along any property line abutting residentially zoned property. 
7.1.2.3  Permanent and temporary sawmills and planning mills, provided that the mill and storage areas are not located closer than 400 feet to a property line. 
7.1.2.4  Towers provided the requirements of the Greene County Tower Ordinance is met. 
7.1.2.5  Veterinary hospitals, clinics, and kennels, provided no enclosed structure for the keeping of animals is located within 200 feet of a property line. 
7.1.2.6  Solid waste landfill provided the requirements of § 9.9 are met. 
7.1.2.7  Home industry. 
7.1.2.8  Transfer Stations. 
7.1.2.9  Private cemeteries. 
7.1.2.10  Recreational developments, including but not limited to, public fishing lakes, public swimming pools, and golf courses or driving ranges, or other recreational developments provided a comprehensive plan for the area is submitted which includes the location of the site on plats of not less than a 1" = 400' scale, the location and function of all buildings and modifications of the natural landscape, the location and surface treatment of all roadways, appropriate details of drinking water or sanitary facilities, certificated by the Health Department if wells or septic tanks are involved and a time schedule setting for a development program. 
7.1.2.11  Family Restaurants provided the requirements of § 6.2 are met. 
7.1.2.12  Family Personal Care Home, Group Personal Care Home and Congregate Personal Care Home. 
7.1.2.13  Borrow Pits greater than 2 acres. 
7.1.2.14  Development of natural resources, including the removal of minerals and natural materials together with necessary buildings and machinery - this includes mining and mineral exploration. 
7.1.2.15  Confined Animal Feeding Operations shall only be allowed in the A1 Agricultural District, and shall only be allowed as a Conditional Use. Applications for Confined Animal Feeding Operations shall comply with § 7.1.4. 
7.1.2.16  Solar Farm provided the requirements of Section 9.22 are met. 
7.1.3  O.C.G.A. 44-1-17. 
7.1.3.1  Prior to any purchase, lease, or other acquisition of real property or any interest in real property located within any county which has land zoned for agricultural or silvicultural use or identified on an approved county land use plan as agricultural or silvicultural use, it shall be the buyer's or grantee's responsibility to determine whether the subject property is within, partially within, or adjacent to any property zoned or identified on an approved county land use plan as agricultural or silvicultural use, the owner or agent for the owner shall deliver to the prospective purchaser, lessee, or grantee a notice which states the following: 
"It is the policy of this state and this community to conserve, protect, and encourage the development and improvement of farm and forest land for the production of food, fiver, and other products, and also for its natural and environmental value. This notice is to inform prospective property owners or other persons or entities leasing or acquiring an interest in real property that the property in which they are about to acquire an interest lies within, partially within, or adjacent to an area zoned, used, or identified for farm and forest activities and that farm and forest activities occur in the area. Such farm and forest activities may include intensive operations that cause discomfort and inconveniences that involve, but are not limited to, noises, odors, fumes, dust, smoke, insects, operations of machinery during any 24 hour period, storage and disposal of manure, and the application by spraying or otherwise of chemical fertilizers, soil amendments, herbicides, and pesticides. One of more of these inconveniences may occur as the result of farm or forest activities which are in conformance with existing laws and regulations and accepted customs and standards." 
Noncompliance with any provision of this Code section shall not affect title to real property nor prevent the recording of any document. 
This Code section shall not apply to any transaction involving title passing by foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure, tax deed, deed to secure debt, or from an executor or administrator. 
This Code section shall not create a cause of action for damages or equitable relief. 
7.1.4  Standards for Confined Animal Feeding Operations. 
7.1.4.1  Purpose. The Greene County Board of Commissioners finds that residents in Greene County rely on water resources for drinking water supply, agricultural production, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, and other activities; and that regulation of land uses within the County is essential for the protection of these water resources from degradation. Greene County residents also rely on an environment that has minimal impacts related to nuisances. The uses of land for Confined Animal Feeding Operations may result in odors, dust, noise, or other effects that may not be compatible with other zoning districts and surrounding areas. Confined Animal Feeding Operations shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable county, state, and federal laws and regulations, including land use, water quality, health, and environmental standards. 
7.1.4.2  Additional Application Submittal Requirements. In addition to the standard application for Conditional Use, the following requirements shall be met and the following additional information shall be submitted with a Conditional Use application: 
a.  Application Fee. An additional permit application fee of $0.05 per animal based on the capacity of the proposed operation. 
b.  Development and Design Plan. A comprehensive, detailed site plan showing and identifying significant onsite and proposed features, to include: 
(1)  The boundaries of the parcel of land by survey 
(2)  Any existing and proposed structures on the property 
(3)  Any water impoundments and/or waterways on the property 
(4)  Any existing and proposed wells 
(5)  Any existing and proposed septic systems 
(6)  Any existing and proposed screening 
(7)  Any public roadways directly serving the parcel of land 
(8)  Required setbacks 
(9)  Required buffer zone 
(10)  Any existing and proposed utility lines 
(11)  Existing and proposed topographic contours at vertical intervals of five feet maximum (U.S.G.S topographic maps may be used for existing contours) 
c.  Comprehensive Nutrient (Waste) Management Plan. A Comprehensive Nutrient (Waste) Management Plan that establishes the methods by which waste generated as part of the Confined Animal Feeding Operation will be managed and disposed of including any temporary storage of such waste if managed on-site. 
d.  Water Supply and Usage Plan. A Water Supply and Usage Plan is required for projects that exceed six confinement areas that provides the projected water usage for the operation(s); adequate water supply must be available through public and/or private wells adequate in quality and quantity to serve the Confined Animal Feeding Operation being proposed and must be certified and approved as meeting such requirements by a Registered Professional Engineer based on State Geologic Survey and local well drillers. 
e.  Notice Required. The applicant shall notify owners of adjacent property and owners of property within five hundred feet of the designated parcel (500') for which the application has been submitted. Such notice shall be mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the Public Hearing required by Article XI by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
7.1.4.3  Additional Requirements, Review Criteria, and Development and Design Standards: 
7.1.4.3.1  Buffer Zone. Confined Animal Feeding Operations shall be located to reduce impacts from nuisances to the greatest extent practicable. A Buffer Zone must be located on the outer perimeter of the confinement area, with appropriate fencing, landscaping or other barrier as shall be approved by the County as a condition of Conditional Use approval. A Buffer Zone shall not be located on any portion of any existing or dedicated public or private street right-of-way and shall be privately owned and maintained. A Buffer Zone is a unit of required space and plantings and/or structures designed to reduce conflicts between adjacent land uses by eliminating or minimizing potential nuisances such as light, odor, noise, pests, dust, or unsightly buildings. 
7.1.4.3.2  Odors. Confined Animal Feeding Operations shall be operated in compliance with all state and federal laws, rules and regulations and in such a manner as to not constitute a nuisance as defined by law. 
7.1.4.3.3  Character of the neighborhood and surrounding community. The use, as determined in the sole discretion of the Board of Commissioners, will be compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and will not have negative impacts on adjacent properties. The determination of compatibility shall be based upon a consideration of the level of traffic; hours of operation; scale and design of buildings; noise, odor or vibration; and similar impacts associated with the proposed land use. 
7.1.4.3.4  Traffic. The use will not cause undue traffic, congestion, dangerous traffic conditions, or other vehicle-related impacts. The Board of Commissioners shall have sole discretion in determining if the proposed Confined Animal Feeding Operation will cause excessive traffic that is incompatible, and/or detrimental to the immediately surrounding areas. 
7.1.4.3.5  Nuisance. The operating characteristics of the use shall not create a nuisance and the impacts on neighboring property shall be minimized with respect to noise, odors, vibrations, glare and similar conditions. 
7.1.4.3.6  Setbacks. The specific setback requirements for Confined Animal Feeding Operations set forth herein are intended to minimize the adverse effects commonly associated with such operations, provided that larger setbacks or other conditions may be imposed as conditions so as to minimize adverse effects on surrounding property in cases involving, but not limited to, uncommonly large operations, unusual topographical conditions, or proximity to sensitive natural, scenic, or historic areas, municipal boundaries, and residential areas. 
(1)  No Confined Animal Feeding Operation shall be constructed in any location where any portion of the Confinement Area is 500 feet or less from the property boundaries of the parcel on which the Confinement Area is to be constructed. 
(2)  No Confined Animal Feeding Operation shall be constructed in any location where any portion of the Confinement Area is 1,500 feet or less from any building or property that is regularly used as a school, hospital, church, a public park, a public recreational area, a senior center, a nursing home or retirement home, a restaurant, or public community center. 
(3)  No Confined Animal Feeding Operation shall be constructed in any location where any portion of the Confinement Area is 200 feet or less from any perennial stream. 
7.1.4.3.7  Air Quality Protection. The operation of Confined Animal Feeding Operation facilities shall not exceed allowable emissions of substances or compounds regulated by state or federal Clean Air Acts, or the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, or any future amendments to either, or any other applicable statute or regulation. 
7.1.4.3.8  Dead Animal Disposal. Dead animals shall be disposed of in a way that does not adversely affect ground or surface water and does not compromise public health. Any dead animal shall be disposed of within seventy-two (72) hours of discovery by removal for rendering, cremation, burial or composting as approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture and by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources 
7.1.4.4  Non-conforming Uses. Existing Confined Animal Feeding Operations which were in operation at the time the Zoning Ordinance of Greene County, Georgia (hereinafter "Ordinance") was amended to include § 7.1.4, and which do not meet the requirements as described in this § 7.1.4, shall be grandfathered as existing nonconforming uses for purposes of the Ordinance. If such legally nonconforming operations contain less than six (6) Confinement Areas, the grandfathered operation may, as a Permitted Use, construct additional Confinement Areas without compliance with § 7.1.4, provided that the total number of Confinement Areas does not exceed six (6) and, if a poultry operation, the total number of animals associated with the poultry operation does not exceed 250,000 at any given time. 
Sec. 7.2. - A2 Agricultural-Residential District. 
This zoning district is composed primarily of limited agricultural activities in areas where compatible low density, rural, single-family residential development has occurred or is occurring. The regulations for this district are designed to provide the landowner an opportunity to engage in limited hobby type agricultural activities for personal use, with the exception of fresh fruits, flowers or vegetables raised on the property that may be sold to the public. A farm or farming operation shall not be found to be a public or private nuisance if the farm or farm operation alleged to be a nuisance conforms to generally accepted agriculture and management practices. The intent of this ordinance is to prevent the non-agricultural resident from encroaching on existing, approved, or projected expansion of farms or farming operations 
7.2.1  Permitted Uses. Within the A2 District, the following uses are permitted: 
7.2.1.1  Dwelling, Single or two family detached. 
7.2.1.2  Individual manufactured home. 
7.2.1.3  Industrialized building qualifying as Dwelling, Single or two family detached. 
7.2.1.4  Accessory buildings and accessory uses provided the requirements of § 9.6 are met. 
7.2.1.5  Agricultural uses including small scale crop farming, truck gardening, forestry, but excluding poultry houses and feedlots. 
7.2.1.6  Animals and fowl not to exceed the requirements specified in § 3.1, Animal Units. 
7.2.1.7  Daycare home. 
7.2.1.8  Home swimming pools, above and below ground, for home use, provided that the location is not closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line. 
7.2.1.9  Home office. 
7.2.1.10  Nurseries, for the production and sale of plants and their related products. 
7.2.1.11  Sale of agricultural products grown or processed on the premises owned by the seller, provided that adequate pull off lanes and parking are provided at the site, and the use does not adversely affect existing or future adjacent residential uses or seriously impede traffic in the area. 
7.2.1.12  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.2.1.13  Signs, provided that requirements of Article X are met. 
7.2.1.14  Special events. 
7.2.1.15  Rural home occupation, provided that requirements of § 9.7 are met. 
7.2.1.16  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
7.2.2  Conditional Uses. Within the A2 District, the following uses may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.2.2.1  Bed and Breakfast provided the requirements of § 9.12 are met. 
7.2.2.2  Cemeteries. 
7.2.2.3  Convalescent or nursing homes. 
7.2.2.4  Community center or club, provided that the requirements of § 9.13 are met. 
7.2.2.5  Home industry. 
7.2.2.6  Public and private schools provided that a complete site development sketch is submitted with the application. The school must be located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street. All buildings must be at least fifty (50) ft. from any property line. The property must be bordered by a ten (10) ft. wide buffer area along its exterior boundary lines that do not border the frontage street. The buffer must not extend into the required front yard. The buffer area should be planted with evergreen trees or shrubs that grow at least eight (8) ft. tall within three (3) years and provide an effective visual screen. 
7.2.2.7  Recreational developments, including but not limited to, public fishing lakes, public swimming pools. and golf courses or driving ranges, or other recreational developments provided a comprehensive plan for the area is submitted which includes the location of the site on plats of not less than a 1" = 400' scale, the location and function of all buildings and modifications of the natural landscape, the location and surface treatment of all roadways, appropriate details of drinking water or sanitary facilities, certificated by the Health Department if wells or septic tanks are involved and a time schedule setting for a development program. 
7.2.2.8  Religious institutions and their customary related facilities, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum of 2 acres and fronts on a public right-of-way or a private street which connects with a public right-of-way. The minimum building front setback is 50 feet. A ten (10) ft. wide buffer area is required along any property line abutting residentially zoned property. 
7.2.2.9  Family Restaurants provided the requirements of § 6.2 are met. 
7.2.2.10  Family Personal Care Home, Group Personal Care Home and Congregate Personal Care Home. 
7.2.2.11  Borrow Pits greater than 2 acres. 
7.2.3  O.C.G.A. 44-1-17. See 7.1.3 
Sec. 7.3. - B1 Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District. 
This zoning district is intended for the development of small clusters of retail sales and service establishments which when appropriately located are designed to provide limited convenience shopping and services only for surrounding residential areas. 
7.3.1  Permitted Uses. Within the B1 District, only the following uses are permitted: 
7.3.1.1  Accessory buildings and accessory uses provided the requirements of § 9.6 are met. 
7.3.1.2  Arts and Crafts store. 
7.3.1.3  Automobile service areas provided the requirements of § 9.8 are met. 
7.3.1.4  Automobile repair garage when in conjunction with an automobile service station. 
7.3.1.5  Bakery. 
7.3.1.6  Barber and beauty shop. 
7.3.1.7  Book, Stationary and Card Shop. 
7.3.1.8  Business office. 
7.3.1.9  Cafes and grills. 
7.3.1.10  Clothing alteration. 
7.3.1.11  Convenience store. 
7.3.1.12  Daycare center. 
7.3.1.13  Drug store. 
7.3.1.14  Dry cleaners. 
7.3.1.15  Financial institution. 
7.3.1.16  Florist, nursery and gift shop. 
7.3.1.17  Frame shop. 
7.3.1.18  Grocery store. 
7.3.1.19  Hardware store. 
7.3.1.20  Nurseries, for the production and sale of plants and their related products. 
7.3.1.21  Professional office. 
7.3.1.22  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.3.1.23  Restaurant. 
7.3.1.24  Self-service laundry. 
7.3.1.25  Service occupation. 
7.3.1.26  Shopping centers with uses as otherwise permitted in the B1 District and a total leasable floor area of less than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet. 
7.3.1.27  Signs, provided the requirements of Article X are met. 
7.3.1.28  Special events. 
7.3.1.29  Temporary commercial use, including the sale of Christmas trees or the sale of seasonal fruit, but not to exceed a period of two consecutive months in a calendar year. 
7.3.1.30  Veterinary hospitals, clinics and kennels, provided no unenclosed structure for the keeping of animals is located within two hundred (200) feet of a property boundary. 
7.3.1.31  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
7.3.2  Conditional Uses. Within the B1 Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.3.2.1  Convalescent or nursing homes. 
7.3.2.2  Second floor may be used as a residential dwelling unit provided it is served by a private entrance. 
7.3.2.3  Congregate Personal Care Home. 
7.3.2.4  Self-storage facility. 
Sec. 7.4. - B2 General Commercial Highway Oriented District. 
The B-2 General Commercial Highway Oriented District is intended for denser commercial development that may extend along highways and provide services to both highway oriented and municipality-oriented trade. All businesses, services, storage or processing shall be conducted within an enclosed building, except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible (i.e., off-street loading, automobile parking for customers while on the premises, and the sale of automobile fuel at service stations.) Use, processes or equipment employed on the premises shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise, or vibration. 
7.4.1  Permitted Uses. Within the B2 District, only the following uses are permitted: 
7.4.1.1  Accessory buildings and accessory uses provided the requirements of § 9.6 are met. 
7.4.1.2  Ambulance Service. 
7.4.1.3  Apparel stores (individual). 
7.4.1.4  Appliance store including radio and television service. 
7.4.1.5  Arts and Crafts stores. 
7.4.1.6  Automobile repair garage, mechanical and body shops. 
7.4.1.7  Automobile and boat service areas provided the requirements of § 9.8 are met. 
7.4.1.8  Automobile repair garage when in conjunction with an automobile service station. 
7.4.1.9  Bakeries. 
7.4.1.10  Barber and beauty shop. 
7.4.1.11  Bicycle or motorcycle store. 
7.4.1.12  Books, stationary and card shops. 
7.4.1.13  Bowling alleys. 
7.4.1.14  Cafes, grills, and lunch counters. 
7.4.1.15  Camera or photographic supply store. 
7.4.1.16  Catering establishments. 
7.4.1.17  Clothing, shoe, dry goods or gift store. 
7.4.1.18  Commercial parking garage or lot provided no entrance or exit is on the same block as a school, and curb breaks are limited to two (2) for each one hundred (100) feet of street frontage, each not to exceed thirty (30) feet in width and at least fifty (50) feet separation and not located closer than fifty (50) feet to a street intersection. 
7.4.1.19  Community Center or club provided the requirements of § 9.13 are met. 
7.4.1.20  Computer sales and services. 
7.4.1.21  Confectionery store. 
7.4.1.22  Convenience store. 
7.4.1.23  Daycare center. 
7.4.1.24  Dressmaking and tailoring shops. 
7.4.1.25  Drug store. 
7.4.1.26  Dry cleaning and laundry establishments. 
7.4.1.27  Electronic supply store. 
7.4.1.28  Fabric store. 
7.4.1.29  Financial institution. 
7.4.1.30  Florist, nursery and gift shop. 
7.4.1.31  Frame shop. 
7.4.1.32  Funeral home. 
7.4.1.33  Furniture, home furnishings, including office furniture and equipment. 
7.4.1.34  Grocery, fruit, vegetable, meat market, delicatessen, catering and supermarkets. 
7.4.1.35  Hardware store. 
7.4.1.36  Health Club. 
7.4.1.37  Jewelry store. 
7.4.1.38  Laundromat. 
7.4.1.39  Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up stations, and self-service laundry. 
7.4.1.40  Laundry and dry cleaning store. 
7.4.1.41  Lawn and Garden Shop. 
7.4.1.42  Medical clinic. 
7.4.1.43  Miniature golf course. 
7.4.1.44  Miscellaneous repair service. 
7.4.1.45  Motels, hotels. 
7.4.1.46  News and tobacco center. 
7.4.1.47  Nurseries, for the production and sale of plants and their related products. 
7.4.1.48  Nursing home. 
7.4.1.49  Paint store. 
7.4.1.50  Professional and business office. 
7.4.1.51  Printing, blue printing, book binding, photo stating, lithography and publishing establishments. 
7.4.1.52  Produce and farmers markets. 
7.4.1.53  Radio/TV repair. 
7.4.1.54  Restaurants. 
7.4.1.55  Restaurants, drive-in. 
7.4.1.56  Restaurants, fast food. 
7.4.1.57  Self-storage facility. 
7.4.1.58  Service occupations, including barber and beauty shop, shoe repair, appliance repair, and similar occupations. 
7.4.1.59  Shopping centers with uses as otherwise permitted in the B2 District and a total leasable floor area of more than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet. 
7.4.1.60  Signs, provided the requirements of Article X are met. 
7.4.1.61  Special event. 
7.4.1.62  Sporting Goods store. 
7.4.1.63  Temporary commercial use, including the sale of Christmas trees or the sale of seasonal fruit, but not to exceed a period of two consecutive months in a calendar year. 
7.4.1.64  Theater. 
7.4.1.65  Travel agency. 
7.4.1.66  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.4.1.67  Veterinary hospitals and animal shelters, provided adequate opaque screening by a wall or fence at least six (6) feet high is provided for areas where horses, dogs and other animals are not kept in cages or stalls. 
7.4.1.68  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
7.4.2  Conditional Uses. Within the B2 General Commercial Highway Oriented District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.4.2.1  Second floor may be used as a residential dwelling unit provided it is served by a private entrance. 
Sec. 7.5. - C3 Heavy Commercial District. 
The C3 District is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for those retail uses that generate loud noises, excessive traffic, or require large areas for outdoor storage. Included among these uses are establishments of a commercial-industrial nature, as well as those of a commercial-recreational nature. This area provides for substantial motor vehicle traffic. 
7.5.1  Permitted Uses. Within the C-3 District, only the following uses are permitted. 
7.5.1.1  Accessory buildings and accessory uses provided the requirements under § 9.6 are met. 
7.5.1.2  Auction houses. 
7.5.1.3  Automobile service garages. 
7.5.1.4  Automobile service station provided the requirements of § 9.8 are met. 
7.5.1.5  Automobile repair garage. 
7.5.1.6  Automobile and truck rental. 
7.5.1.7  Automobile sales lot. 
7.5.1.8  Automobile laundry or car wash provided that the paved area for the vehicle awaiting entrance to the washing process is located on the same lot. The paved area must be of sufficient size to adequately contain the number of vehicles (at two hundred (200) square feet per vehicle) equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the washing machines. Curb breaks are limited to two (2), each not to exceed thirty (30) feet in width, and located no closer than fifty (50) feet to an intersection. 
7.5.1.9  Building and lumber supply establishments provided the entire storage area is properly screened as required in § 6.7. 
7.5.1.10  Bus and Railroad terminal facilities. 
7.5.1.11  Commercial parking garage or lot provided no entrance or exit be on the same block as a school, and that curb breaks be limited to two (2) for each one hundred (100) feet of street frontage, each not to exceed thirty (30) feet in width and at least fifty (50) feet separation and not located closer than fifty (50) feet to a street intersection. 
7.5.1.12  Farm equipment sales. 
7.5.1.13  Flea market. 
7.5.1.14  Hospital. 
7.5.1.15  Manufactured Homes sales lot. 
7.5.1.16  Nurseries, for the production and sale of plants and their related products. 
7.5.1.17  Rental Sales. 
7.5.1.18  Restaurant. 
7.5.1.19  Restaurant, drive-in. 
7.5.1.20  Restaurant, fast food. 
7.5.1.21  Self-storage facility. 
7.5.1.22  Shopping Center. 
7.5.1.23  Signs, provided the requirements of Article X are met. 
7.5.1.24  Special event. 
7.5.1.25  Tower provided the requirements of § 9.17 are met. 
7.5.1.26  Trucking and Motor Freight companies. 
7.5.1.27  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.5.1.28  Warehousing. 
7.5.1.29  Wholesale outlets. 
7.5.1.30  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
7.5.1.31  Tow truck and wrecker services. 
7.5.2  Conditional Uses. Within the C-3 Heavy Commercial District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.5.2.1  Amusement parks. 
7.5.2.2  Borrow Pits greater than 2 acres. 
Sec. 7.6. - LI Light Industrial District. 
The LI zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for light industrial purposes, including accessibility to major transportation facilities, and availability of adequate utilities and other public services. Industrial uses that cause obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, glare, fire hazards or other objectionable environment conditions are prohibited from this district. 
7.6.1  Permitted Uses. Within the LI District, only the following uses are permitted. 
7.6.1.1  Accessory buildings and accessory uses provided the requirements under § 9.6 are met. 
7.6.1.2  Any establishment for manufacture, repair, assembly or processing totaling less than 500,000 square feet in floor area, and employing less than 200 employees, including, but not restricted to the following: 
1.  Confectionery manufacture; 
2.  Clothing and garment manufacture; 
3.  Laboratories for testing materials, chemical analysis, photography procession; 
4.  Manufacturing and assembly of scientific, optical and electrical equipment. 
5.  Manufacture of musical instruments and parts. 
6.  Manufacture of souvenirs and novelties. 
7.  Manufacture of toys, sporting and athletic goods. 
7.6.1.3  Baking and food processing plants, fish and poultry houses, but not including the on-site slaughter or processing of animals. 
7.6.1.4  Cold storage plants. 
7.6.1.5  Public airport. 
7.6.1.6  Permanent sawmills and planning mills. 
7.6.1.7  Contractor's storage and equipment yards when located entirely within a building or fenced area as required by § 6.7. 
7.6.1.8  Dyeing plants. 
7.6.1.9  Facilities owned by Greene County. 
7.6.1.10  Frozen dessert and milk processing plants. 
7.6.1.11  Industrial Parks and Planned Industrial Parks, provided that the provisions of § 9.10 are met. 
7.6.1.12  Printing and publishing plants. 
7.6.1.13  Processing of raw or semi-finished materials. 
7.6.1.14  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.6.1.15  Radio stations. 
7.6.1.16  Retail sales of goods or products produced or processed on the site, provided sufficient paved off-street parking and loading space is constructed to accommodate retail customers. 
7.6.1.17  Signs, provided the requirements of Article X are met. 
7.6.1.18  Towers provided the requirements of § 9.17 are met. 
7.6.1.19  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
7.6.1.20  Manufactured home sales. 
7.6.2  Conditional Uses. Within the Light Industrial District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.6.2.1  Truck terminals, provided that acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least two hundred (200) feet, including 50 feet flare, are provided for trucks entering or leaving the site and that generated truck traffic will not create safety hazard or unduly impede traffic. 
7.6.2.2  Crematorium. 
7.6.2.3  Transfer Stations. 
7.6.2.4  Borrow Pits greater than 2 acres. 
Sec. 7.7. - H-I Heavy Industrial District. 
The H-I Heavy Industrial District is established to provide appropriate locations for any use that may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission, odors, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration or traffic. All residential uses are prohibited in this district. 7.7.1 Permitted Uses. 
Within the H-I District, only the following uses are permitted: 
7.7.1.1  Automobile and boat sales. 
7.7.1.2  Automobile and boat service. 
7.7.1.3  Bottling and canning plants. 
7.7.1.4  Borrow pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
7.7.1.5  Ceramic production facilities. 
7.7.1.6  Cold storage plants and frozen food lockers. 
7.7.1.7  Commercial sales of the product(s) permitted to be manufactured, assembled, or processed, unenclosed or enclosed, not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 
7.7.1.8  Convenience stores, with or without gasoline pumps. 
7.7.1.9  Dry cleaning plants. 
7.7.1.10  Dwelling for caretaker or night watchman. 
7.7.1.11  Electronics assembly and manufacturing of communications equipment. 
7.7.1.12  Exterminating and pest control businesses. 
7.7.1.13  Ice manufacturing. 
7.7.1.14  Manufactured home sales. 
7.7.1.15  Mini-warehouses. 
7.7.1.16  Metal products manufacturing. 
7.7.1.17  Pharmaceuticals and medical supplies manufacturers. 
7.7.1.18  Printing, blueprinting, publishing, and book binding facilities. 
7.7.1.19  Service stations. 
7.7.1.20  Sign fabrication and painting shops. 
7.7.1.21  Textile manufacturing and processing. 
7.7.1.22  Warehouses and storage buildings. 
7.7.1.23  Wood products manufacturing. 
7.7.1.24  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.7.2  Conditional Uses. Within the Heavy Industrial District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.7.2.1  Concrete/lime/gypsum/plaster manufacturing facility. 
7.7.2.2  Asphalt and Concrete processing facilities. 
7.7.2.3  Junkyards. 
7.7.2.4  Landfills. 
7.7.2.5  Development of natural resources, including the removal of minerals and natural materials together with necessary buildings and machinery - this includes mining and mineral exploration. 
7.7.2.6  Borrow pits greater than 2 acres. 
7.7.2.7  Crematorium. 
7.7.2.8  Transfer Stations. 
7.7.2.9  Commercial sales of the product(s) permitted to be extracted, unenclosed, exceeding twenty (20) percent of the lot area but not exceeding fifty (50) percent of the lot area. 
7.7.2.10  Communication towers and communication antennas. 
7.7.2.11  Cosmetics and toiletries manufacturers. 
7.7.2.12  Feed, grain, and fertilizer. 
7.7.2.13  Food processing plants or on-site slaughter facilities, including fish and poultry facilities. 
7.7.2.14  Solar Farm provided the requirements of Section 9.22 are met. 
7.7.3  Requirements. 
7.7.3.1  All operations shall maintain a buffer of a minimum of 500 feet to a residential district and public roads. 
7.7.3.2  All such operations, except driveway areas, shall be completely enclosed by an opaque fence, wall, or other opaque screening (including earthen berms and vegetation) having a minimum of six feet but in no case less than such a height as will effectively screen all operations from view. Fences must be painted a natural color and maintained in good condition. 
7.7.3.3  The number of vehicular driveways permitted on any single street frontage shall be limited to one per 500 feet with a minimum of 24 feet driveway width. 
7.7.3.4  All operations shall conform to the following performance standards: 

 
  
Sec. 7.8 - OI Office-Institutional District. 
The OI District is intended to provide an area for business and professional offices as well as for social, fraternal, political, civic and community organization. The district is also designed for institutional uses such as hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent centers, institutional planned developments and clinics. The following uses are permitted: 
7.8.1  Permitted Uses. Within the OI District, only the following uses are permitted: 
7.8.1.1  Accessory building and accessory uses provided the requirements of § 9.6 are met. 
7.8.1.2  Art, music, drama, photography, dance, theatrical studies. 
7.8.1.3  Community center or club provided the requirements of § 9.13 are met. 
7.8.1.4  Financial institutions, security-commodity brokers and exchanges, and holding and investment companies. 
7.8.1.5  Funeral homes. 
7.8.1.6  Hospital. 
7.8.1.7  Institutional and philanthropic uses. 
7.8.1.8  Libraries. 
7.8.1.9  Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories. 
7.8.1.10  Museum. 
7.8.1.11  Nursing homes, Group personal care homes, congregate personal care homes, and Memory care unit on a minimum lot size of 3 acres with at least 200 feet of width at the building line and at least 200 feet of frontage on a public road. 
7.8.1.12  Offices for business, professional, governmental, civic, social, fraternal, political and charitable organizations. 
7.8.1.13  Public and private primary and secondary schools, colleges, technical and vocational centers, including pre-schools, kindergartens, day care for children or adults. 
7.8.1.14  Religious institutions and their customary related facilities, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum of 2 acres and front on a public right-of-way or a private street which connects with a public right-of-way. A ten (10) ft. wide buffer area is required along any property line abutting residentially zoned districts. 
7.8.1.15  Research, development, and testing laboratories and centers. 
7.8.1.16  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.8.1.17  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
7.8.2  Conditional Uses. Within the Office-Institutional District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.8.2.1  Borrow Pits greater than 2 acres. 
Sec. 7.9. - PUD Planned Unit Development. 
The PUD district provides for innovative concepts in large-scale residential development that enables economy in capital maintenance, yet does not forsake the desired rural setting of openness and a livable environment. Allied uses, public facilities and enclosed recreational uses are allowed. Through the Planned Unit Development process, it is the intent that property will be developed with a unified design providing continuity between the various elements. However, the PUD process is not intended as a device to circumvent general development regulations, densities, standards and good planning practice. 
PUDs on contiguous property may be consolidated as a single PUD. To be eligible for a PUD consolidation, an application must provide documentation showing that the PUDs to be combined are subject to unified control and management. Subsequent to a PUD consolidation, the standards, requirements and restrictions of this Ordinance shall apply to the larger consolidated PUD as a single, unified development. The application for joining of PUDs must document the current land uses and acreages for each PUD, and then document the land uses and acreages for the proposed combined PUD. 
Properties that are not zoned PUD may be annexed into a contiguous existing PUD. Any developed property that is annexed into a contiguous PUD shall not be required to comply with the PUD district regulations so long as it was lawfully developed with a use permitted by the PUD regulations at the time of its annexation. 
All submissions of development plans for a PUD must comply with the applicable provisions of 9.18 and must be served by a central sewerage and a central water system sized to support fire hydrants. Minor subdivisions in established subdivisions that require no proposed road improvements are not required to connect to central sewerage or upgrade central water system to support fire hydrants unless the proposed minor subdivision is within 1,500 feet of a point of connection capable of handling said improvements. 
To qualify as a PUD, it must be a minimum of 50 contiguous acres. 
7.9.1  Permitted Uses. Within the PUD District, only the following uses are permitted: 
7.9.1.1  Dwelling, single-family, detached. 
7.9.1.2  Dwelling, multi-family. 
7.9.1.3  Dwelling, two-family. 
7.9.1.4  Industrialized home qualifying as Dwelling, single-family. 
7.9.1.5  Accessory buildings and accessory uses provided the requirements of § 9.6 are met. 
7.9.1.6  Condominiums and townhouses provided the requirements of § 9.5 are met. 
7.9.1.7  Daycare home. 
7.9.1.8  Home office. 
7.9.1.9  Home swimming pools, above and below ground, for home use, provided that the pool location, including the pool deck and accessory equipment, is not closer than ten (10) feet to any adjacent residential lot, and that the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence to the extent required by State Law. 
7.9.1.10  Public or private park or recreational area, which may include clubs, marinas, restaurants, a golf course, swimming pool, clubhouse, tennis courts, playgrounds, lakes or similar recreation uses. 
7.9.1.11  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.9.1.12  Boat docks, provided all ordinances and requirements of the Georgia Power Company pertaining to use of lake shore property and the reservoir are met. 
7.9.1.13  Signs, provided the requirements of Article X are met. 
7.9.1.14  Fire Stations. 
7.9.1.15  PUD Development, operations & maintenance facilities. 
7.9.1.16  Residential home occupation provided the requirements of § 9.7 are met. 
7.9.1.17  Borrow Pits less than or equal to two (2) acres. 
7.9.2  Conditional Uses. Within the PUD District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.9.2.1  Religious institutions and their customary related facilities, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum of 2 acres and fronts on a public right-of-way or a private street which connects with a public right-of-way. The minimum building front setback is 50 feet. A ten (10) ft. wide buffer area is required along any property line abutting residentially zoned property. 
7.9.2.2  Non-Residential uses. Non-residential uses may be permitted where such uses are scaled primarily to serve the residents of the PUD. Non-residential uses shall be necessary commercial or accessory services. 
7.9.2.3  Motel/Hotel. 
7.9.2.4  Borrow Pits greater than 2 acres. 
Sec. 7.10. - CPUD Commercial Planned Unit Development District. 
The purpose of the Commercial Planned Unit Development district is to encourage flexibility in the design and development of land in order to promote its most appropriate use; to facilitate the adequate and economical provisions of streets and utilities; to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open space; and to encourage, in compatibility with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, large-scale mixed commercial, office/institutional, and residential developments that are planned, designed and developed to function as integral units independent of adjacent building sites. Through the Commercial Planned Unit Development process, it is the intent that property will be developed with a unified design providing continuity between the various elements. However, the CPUD process is not intended as a device to circumvent general development regulations, standards and good planning practice. 
CPUDs on contiguous property may be consolidated as a single CPUD. To be eligible for a CPUD consolidation, an application must provide documentation showing that the CPUDs to be combined are subject to unified control and management. Subsequent to a CPUD consolidation, the standards, requirements and restrictions of this Ordinance shall apply to the larger consolidated CPUD as a single, unified development. The application for joining of CPUDs must document the current land uses and acreages for each CPUD, and then document the land uses and acreages for the proposed combined CPUD. 
Properties that are not zoned CPUD may be annexed into a contiguous existing CPUD. Any developed property that is annexed into a contiguous CPUD shall not be required to comply with the CPUD district regulations so long as it was lawfully developed with a use permitted by the CPUD regulations at the time of its annexation. 
To qualify as a CPUD, it must be a minimum of 50 contiguous acres. The residential usage shall be a minimum of 25% of the total acreage and the non-residential usage shall be a minimum of 25% of the total acreage. It is the intent that a CPUD will be a mixed use development. 
All submissions of development plans for a CPUD must comply with the applicable provisions of § 9.18 and must be served by a central sewerage and a central water system sized to support fire hydrants. Minor subdivisions in established subdivisions that require no proposed road improvements are not required to connect to central sewerage or upgrade central water system to support fire hydrants unless the proposed minor subdivision is within 1,500 feet of a point of connection capable of handling said improvements. 
7.10.1  Permitted uses. Within the CPUD District, the following uses are permitted. 
7.10.1.1  Public uses, essential public services, open land uses, and similar uses which are either subject to other public controls or which do not have significantly adverse effects on other permitted uses. 
7.10.1.2  Cultural, recreational, health, educational, daycare, and religious facilities that serve the residents of the community. These uses are typically public in nature but may also be private. 
7.10.1.3  Single-family detached dwelling located in appropriate residential areas. 
7.10.1.4  Single-family detached dwellings that have a zero lot line lot configuration. 
7.10.1.5  Single-family dwellings which have either a townhouse design or a condominium ownership regime. 
7.10.1.6  Multi-family dwellings. 
7.10.1.7  Offices, studios, medical and dental clinics and labs, and other compatible or supporting business services and sales. 
7.10.1.8  Eating places, other than drive-in restaurants. 
7.10.1.9  Athletic facilities, hotels, and motels. 
7.10.1.10  Establishments providing a variety of frequently purchased commercial goods, where convenience of location is more important than comparative shopping. These uses are grouped in order that limited commercial uses be permitted adjacent to residential areas. Uses include but are not limited to retail food and drug stores, dry-cleaning and coin-operated laundries, and convenience stores. 
7.10.1.11  Automobile and boat service areas. 
7.10.1.12  Restaurants and fast food outlets. 
7.10.1.13  Entertainment and recreation facilities including theaters, bowling alleys, skating rinks, golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts or similar recreation uses. 
7.10.1.14  Home office. 
7.10.1.15  Parking lot for the parking of vehicles used by customers and employees of businesses within the CPUD. 
7.10.1.16  Accessory buildings and accessory uses as permitted by Covenants and Restrictions. 
7.10.1.17  Arts and Crafts stores. 
7.10.1.18  Bakery. 
7.10.1.19  Barber and beauty shop. 
7.10.1.20  Book, stationary and card shop. 
7.10.1.21  Cafes and grills. 
7.10.1.22  Clothing alternation. 
7.10.1.23  Financial institution. 
7.10.1.24  Florist, nursery and gift shop. 
7.10.1.25  Frame shop. 
7.10.1.26  Professional offices. 
7.10.1.27  Service occupation. 
7.10.1.28  Shopping centers with uses as otherwise permitted and a total leasable floor area of less than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet. 
7.10.1.29  Special events. 
7.10.1.30  Temporary commercial use, including the sale of Christmas trees or the sale of seasonal fruit and/or nuts not to exceed a period of two consecutive months in a calendar year. 
7.10.1.31  Veterinary hospitals, clinics and kennels with only enclosed structure for the keeping of animals. 
7.10.1.32  Bed and breakfast. 
7.10.1.33  Convalescent and nursing homes. 
7.10.1.34  Camera and photographic supply store. 
7.10.1.35  Car wash. 
7.10.1.36  Catering establishments. 
7.10.1.37  Computer sales and service. 
7.10.1.38  Delicatessen. 
7.10.1.39  Electronic supply store. 
7.10.1.40  Fabric store. 
7.10.1.41  Jewelry store. 
7.10.1.42  News and tobacco center. 
7.10.1.43  Produce and farmers' markets. 
7.10.1.44  Sporting goods store. 
7.10.1.45  Travel agency. 
7.10.1.46  Variety and general merchandise stores. 
7.10.1.47  Community center or club. 
7.10.1.48  Single-family dwellings sold as a condominium ownership regime over commercial businesses. 
7.10.1.49  Live-work commercial/residential units in which businesses are located on the main floor and the dwelling is located over the shop. 
7.10.1.50  Apartments. 
7.10.1.51  Boat docks and marinas, provided all ordinances and requirements of the Georgia Power Company pertaining to use of lake shore property and the reservoir are met. 
7.10.1.52  Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND). 
7.10.1.53  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
7.10.1.54  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.10.2  Conditional uses. 
7.10.2.1  Stores selling retail goods that are ordinarily purchased less frequently and often have a community-wide or regional market. These uses include building materials, hardware, lawn and garden supply, and equipment stores, and automotive and marine sales and accessories establishments. 
7.10.2.2  Family Personal Care Home, Group Personal Care Home, Memory Care Unit and Congregate Personal Care Home. 
7.10.2.3  Borrow Pits greater than 2 acres. 
7.10.3  Development Standards. Within the CPUD District, the following standards must be met. 
7.10.3.1  Commercial Planned Unit Developments must be connected to central water supply and sewer systems. On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems must be designed and installed to meet applicable rules of the Greene County Health Department and the State of Georgia EPD. 
7.10.3.2  Structures, parking areas, and other facilities shall when practical be designed and located in a manner that minimizes their visibility from adjacent roadways. 
7.10.3.3  CPUD densities may be determined on the basis of any and all of the following considerations: the densities designated by the land use plan, the densities of surrounding development, the densities allowed under the various zoning districts, topography and character of the natural environment and the impact of a given density on the specific site and adjacent properties. The County also has the discretion to consider any other relevant factors. 
7.10.3.4  There shall be no minimum standards for lot size although existing standards of zoning and subdivisions may be used as a guide. 
7.10.3.5  There shall be no minimum setback standards although existing standards of zoning and subdivisions may be used as a guide. 
7.10.3.6  Due to the flexibility allowed in development density, well designed open space is an important factor in providing for innovative design and visual attractiveness. A minimum of twenty percent of gross acreage shall be designated as open space. 
Sec. 7.11. - R1 Low-Density Residential District. 
The R-1 District is composed primarily of low density residential areas where similar developments appear likely to occur. The district is designed to encourage single-family development in a rural setting and certain uses allied to or customarily incidental to residential developments in a rural area. 
7.11.1  Permitted Uses. Within the R1 District, only the following uses are permitted. 
7.11.1.1  Dwelling, single-family, detached. 
7.11.1.2  Industrialized home qualifying as dwelling, single-family, detached. 
7.11.1.3  Accessory buildings and accessory uses provided the requirements of § 9.6 are met. 
7.11.1.4  Home office. 
7.11.1.5  Daycare home. 
7.11.1.6  Major and Minor Utility facilities. 
7.11.1.7  Signs, provided the requirements of Article X are met. 
7.11.1.8  Swimming pools, above and below ground, provided the location is not closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line; the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence of at least six (6) feet in height. Only home swimming pools and private community swimming pools are permitted. 
7.11.1.9  Residential home occupation provided the requirements of § 9.7 are met. 
7.11.2  Conditional Uses. Within the R-1 District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.11.2.1  Religious institutions and their customary related facilities, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum of 2 acres and fronts on a public right-of-way or a private street which connects with a public right-of-way. The minimum building front setback is 50 feet. A ten (10) ft. wide buffer area is required along any property line abutting residentially zoned property. 
7.11.2.2  Recreational developments, including but not limited to, public fishing lakes, public swimming pools. and golf courses or driving ranges, or other recreational developments provided a comprehensive plan for the area is submitted which includes the location of the site on plats of not less than a 1" = 400' scale, the location and function of all buildings and modifications of the natural landscape, the location and surface treatment of all roadways, appropriate details of drinking water or sanitary facilities, certificated by the Health Department if wells or septic tanks are involved and a time schedule setting for a development program. 
7.11.2.3  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
Sec. 7.12. - R2 Medium-Density Residential District. 
The R-2 District is comprised of medium density residential areas plus certain open areas where similar development appears likely to occur in the near future. The district is designed to encourage similar and complementary uses which may be desirable in a neighborhood. 
7.12.1  Permitted Uses. With the R-2 District, only the following uses are permitted: 
7.12.1.1  Dwelling, single-family, detached. 
7.12.1.2  Dwelling, two-family. 
7.12.1.3  Industrialized home qualifying as Dwelling, single-family, detached. 
7.12.1.4  Individual manufactured home meeting the definition of Dwelling, Single-Family, Detached. 
7.12.1.5  Accessory buildings and accessory uses provided the requirements of § 9.6 are met. 
7.12.1.6  Daycare home. 
7.12.1.7  Home office. 
7.12.1.8  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.12.1.9  Swimming pools, above and below ground, provided the location is not closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line; the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence of at least six (6) feet in height. Only home swimming pools and private community swimming pools are permitted. 
7.12.1.10  Residential home occupation provided the requirements of § 9.7 are met. 
7.12.2  Conditional uses. Within the R2 District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.12.2.1  Recreational developments, including but not limited to, public fishing lakes, public swimming pools, and golf courses or driving ranges, or other recreational developments provided a comprehensive plan for the area is submitted which includes the location of the site on plats of not less than a 1" = 400' scale, the location and function of all buildings and modifications of the natural landscape, the location and surface treatment of all roadways, appropriate details of drinking water or sanitary facilities, certificated by the Health Department if wells or septic tanks are involved and a time schedule setting for a development program. 
7.12.2.2  Religious institutions and their customary related facilities, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum of 2 acres and front on a public right-of-way or a private street which connects with a public right-of-way. A ten (10) ft. wide buffer area is required along any property line abutting property in residential zoning districts. 
7.12.2.3  Public and private primary and secondary schools provided that a complete site development sketch is submitted to and approved by the Planning and Zoning Board. 
7.12.2.4  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
Sec. 7.13. - RM Multi-Family Residential District. 
The RM District is composed of areas with existing or proposed high density residential use. The ordinance is designed to accommodate open space, convenience services, and community facilities needed for high density living. 
7.13.1  Permitted Uses. Within the RM District, only the following uses are permitted: 
7.13.1.1  Dwelling, single-family, detached. 
7.13.1.2  Dwelling, two-family. 
7.13.1.3  Dwelling, multi-family. 
7.13.1.4  Garage apartment. 
7.13.1.5  Individual manufactured home. 
7.13.1.6  Industrialized home qualifying as Dwelling, single-family, detached. 
7.13.1.7  Boarding house. 
7.13.1.8  Apartments. 
7.13.1.9  Townhouses and condominiums provided that the requirements in § 9.5 are met. 
7.13.1.10  Manufactured Home Park provided the requirements of §§ 9.3 and 9.4 are met. 
7.13.1.11  Accessory buildings and accessory uses provided the requirements of § 9.6 are met. 
7.13.1.12  Daycare home. 
7.13.1.13  Residential home occupation provided the requirements of § 9.7 are met. 
7.13.1.14  Swimming pools, above and below ground, provided the location is not closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line; the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence of at least six (6) feet in height. Only home swimming pools and private community swimming pools are permitted. 
7.13.1.15  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.13.2  Conditional Uses. Within the RM District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.13.2.1  Home office. 
7.13.2.2  Kindergartens, play schools, and daycare centers. A complete site development sketch must be submitted with the application. 
7.13.2.3  Family or group personal care homes provided that a complete site development sketch is submitted with the application showing adequate paved and lined off-street parking. All buildings must be placed at least fifty (50) feet from any property line and bordered by a ten (10) ft. wide buffer area along the front, side and back lot lines. The buffer area should be planted with evergreen trees or evergreen shrubs that grow at least eight (8) feet tall within three (3) years and provide an effective visual screen. 
7.13.2.4  Recreational developments, including but not limited to, public fishing lakes, public swimming pools. and golf courses or driving ranges, or other recreational developments provided a comprehensive plan for the area is submitted which includes the location of the site on plats of not less than a 1" = 400' scale, the location and function of all buildings and modifications of the natural landscape, the location and surface treatment of all roadways, appropriate details of drinking water or sanitary facilities, certificated by the Health Department if wells or septic tanks are involved and a time schedule setting for a development program. 
7.13.2.5  Religious institutions and their customary related facilities, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum of 2 acres and fronts on a public right-of-way or a private street which connects with a public right-of-way. The minimum building front setback if 50 feet. A ten (10) ft. wide buffer area is required along any property line abutting residentially zoned property. 
7.13.2.6  Family Personal Care Home, Group Personal Care Home and Congregate Personal Care Home. 
7.13.2.7  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
Sec. 7.14. - LR1 Lakeshore Single-Family Residential/Recreation District. 
The LR1 District is composed primarily of low to medium density residential areas. The ordinance for the district is designed to encourage single family developments, stressing the preservation of the natural beauty of the lake shore line and surrounding land. Additionally, the preservation of historical and archaeological sites is encouraged. 
7.14.1  Permitted Uses. Within the LR1 District, only the following uses are permitted. 
7.14.1.1  Dwelling, single-family, detached. 
7.14.1.2  Industrialized home qualifying as Dwelling, single-family, detached. 
7.14.1.3  Accessory building and accessory uses provided the requirements of § 9.6 are met. 
7.14.1.4  Daycare home. 
7.14.1.5  Home office. 
7.14.1.6  Boat docks, provided all ordinances and requirements of the Georgia Power Company pertaining to use of lake shore property and the reservoir are met. 
7.14.1.7  Swimming pools, above and below ground, provided the location is not closer than 10 feet to any property line; the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence to the extent required by State Law. Only home swimming pools and private community swimming pools are permitted. 
7.14.1.8  Residential home occupation provided the requirements of § 9.7 is met. 
7.14.2  Conditional Uses. Within the LR1 District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.14.2.1  Religious institutions and their customary related facilities, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum of 2 acres and fronts on a public right-of-way or a private street which connects with a public right-of-way. The minimum building front setback is 50 feet. A ten (10) ft. wide buffer area is required along any property line abutting residentially zoned property. 
7.14.2.2  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.14.2.3  Recreational developments including, but not limited to, public fishing lakes, swimming pools, golf courses or driving ranges, or other recreational developments provided that a comprehensive development plan for the area is submitted which includes the location of the site on maps of not less than 1" = 400' scale, the location and surface treatment of all roadways, appropriate details of drinking water or sanitary facilities, approval of the Greene County Health Department if wells and/or septic tanks are to be used, plus a time schedule setting forth a development program. No building shall be located within 100 feet of any property boundary. 
7.14.2.4  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
Sec. 7.15. - LR2 Lakeshore Multi-Family Residential/Recreation District. 
The LR2 Lakeshore Multi-family Residential/Recreation is composed of medium to high density residential areas. The ordinances are designed to encourage the preservation of the natural beauty of the shoreline and the surrounding land. Additionally, the preservation of historical and archaeological sites is encouraged. 
7.15.1  Permitted Uses. Within the LR2 District, only the following uses are permitted. 
7.15.1.1  Dwelling, single-family detached. 
7.15.1.2  Dwelling, two-family. 
7.15.1.3  Industrialized home qualifying as Dwelling, single-family, detached. 
7.15.1.4  Townhouses and condominiums provided that the requirements in § 9.5 are met. 
7.15.1.5  Garage apartment. 
7.15.1.6  Accessory buildings and accessory uses provided the requirements of § 9.6 are met. 
7.15.1.7  Daycare home. 
7.15.1.8  Home office. 
7.15.1.9  Boat docks, provided all ordinances and requirements of the Georgia Power Company pertaining to use of lake shore property and the reservoir are met. 
7.15.1.10  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.15.1.11  Swimming pools, above and below ground, provided the pool location, including the pool deck and accessory equipment, is not closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line; the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence to the extent required by State Law. Only home swimming pools and private community swimming pools are permitted. 
7.15.1.12  Residential home occupation provided the requirements of § 9.7 are met. 
7.15.2  Conditional Uses. Within the LR2 District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.15.2.1  Kindergartens, play schools, and daycare centers. A complete site development sketch must be submitted with the application. 
7.15.2.2  Recreational developments, including but not limited to, public fishing lakes, public swimming pools, and golf courses or driving ranges, or other recreational developments provided a comprehensive plan for the area is submitted which includes the location of the site on plats of not less than a 1" = 400' scale, the location and function of all buildings and modifications of the natural landscape, the location and surface treatment of all roadways, appropriate details of drinking water or sanitary facilities, certificated by the Health Department if wells or septic tanks are involved and a time schedule setting for a development program. 
7.15.2.3  Religious institutions and their customary related facilities, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum of 2 acres and front on a public right-of-way or a private street which connects with a public right-of-way. A ten (10) ft. wide buffer area is required along any property line abutting residentially zoned property. 
7.15.2.4  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
Sec. 7.16. - LC Lakeshore Commercial District. 
The LC District is intended for the development of retail establishments, boat facilities and other commercial uses oriented to waterway use. 
7.16.1  Permitted Uses. Within the LC District, only the following uses are permitted. 
7.16.1.1  Cafes, grill or lunch counter. 
7.16.1.2  Convenience store. 
7.16.1.3  Marinas, provided all general specifications and restrictions applied to use of Georgia Power Company lands and reservoir. 
7.16.1.4  Hotel/Motel. 
7.16.1.5  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.16.1.6  Restaurant. 
7.16.1.7  Restaurant, fast-food. 
7.16.1.8  Restaurant, drive-in. 
7.16.1.9  Retail shops for waterway oriented merchandise. 
7.16.1.10  Signs, provided the requirements of Article X are met. 
7.16.2  Conditional Uses. Within the LC District, the uses enumerated below may be permitted. Conditional Use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
7.16.2.1  RV Campground and its accessory use provided that the site plan is approved by Greene County Health Department. Accessory uses in the campground may include a single-family dwelling for use for the on-site manager of the campground and a self-service laundry for use by those camping in the campground. The density of campsites shall not exceed 10 campsites per acre. 
The perimeter of the campground shall contain a ten-foot vegetative buffer. A natural buffer strip is preferred. If a natural buffer strip is not available a landscaped buffer strip is required. (See Article III for definition of "Buffer Strip, Natural" and "Buffer Strip, Landscaped." 
7.16.2.2  Temporary tent camping not to exceed ten (10) consecutive calendar days during any month. All tents shall be immediately removed from the property on or before the tenth calendar day. 
7.16.2.3  Accessory buildings and accessory uses provided the requirements of § 9.6 are met. 
Sec. 7.17. - LP Lakeshore Park District. 
The LP District is intended for the development of public park and recreation areas stressing the preservation of the natural beauty of the lake shoreline and surrounding area. 
7.17.1  Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the LP District. 
7.17.1.1  Forestry uses. 
7.17.1.2  Passive recreation areas including picnic areas, shelters, and hiking trails. 
7.17.1.3  Minor and Major Utility facilities. 
7.17.1.4  Signs, incidental to and compatible with the historic, natural, archaeological or scenic area. 
7.17.1.5  Temporary tent camping not to exceed ten (10) consecutive calendar days during any month. All tents shall be immediately removed from the property on or before the tenth calendar day. 
Sec. 7.18. - AP Airport Corridor District. 
Zoning Requirements restricting the height of structures and objects of natural growth, and otherwise regulating the use of property, in the vicinity of the Greene County Regional Airport by creating the appropriate zones and establishing the boundaries thereof; providing for changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones; defining certain terms used herein; referring to the Greene County Regional Airport Airspace plan; providing for enforcement; establishing a board of adjustment; and imposing penalties. 
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Rules of State Department of Transportation Chapter 672-9. It is hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for endangering the lives and property of users of the Greene County Regional Airport, and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an obstruction may affect existing and future instrument approach minimums of the Greene County Regional Airport; and that an obstruction may reduce the size of areas available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the Greene County Regional Airport and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared: 
1.  That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by the Greene County Regional Airport; 
2.  That it is necessary in the interest of public health, public safety, and general welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and 
3.  That the prevention of those obstructions should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of police power without compensation. 
It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or establishment of hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal, alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation, or marking and lighting of obstructions are public purposes for which a political subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land. 
7.18.1  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Airport Height and Hazard Zoning Ordinance is to provide both airspace protection and land use compatibility with airport operations in Greene County. This ordinance, through establishment of airport overlay zones and corresponding regulations, provides for independent review of development proposals in order to promote the public safety, health, and general welfare in Greene County as well as to ensure that the Greene County Regional Airport can function effectively. Therefore, the Board of County Commissioners of Greene County, Georgia deems it necessary to regulate uses of land located within or near the traffic patterns of airports through regulation of height of structures and objects of natural growth, and through regulation of land uses within noise impacted areas and runway protection zones (RPZ). 
7.18.2  Definitions. As used in this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires: 
AIRPORT - Greene County Regional Airport or any public licensed airport. 
AIRPORT ELEVATION - Mean sea level at the airport. 
APPROACH SURFACE - A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in Section 5 [Article V] of this Ordinance. The perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, AND CONICAL ZONES - These zones are set forth in Section [Article] III of this Ordinance. 
CONICAL SURFACE - A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION - An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
HEIGHT - For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this Ordinance and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
HORIZONTAL SURFACE - A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in the airspace plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY - A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds' maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft. 
NON-CONFORMING USE - Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance or an amendment thereto. 
NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in NON-PRECISION instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
OBSTRUCTION - Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in Section 5 [Article V] of this Ordinance. 
PERSON - An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or government entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them. 
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document. 
PRIMARY SURFACE - A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; the elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
RUNWAY - A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
STRUCTURE - An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE - These surfaces extend outward at 90 degrees angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
TREE - Any object of natural growth. 
UTILITY RUNWAY - A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds' maximum gross weight or less. 
VISUAL RUNWAY - A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
7.18.3  Airport Zones. In order to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces, as they apply to the Greene County Regional Airport. Such zones are shown on the Airspace Plan, prepared by Wilbur Smith Associates, dated February, 1998. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
1.  Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
2.  Utility Runway Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
3.  Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
4.  Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum Greater Than ¾ Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
5.  Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum As Low As ¾ Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
6.  Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
7.  Transitional Zones - The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
8.  Horizontal Zone - The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all runways designated utility or visual and 10,000 for all others from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
9.  Conical Zone - The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
7.18.4  Airport Zone Height Limitations. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by the Ordinance to a height in excess of the applicable height herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
1.  Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone - Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
2.  Utility Runway Non Precision Instrument Approach Zone - Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
3.  Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Zone - Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
4.  Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum Greater Than ¾ Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone - Slopes thirty-four (34) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
5.  Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum As Low As ¾ Mile Non-Precision instrument approach zone - Slopes thirty-four (34) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
6.  Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone - Slopes fifty (50) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward forty (40) feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
7.  Transitional Zones - Slope seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation that is 35 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
8.  Horizontal Zone - Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation or at a height of 828 feet above mean sea level. 
9.  Conical Zone - Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation or at a height of 1,028 feet above mean sea level. 
10.  Excepted Height Limitations - Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to 50 feet above the surface of the land. 
7.18.5  Use Restriction. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, no use may be made of land or water within the county in such a manner as to interfere with operation of an airborne aircraft using a publicly licensed airport. The following special requirements shall apply to proposed developments: 
1.  No Solid Waste Disposal Sites except inert materials shall be permitted to be located as follows: 
a.  Within 10,000 feet of any publicly licensed airport active runway used or planned to be used by turbine powered aircraft, or 
b.  Within 5,000 feet of any publicly licensed airport active runway used only by piston type aircraft, or 
c.  So that it places the active runways and/or approach and departure patterns of an airport between the solid waste disposal site and bird feeding, water or roosting areas, or 
d.  locations outside the above locations but still within the limits of any airport overlay zone(s) if determined by the FAA to pose a hazard. 
2.  Proposed developments which produce lights or illumination, smoke, glare or other visual hazards, or produce electronic interference with airport airplane navigation signals are subject to the standards specified in the FAA Procedures Manual 7400-2C as may be applied and enforced by the state and/or federal governments. 
7.18.6  Nonconforming Uses. 
7.18.6.1  The requirements prescribed by this Ordinance shall not be construed to necessitate the removal, lowering, alteration or other changes of any existing structure or tree not conforming to the requirements as of the effective date of this Ordinance. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to require the sound conditioning or other changes or alteration of any preexisting structure not conforming to requirements of this Ordinance as of its effective date or to otherwise interfere with the continuance of any such preexisting nonconforming use. 
7.18.6.2  Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction or alteration that was begun prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and is diligently pursued and completed within one (1) year thereof. 
7.18.6.3  Before any nonconforming structure or tree may be replaced, substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt or allowed to grow higher or to be replanted, a permit must be secured from the County Planning and Zoning Administrator. 
7.18.6.4  No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction hazardous to aircraft operations or permit a nonconforming structure or tree or nonconforming use to be made or become higher or become a greater obstruction to air navigation than it was as of the effective date of this regulation. 
7.18.6.5  Whenever the County Planning and Zoning Administrator determines that a nonconforming use or nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or that the cost of repair, reconstruction or restoration exceeds the value of the structure or tree, no permit shall be granted that would allow said structure or tree to be repaired, reconstructed, restored or replanted except by a conforming structure or tree. 
7.18.6.6  The cost of removing or lowering any tree not conforming to the requirements of this Ordinance shall be borne by the proprietor of the airport affected by the nonconforming tree. 
7.18.7  Permits. 
7.18.7.1  Future Uses - No material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be granted unless a variance has been approved. 
7.18.7.2  Existing Uses - No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
7.18.8  Procedures For Obtaining An Airport Obstruction Variance. 
7.18.8.1  Applicants shall submit to the County Planning and Zoning Administrator a completed Airport Construction Variance application form, as provided by the county. Variance requests shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning Board. The request may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. 
7.18.8.2  Prior to variance requests being scheduled for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Board, the applicant shall submit to the County Planning and Zoning Administrator the following: 
a.  A copy of the notice of proposed construction form submitted to the FAA; 
b.  A final Determination issued by the FAA based on its review of the applicant's Notice of Proposed Construction submitted in accordance with 14 CFR Part 77; 
c.  A valid aeronautical evaluation (may consist of the evaluation performed by the FAA); 
d.  Comments from the GA DOT or evidence that the GA DOT has made no comments during its required 45-day comment time frame. Said evidence shall include a return receipt showing that the GA DOT comment time frame has been exceeded. 
7.18.9  Criteria for Granting an Airport Obstruction Variance. Where the FAA has reviewed the proposed development and determined its construction would exceed an Obstruction Standard of 14 CFR Part 77, the county may grant an Airport Obstruction Variance for a proposed development. Such a variance may be granted if the county determines that a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and where the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest (i.e. the development can be accommodated in navigable airspace without adverse impact to the county's public use airports or aviation operations), and provided that a condition is attached to the variance approval to require that the approved structure(s) is marked and lighted to indicate to aircraft pilots the presence of an obstruction in accordance with the standards of FAA Advisory Circular Number 70/7460-1G., as it may be amended. Where such marking or lighting is required, such requirement shall be satisfied prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (C.O.) for the affected structure and the FAA determines the aeronautical evaluations submitted are valid. Consideration is given to: 
1.  The nature of the terrain and height of existing structures. 
2.  Public and private interests and investments. 
3.  The character of flying operations and planned development of airports. 
4.  FAA designated federal airways. 
5.  Whether construction of the proposed structure would cause an increase in the minimum descent altitude or the decision height at the affected airport. 
6.  Technological advances. 
7.  The safety of persons on the ground and in the air. 
8.  Land use density. 
9.  The safe and efficient use of navigable airspace. 
10.  The cumulative effects on navigable airspace of all existing structures, proposed structures identified in the applicable jurisdictions comprehensive plans, and all other known proposed structures in the area. 
11.  FAA determinations and results of aeronautical studies conducted by or for the FAA. 
12.  GA DOT comments and recommendations, including GA DOT findings relating to FS 333.025(1) standards and guidelines. 
13.  Comments and recommendations from local airport authorities. 
14.  Other testimony and findings of aviation operations and safety experts. 
7.18.10  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the County Manager to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Application for permits and variances shall be made to the County Planning and Zoning Administrator upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this Ordinance to be submitted to the County Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Application for action by the Board of County Commissioners shall be forthwith transmitted by the County Planning and Zoning Administrator. 
7.18.11  Appeals. 
1.  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the County Planning and Zoning Board, made in the administration of the Ordinance, may appeal to the Board of County Commissioners. 
2.  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time, by filing with the County Manager a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The County Manager shall forthwith transmit to the Board of County Commissioners all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
3.  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the County Manager certifies to the Board of County Commissioners, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the County Manager cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the Board of County Commissioners or notice to the County Manager and on due cause shown. 
4.  The Board of Commissioners shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
5.  The Board of County Commissioners may, in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
7.18.12  Judicial Review. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Board of County Commissioners, may appeal to the Superior Court as provided by law. 
7.18.13  Penalties. Each violation of this Ordinance or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars or imprisonment for not more than 180 days or both; and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
7.18.14  Conflicting Regulations. Where there exists a conflict between any of the requirements or limitations prescribed in this Ordinance and any other requirements, regulations or zoning applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees; the use of land; or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. The variance to or waiver of any such more stringent limitation or requirement shall not constitute automatic variance or waiver of the less stringent limitations or requirements of this Ordinance. 
7.18.15  Severability. If any of the provisions of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances are held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. 
Sec. 7.19 - Short Term Rental Overlay District. 
7.19.1  Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to designate areas in the community where rental of residential units on an overnight or short term basis have otherwise previously been generally prohibited but may be desirable and in the best interests of the residential community, and to aid the development of housing in those areas. Nothing in this Article is intended to regulate the amount of rent that may be charged by a property owner. 
7.19.2  Applicability. 
7.19.2.1  The provisions of this section 7.19 apply in the unincorporated portions of Greene County, Georgia in which a STRO District has been established in accordance with 7.19.3. 
7.19.2.2  All requirements, regulations and standards imposed by this section apply in addition to any other applicable requirements, regulations and standards imposed elsewhere in this Code. 
7.19.2.3  The restrictions and obligations contained in this section shall apply to short term rentals at all times during which such units are marketed and used as short term rentals. 
7.19.2.4  The allowance of short term rentals pursuant to this section shall not prevent enforcement of additional restrictions that may be contained in restrictive covenants or other private contractual agreements or arrangements. 
7.19.3  Short Term Rental Overlay District Requirements. 
7.19.3.1  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any property within the unincorporated areas of Greene County to rent or operate a short term rental of residential property contrary to the procedures and regulations established in this section, other provisions of the Greene County Code of Ordinances ("Code"), or any applicable state law. 
7.19.3.2  Short term rentals shall only be allowed in residential communities wherein a Short Term Rental Overlay District has been established by the County in accordance with the process for map amendments contained in this Code, including pursuant to an application by the Planning Commission, the Board of Commissioners, a property owner, or the authorized agent of a property owner. Where the interest of the public health, safety or welfare is promoted, the Board of Commissioners may waive an application requirement otherwise required for the adoption of a Short Term Rental Overlay District. 
7.19.3.2.1  In addition to the process for a zoning map amendment, as provided by Article XIII, Sections 13.2 and 13.3 of this Chapter, an application for the establishment of a STRO district submitted by an individual(s) shall include a list of each and every owner of real property, as reflected on the County's property tax records, or in the case of property that has been transferred since the last property tax return, the owner as reflected on a deed provided by the applicant evidencing such transfer from the owner as reflected on the County's property tax records, in the residential community indicating their support for the STRO District. Such list shall include contact information for each owner to include phone number, email address, street address of the lot in the residential community, mailing address, and signature indicating support of the application. The list of property owners submitted pursuant to the application requirements shall reflect the support of owners of at least 60% of the legal parcels in the residential community. Notwithstanding the indication of support by other property owners, or lack thereof, the final decision with respect to the imposition of a Short Term Rental Overlay District shall be made by the Board of Commissioners in compliance with the procedures and standards set forth in Article XIII of this Chapter. 
7.19.3.2.2  A developer of a residential community may apply for a STRO District for areas designated within the residential community provided that the developer is actively developing the residential community, and continues to own developable property in, or adjoining the residential community. Such an application shall clearly designate the area to which the STRO shall apply. 
7.19.3.2.3  If granted, a STRO District shall be approved for a period of five years after final approval by the County and may be terminated or renewed after a public hearing following the same procedure required for the initial designation. 
7.19.3.3  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 7.19.3.2, any dwelling that has been rented for periods of not less than one night and not more than thirty (30) consecutive nights during the 12-month period beginning September 1, 2016 and ending August 31, 2017, provided that the owner of such dwelling registered the physical address of the short term rental with the County for the remittance of hotel/motel occupancy tax and paid all hotel/motel occupancy tax due to the County prior to the passage of this Ordinance for the specified 12-month period, shall be deemed a lawful non-conforming use that may continue to exist in perpetuity as a short term rental. Such dwellings shall be subject to all of the procedures and regulations of this section 7.19 as if the use were an allowed use under the section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a short term rental dwelling's non-conforming status shall expire upon the conveyance of that dwelling to an unrelated third party. 
7.19.3.4  Notwithstanding anything in this Section 7.19 to the contrary, during the period of April 1 through April 15 of the calendar year ("April Window"), short term rentals as defined herein shall be allowed to occur in any district without the necessity of first obtaining a short term rental business license. Such short term rentals during the April Window shall comply with the requirements of Sections 7.19.10, 7.19.11, 7.19.12, 7.19.13 and 7.19.14 other than any requirements directly associated with obtaining and maintaining a short term rental business license. During the April Window property owners shall be subject to penalties for all violations other than for failure to maintain a short term rental business license or any requirements directly associated with obtaining and maintaining a short term rental business license. 
7.19.4  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
7.19.4.1  Code compliance verification form means a document executed by a short term rental owner, operator, managing agency or managing agent certifying that the short term rental unit complies with applicable zoning, building, health and life safety code provisions. No person shall allow occupancy or possession of any short term rental unit if the premises or owner thereof is in violation of any applicable zoning, building, health or life safety code provisions. 
7.19.4.2  Local contact person means a local property manager, owner or any managing agency or managing agent of the owner authorized by an owner of a short term rental to take remedial action and respond to any notice of violation of this section, who resides in the County or no more than sixty (60) miles from the short term rental. 
7.19.4.3  Managing agency or agent means a person, firm or agency representing an owner or owners of a short term rental or short term rentals, or a person, firm or agency owning a short term rental. 
7.19.4.4  Noise Regulations means those regulations contained in the Code of Greene County, Georgia, Part II, Chapter 20, Article III. 
7.19.4.5  Operator means a person who is a proprietor of a short term rental, whether in the capacity of owner, developer, managing agency, managing agent, lessee, sub-lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character, other than an employee, or where the operator performs his or her functions through a rental agent, the managing agent or the rental agent shall have the same duties as his or her principal. 
7.19.4.6  Owner means a person or entity that holds legal and/or equitable title to private property. 
7.19.4.7  Private means intended for or restricted to the occupants and/or guests of his or her short term rental; not for public use. 
7.19.4.8  Short term means a period of thirty (30) days or less. 
7.19.4.9  Short term rental means one or more dwelling units, including either a single-family home, duplex or single multi-family residential unit rented for the purpose of overnight lodging for a period of not less than one night and not more than thirty (30) consecutive nights. 
7.19.4.10  Residential community means a list of residential communities maintained by the County Zoning Administrator. 
7.19.5  Short term rental business license requirements. No owner or operator of a short term rental shall rent that unit without first applying for and receiving a business license in accordance with Chapter 12 (Business Licensing and Regulations) of the Code of Greene County, Georgia. A separate business license shall be required for each short term rental unit (except where an operator manages multiple short term rentals in a residential community or multiple residential communities and applies for a business license for a single business license for such short term rental units). The licensing requirements of this section are in addition to any hotel/motel tax registration or any other permit or licensing requirements. However, at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, the processing of such license required under this section may be combined with the processing of hotel/motel tax registration or any other related permit or license process administered by the County. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to prescribe forms and procedures for the processing of licenses under this section. 
7.19.6  Agency. An owner may retain a managing agency, managing agent, operator, representative or local contact person to comply with the requirements of this section, including, without limitation, the licensing of the short term rental, the management of the short term rental and the compliance with the conditions of the license. The owner of the short term rental is responsible for compliance with the provisions of this section and the failure of an agent, representative, or local contact person to comply with this section shall be deemed noncompliance by the owner. 
7.19.7  Application for short term rental business license. An application for a short term rental business license shall be filed with the County Clerk prior to use of the property as a short term rental. Applications shall be on the forms provided by the County which shall include all the required information listed in Section 12-7 (Applications) of the Code of Greene County, Georgia. Additionally, in accordance with Code Sec. 12-7(a)(2)(i), application for a short term rental business license must contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
7.19.7.1  The name, address telephone number, and email address of the owner or operator of the short term rental for which the registration is being issued; 
7.19.7.2  The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the agent, representative or local contact person for the owner of the short term rental; 
7.19.7.3  The number of bedrooms and approximate square footage in the short term rental, and the maximum number of overnight occupants; 
7.19.7.4  An executed Code compliance verification form acknowledging that all designated bedrooms meet all local building and safety code requirements; 
7.19.7.5  A diagram and/or photograph of the premises showing and indicating the number and location of designated on-site parking spaces and the maximum number of vehicles allowed for overnight occupants. Landscaped areas of any kind shall not be counted as parking spaces; 
7.19.7.6  Evidence of a valid hotel/motel occupancy tax registration certificate issued by the County for the short term rental. Application for such registration may be filed concurrently with the application for registration under this chapter; 
7.19.7.7  Evidence of a valid sales tax certification number issued by the Georgia Department of Revenue for collection and remittance of sales tax; 
7.19.7.8  Acknowledgment that the owner, agent and local contact person have read all regulations pertaining to the operation of a short term rental; 
7.19.7.9  Certification of the accuracy of the information submitted, and agreement to comply with all conditions of the registration; and 
7.19.7.10  Acknowledgement that the owner, agent, or local contact person has or will post, at the short term rental, the notice required in Section 7.19.10. 
7.19.8  Application fee. An application for a short term rental business license shall be accompanied by an initial fee in accordance with Section 12-3 (Determination of Occupation Tax) of the Code of Greene County, Georgia. 
7.19.9  License conditions. 
7.19.9.1  All business licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are subject to the following standard conditions: 
1.  The owner or operator shall, by written agreement with the occupants, limit overnight occupancy of the short term rental to the specific number of occupants designated in the business license application, with the number of overnight occupants not to exceed two persons per bedroom meeting building code and life-safety code requirements, plus two additional persons per residence. A bedroom is a room that is designed to be, or meets the building code requirements to be, used as a sleeping room and for no other primary purpose. Every bedroom shall have an emergency escape or rescue exit and a minimum ceiling height as follows: 
a.  Each bedroom shall have at least one operable window or door for emergency escape or rescue that opens directly to the exterior of the unit. The emergency door or window shall be operable from the inside to provide a full, clear opening without the use of separate tools. Escape or rescue windows shall have a minimum net clear openable area of 5.7 square feet. The minimum net clear openable height dimension shall be 24 inches. The minimum net clear openable width dimension shall be 20 inches. When windows are provided as a means of escape or rescue, they shall have a finished sill height not more than 44 inches above the floor; 
b.  Bedrooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than eight feet, except as provided in this section. If any room has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half of the area thereof; 
2.  The owner or operator shall, by written agreement with the occupants, limit the number of vehicles of overnight occupants to the number designated in the business license application; with the number of vehicles of overnight occupants not to exceed the number of designated on-site parking spaces of the short term rental property; 
3.  The owner shall use best efforts to ensure that the occupants and/or guests of the short term rental do not violate Noise Regulations by notifying the occupants of the rules regarding short term rentals and responding when notified that occupants are violating laws regarding their occupancy. It is not intended that the owner, local contact person, managing agency or agent, or operator act as a peace officer or place himself or herself in harm's way; 
4.  The owner shall, by written agreement, limit the daytime visitors at any time in a vacation home rental to no more than six (6) persons in addition to the maximum overnight occupancy designated in the business license application; 
5.  The owner or operator of the short term rental shall post a copy of the business license and a copy of the conditions set forth in this section in a conspicuous place within the short term rental; 
6.  No business license issued under this section shall be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the owner or operator to whom it is issued, or at any location other than the one for which it is issued; and 
7.  All business licenses issued under this section shall be valid for no more than one year, beginning on the date of issuance and expiring on December 31st of that year. 
7.19.10  Sign and notification requirements. Each short term rental shall have a clearly visible and legible notice conspicuously posted within the unit on or adjacent to the front door, containing the following information: 
7.19.10.1  The name of the managing agency, operator, agent, property manager, local contact person or owner of the unit, and a telephone number at which that party may be reached on a 24-hour basis; 
7.19.10.2  The maximum number of overnight occupants permitted to stay in the unit; 
7.19.10.3  The maximum number of vehicles allowed to be parked on the property including a sketch of the location of the on-site parking spaces; 
7.19.10.4  The maximum number of daytime visitors allowed in addition to the overnight occupants; 
7.19.10.5  The trash pickup day and notification that trash and refuse shall not be left or stored on the exterior of the property unless it is placed in a curbside container, and that the curbside container shall not be placed sooner than 24 hours prior to the pickup day, and must be removed no later than 24 hours after pickup (If owner or operator provides daily trash removal then this notice is not necessary); 
7.19.10.6  Notification that an occupant may be cited and fined for creating a disturbance or for violating this section or other provisions of the County Code; 
7.19.10.7  Notification that failure to conform to the parking and occupancy requirements of the structure is a violation of this section; and 
7.19.10.8  A statement advising the occupant that any failure to conform to the Noise Regulations is a violation of this section. 
7.19.11  Parking. Short term rentals shall comply with all applicable County Code sections regarding parking. Owner or operator shall provide sufficient parking for guests such that all parking is accomplished on the property site. No parking to accommodate renters or invitees of short term rentals is permitted on the County right-of-way or along any roadways at any time. 
7.19.12  Noise. All short term rentals shall comply with the Noise Regulations. 
7.19.13  Local contact person. 
7.19.13.1  Each owner or operator of a short term rental shall designate a local contact person who has access and authority to assume management of the unit and take remedial measures. An owner or operator of a short term rental who resides in Greene County or within 60 miles of the short term rental may designate himself or herself as the local contact person. The local contact person shall be required to respond to the location of the short term rental within one hour after being notified by the Sheriff or County Code Enforcement of the existence of a violation of this chapter or any other provision of this Code, or any disturbance requiring immediate remedy or abatement. 
7.19.13.2  The owner or operator must immediately notify the Zoning Administrator in writing upon a change of local contact person or the local contact person's telephone number. This notification will be on forms prescribed by the Zoning Administrator. The new, revised business license will not extend the expiration date of the business license, and will be issued for a fee of $25.00, and must be posted within ten (10) days of any change of local contact person information. 
7.19.14  Other requirements. All short term rentals shall comply with the following: 
7.19.14.1  An interconnected and hard-wired smoke detection and notification system is required and must be operable and in good working order at all times. 
7.19.14.2  Any advertising of the short term rental unit shall conform to information included in the short term rental business license and requirements of this section, and shall include notification of the maximum occupancy, maximum number of vehicles allowed, and provisions regulating noise. 
7.19.14.3  Compliance with these standards shall be in addition to compliance with all other provisions of this Code relating to nuisance, peace and safety. 
7.19.14.4  In addition to any requirements of this Section 7.19, any structure being operated as a short term rental, except those authorized under subsection 7.19.3.3, with a capacity for more than ten (10) overnight guests at a time shall be required to meet all local, state and federal access and life safety codes, rules and regulations that are otherwise applicable to hotels as defined in such codes, rules and regulations. In the event there is a conflict between the requirements of this Section 7.19.14.4 and such other codes rules or regulations, the requirement that is more protective of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail. 
7.19.15  Violation and penalties. 
7.19.15.1  The requirements of this Section 7.19 shall become effective upon adoption, except that the requirement in subsection 7.19.3.2 requiring short term rentals to only exist in a Short Term Rental Overlay District shall not be enforceable until September 1, 2018. Violations shall be managed on each individual short term rental, and any resulting penalties shall only be assessed against such short term rental. The following conduct shall constitute a violation for which the penalties specified in subsection 7.19.15.2 of this section may be imposed, or the business license suspended or revoked: 
1.  The owner or operator has violated any of the provisions of this chapter; or 
2.  The owner or operator has failed to collect and remit to the County the hotel/motel occupancy tax as required by Article III of County Code. 
7.19.15.2  The penalties for violations specified in Subsection 7.19.15.1 shall be as follows: 
1.  For the first violation within any 12-month period, the penalty shall be a warning notice of violation; 
2.  For a second violation within any 12-month period, the penalty shall be a fine not to exceed $250.00; 
3.  For a third violation within any 12-month period, the penalty shall be a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or suspension of the business license (or suspension of the violating short term rental from the applicable business license) for a period not to exceed six months; if the period of suspension runs beyond December 31st, the owner or operator shall not be eligible to apply for renewal of the business license (or reinstatement of the violating short term rental under the business license) until expiration of the full suspension period; and 
4.  For a fourth violation within any 12-month period, the business license may be revoked (or removal of the violating short term rental from the applicable business license) in accordance with the provisions of subsection 7.19.16 below. An owner or operator shall not be eligible to reapply for a business license (or reinstatement of the violating short term rental under the business license) for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation. 
7.19.15.3  A short term rental that is determined to be operating without the necessary business license required under this section shall subject the owner to a penalty of $1,000.00. Each day the unit is marketed or rented for overnight accommodation shall constitute a separate violation. 
7.19.16  Procedure for imposition of penalties/suspension/revocation. Penalties, including a notice of violation, shall be imposed, and business licenses shall be revoked (or suspension or removal of a short term rental from the applicable business license), only in the manner provided in this subsection. 
7.19.16.1  Initial violations shall result in a notice of violation being directed to the owner or operator, the local person and property manager/agent designated in the business license application as the local contact person. The local contact person shall be responsible for contacting the occupant to correct the problem within sixty (60) minutes. This local contact person is required to visit the property to confirm compliance with this chapter, unless compliance can reasonably be confirmed without visiting the property. 
7.19.16.2  If non-compliance with provisions of this section reoccur, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall conduct an investigation whenever there is reason to believe that an owner or operator has failed to comply with the provisions of this section. The investigation may include an inspection of the premises, review of law enforcement/security reports, online searches, citations, or neighbor documentation consisting of photos, sound recordings and video all of which may constitute evidence of a violation. Should the investigation support a finding that a violation occurred, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall issue written notice of the violation and intention to impose a penalty and/or suspend or revoke the business license (or suspend or remove a short term rental from the applicable business license). The written notice may be served either by first class mail, by commercial overnight delivery, by personal service on the owner and operator or agent, or by any other reasonable means of delivery, including email, and shall specify the facts which, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, constitute grounds for imposition of the penalties and/or suspension or revocation, and specify that the penalties will be imposed and/or that the business license will be suspended or revoked (or suspension or removal of a short term rental from the applicable business license) fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the notice unless the owner and/or operator files with the Zoning Administrator a request for an appeal hearing before the Board of Commissioners in accordance with subsection 15.7 of the Zoning Ordinance of Greene County, Georgia. In considering such appeal, the Board of Commissioners shall determine whether the Zoning Administrator has erred in his/her interpretation and/or enforcement of this section. 
7.19.16.3  Except as otherwise provided in this section, violation of this section will be enforced in accordance with subsection 15.6 and 15.7 of the Zoning Ordinance of Greene County, Georgia. 
7.19.17  Business license and fees not exclusive. The business license and fees required by this section shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other provision of this Code, or other local or state law. The issuance of any business license pursuant to this section shall not relieve the owner of the obligation to comply with all other provisions of this Code pertaining to the use and occupancy of the short term rental or the property on which it is located. 
7.19.18  Penalty. In addition to the penalties described above, any person violating the provisions of this section by operating a short term rental without a valid business license may be prosecuted according to the general penalties described in Chapter 1, Sec. 1-8 of this Code. 
7.19.19  Enforcement. The Zoning Administrator or his or her designee is hereby authorized and directed to establish such procedures as may from time to time be required to carry out the purpose and intent of this section. Greene County Code Enforcement Officers, as well as the Sheriff of Greene County or his or her designee shall also have authority to enforce this section. 
7.19.20  Violations by occupants of short term rentals. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be enforced pursuant to this section; Chapter 1, Sec. 1-8; Chapter 20; and any other applicable Code sections. Enforcement actions may be brought against occupants of a short term rental for violations of this section and any other provision of this Code notwithstanding that this section may also make the owner or operator of the short term rental responsible for the conduct constituting the violation. 
( Amend. of 10-2-2017 ) 
ARTICLE VIII. - AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

[Sec. 8.1. - Generally.] 
This Article is established to show the minimum size, width, and maximum height requirements for the land uses within each designated district. Lot size shall be based on factors including the size of the building required for that use, required parking, and ground water flow. The Planning and Zoning Board is authorized to increase minimum lot sizes and otherwise vary district development standards to accommodate the need to use septic tanks and/or wells and Health Department regulations in this regard. The unavailability of public sewer and/or water shall preclude the ability to develop projects which cannot utilize septic tanks. 

 
S - Public or community sewerage system 
W - Public or community water system 
1 Excludes buildings for agriculture use 
2 All multi-family development must comply with section 9.5 
3 No permanent structures allowed within 65 feet of water line at normal level 
4 For lots lying by Lake Oconee with on-site sewage management systems, lot sizes shall be exclusive of that portion of lot lying within 75 feet of the high water line of Lake Oconee 
5 Excludes church steeples 
ARTICLE IX. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9.1. - Recreational Vehicle Parks. 
9.1.1  Direct Access. All recreational vehicle parks should be located with direct access to a paved city, county, state or federal highway. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide the necessary access where there is no existing improved street or road connecting the recreational park site with an improved existing public street or road. Any street or road improvement required beyond the boundary of the recreational vehicle park shall be improved in accordance with the Greene County Subdivision Regulations. Entrances and exits to parks shall be designed for safe and convenient movement of traffic into and out of the park. No material impediment to visibility shall be created or maintained which obscures the view of an approaching driver. All traffic in and out of the park shall be through such entrances and exits. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district. 
9.1.2  Spaces. Spaces in recreational vehicle parks may be used by recreational vehicles, provided they meet any additional laws and ordinances of Greene County and shall be rented by the day or week only, and an occupant of such space shall remain in the same recreational vehicle park space for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. 
9.1.3  Site Conditions. Conditions of soil, groundwater level, drainage, and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health and safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence, or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
9.1.4  Soil and Ground Cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of the park shall be paved, or covered with stone screenings, or other solid materials, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust. 
9.1.5  Drainage Requirements. Surface drainage plans for the entire tract must be submitted with the application to determine its compatibility with the surrounding existing drainage pattern. 
9.1.6  Minimum Park Size. The minimum park size shall be ten (10) acres with a maximum density of ten (10) campsites per acre. 
9.1.7  Campsite Development. Campsites should, to the greatest extent possible, be developed to preserve the natural character of the lot and the surrounding area. Each campsite shall contain a stabilized vehicular parking pad of shell, marble, paving, or other, suitable material. No part of an RV or other unit placed on a campsite shall be closer than five (5) feet to a site line. 
9.1.8  Separation between Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall be separated by at least ten (10) feet. Any accessory structure such as attached awnings, for purposes of this separation requirement will be considered to be part of the RV. 
9.1.9  Parking Requirements. There shall be at least three (3) off-street parking spaces designated in the RV park for each two (2) RV sites. Off-street parking may be provided in common parking areas or on individual RV sites. 
9.1.10  Accessory Uses. Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, dumping stations, showers, coin-operated laundry facilities and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of an RV park and campground are permitted as accessory uses to the park. 
1.  Such establishments and the parking areas primarily related to their operation shall not occupy more than 5 percent of the gross area of the park. 
2.  Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of the park. 
3.  Such establishments shall present no visible evidence from any street outside the park of their commercial character which would attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
4.  The structures housing such facilities shall not be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any public street and shall not be directly accessible from any public street, but shall be accessible only from a street within the park. 
9.1.11  Open Space and Recreational Areas. A minimum of eight percent (8%) of the gross site area for the RV park shall be set aside and developed as common use areas for open or enclosed recreation facilities. 
9.1.12  Yards and Setbacks. Each RV park shall have a landscaped perimeter buffer which shall be used for no other purpose: 
1.  Minimum front setback—twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line except when the park fronts on a state highway; then the minimum shall be fifty (50) feet. 
2.  Minimum side setback—when abutting residential districts, the side setbacks shall be fifty (50) feet from the property line; when abutting a dedicated right-of-way, the side setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet; when abutting any other zoning district, the side setback shall be twenty (20) feet. 
3.  Minimum rear setback—twenty (20) feet except when the rear yard abuts a dedicated public right-of-way, the minimum shall be twenty-five (25) feet. If the rear yard abuts a residential district, the minimum rear setback shall be fifty (50) feet. 
9.1.13  Landscaping. When needed to enhance aesthetics or to insure public safety, the RV park shall be enclosed by a fence, wall, landscape screening, earth mounds, or by other designs approved by the Planning Commission which will complement the landscape and assure compatibility with the adjacent environment. 
9.1.14  Streets in RV Parks. Streets in RV parks shall be private, constructed with a stabilized travel way (marble, shell, paving, or other suitable material) and meet the following minimum stabilized travel way width requirements: 
1.  One-way, no parking ..... Fourteen (14) feet; 
2.  One-way with parking on one side, or two-way with no parking ..... Eighteen (18) feet; 
3.  Two-way with parking on one side ..... Twenty-six (26) feet; 
4.  Two-way with parking on both sides ..... Thirty-four (34) feet. 
9.1.15  Buffers. As for manufactured home parks, buffer areas may be required in developed areas and areas projected for future growth. 
9.1.16  Adequate Lighting. Recreational vehicle parks shall be adequately lighted with outdoor lighting located every two hundred (200) feet along interior access roads. The first light shall be within one hundred (100) feet from the entrance to the RV park. 
9.1.17  Certificate of Approval. In addition to meeting the above requirements, the recreational vehicle park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval from the Greene County Health Department. 
9.1.18  Recreational Vehicles on Private Lots. Individual RV's occupied temporarily by a guest of the owner or tenant of the property on which the RV is located, shall be allowed, not to exceed fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days in any sixty (60) day period. 
Sec. 9.2. - Individual manufactured homes and mobile homes. 
9.2.1  Individual Mobile Homes or Individual Manufactured Homes. Individual mobile or manufactured homes not meeting the definition of Dwelling, Single-Family, shall comply with the following and other applicable sections of this ordinance: 
9.2.1.1  Limitations. Any pre-owned mobile home or manufactured home, as defined in this ordinance, intended for use as a residential dwelling shall be required to meet the requirements of the Greene County Ordinance for the Minimum Health and Safety Standards for Pre-Owned Manufactured Homes if the unit is to be moved into or to another location within Greene County. 
The attachment of a mobile or manufactured home to an existing mobile or manufactured home is permitted only if both units were engineered and manufactured for such attachment. 
9.2.1.2  Building and Occupancy Permits. Building and Occupancy Permits issued by the Greene County Building Inspector or his/her authorized agent are required for any mobile or manufactured home: 
1.  That is hereafter located to Greene County; 
2.  That is moved from one location to a second location within the county where that manufactured housing unit will house persons or property; 
3.  Which has not been occupied within the preceding twelve (12) months; 
4.  That there is a change in use of the manufactured housing unit; or 
5.  If the mobile or manufactured home is added to or structurally altered 100 sq. ft. or more. 
9.2.1.3  Application Requirements for Building and Occupancy Permits for Mobile or Manufactured Homes. An application for permits for location and occupancy of a mobile or manufactured home is required to be filed by the owner or the owner's agent in the office of the Greene County Building Inspector before a Building or Occupancy Permit is issued. 
A building permit shall not be issued for a mobile home containing aluminum wiring. 
Prior to issuing a building permit, it is unlawful to move, locate, relocate, erect or make utility connections of any kind to a mobile or manufactured home in unincorporated Greene County. 
All mobile and manufactured homes must be registered with the Greene County Tax Commissioner and approval of the septic system by the Greene County Health Department must be obtained before an Occupancy Permit can be issued. 
Prior to issuing an occupancy permit it is unlawful to occupy or otherwise use as a residence a mobile or manufactured home in unincorporated Greene County. 
The permit application shall describe the mobile or manufactured home as to size, dimension, year, model, the zoning district and tax map and parcel number of the planned location of the mobile or manufactured home, the intended use of the mobile or manufactured home, the name of the owner and the name of the intended occupants, and the source of water and type of waste disposal system. A site plan showing the location of the mobile or manufactured home, water source, septic tank and the primary and alternate drain field will be included with the permit application. 
If the intended use of the mobile or manufactured home is as an accessory use, hardship use or farm caretaker, then details of such proposed use shall be provided by the applicant. 
Mobile and manufactured homes shall be provided with prefabricated or permanent stairs and landing, constructed of pressure treated lumber, masonry or metal sufficient to provide safe ingress and egress from two (2) exterior doors of the unit. Individual landings shall meet Greene County building codes; and, be underpinned with skirting material, masonry construction or other materials manufactured for such purpose. All mobile and manufactured homes must be attached to a permanent foundation with underpinning of brick or masonry construction; and meet all other applicable state and county statutes, regulations and ordinances. 
9.2.1.4  Temporary Usage. A manufactured home may be used as an office in a subdivision, by a contractor during construction or development. In other than a subdivision, a manufactured home may be used as a temporary residence during the reconstruction of a permanent residence which has been destroyed by fire, natural disaster or condemnation. All of the above uses must be requested in writing, be for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months, and have written approval of the Planning and Zoning Board. The Planning and Zoning Board may extend the twelve (12) month period one time where necessary for up to an additional six (6) month period. 
Manufactured homes may be permitted on a lot in the A1 and A2 zoning districts which contains another residential dwelling in the case of health hardship provided: 
1.  The requirements of Article VIII are met; 
2.  All setback requirements are met; 
3.  There is only one such use per lot; 
4.  A special permit is issued by the Zoning Administrator. The permit must be renewed annually upon presenting sufficient evidence of such medical hardship as stated in the original application still exists; and 
5.  When the medical hardship originally applied for no longer exists, the Zoning Administrator will be so notified by the property owner, the special permit will be withdrawn and the manufactured home removed from the property within sixty (60) days of the permit withdrawal date or expiration date, whichever occurs first. The Planning and Zoning Board is authorized to extend the sixty (60) day limit one time for an additional sixty (60) days for sufficient cause. 
9.2.1.5  Accessory Buildings. A mobile or manufactured home may be used as an accessory building in the A1 and A2 zoning districts provided: 
1.  All appliances, beds, lavatories and furniture have been removed; 
2.  No more than one such building is permitted per lot or parcel; 
3.  The building is located between the principal building (or any other structure used as a residence) and the rear of the lot, but no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the centerline of the street providing access to the lot or parcel; 
4.  The building meets the side and rear lot setbacks of the district where located; 
5.  The building's physical condition is in keeping with other such accessory buildings in the surrounding area; 
6.  The building is supported and tied down in such a manner as not to present a safety or health risk as determined by the Building Inspector, but in no case shall there be less than three (3) diagonal (frame) ties on each side or two (2) over the roof ties, properly anchored; 
7.  Any required electrical connection to an outside power source must be inspected and approved by the Building Inspector; 
8.  The building, if observable from any street, requires a vegetative buffer to be planted between the street and building; and 
9.  The building is not used for human occupancy. 
9.2.2  Manufactured Home Subdivisions/Manufactured Home Parks. Manufactured home subdivisions and manufactured home parks hereafter developed or expanded either by an increase in acreage or in the number of dwelling units must comply with the Greene County Subdivision Regulations and this ordinance. 
Sec. 9.3. - Manufactured homes parks. 
9.3.1  Park Development Criteria. Manufactured home parks, as defined in this ordinance, including additions of acreage to existing manufactured home parks or replacement of individual housing units within existing manufactured home parks must adhere to the following criteria. 
9.3.1.1  Minimum lot area per park shall be ten (10) acres; minimum lot width for portion used for entrance and exit shall be one hundred (100) feet; and minimum lot street frontage shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
9.3.1.2  Minimum lot area for each manufactured home space or stand shall be eight thousand nine hundred (8,900) square feet and minimum yard setbacks shall be as follows: front yard - twenty (20) feet; side yard - twenty (20) feet; and rear yard - twenty (20) feet. Front yard setback is in addition to square footage required for installation of required deck, landing or patio and any necessary steps. Buffers shall not be included in minimum lot area. 
9.3.1.3  There shall be a maximum of three and one-half (3½) manufactured home units per acre. 
9.3.1.4  Each manufactured home lot shall be provided with a driveway that is at least ten (10) feet wide and is connected to the interior street. Each manufactured home lot driveway shall be sufficient in length and width to serve as two (2) off-street parking spaces. Driveways at least twenty (20) feet wide shall also be provided to service buildings and recreation buildings or areas. 
9.3.1.5  Each manufactured home unit shall be served by either individual refuse containers or dumpster(s), the contents of which shall be emptied at least once a week into a state approved sanitary landfill. Where the manufactured home unit is served by individual refuse containers, each manufactured home unit shall be provided with stands to hold the individual refuse containers and said containers shall be screened from conspicuous view. If the manufactured home unit is provided with a dumpster, said dumpster shall be screened from conspicuous view. One (1), six (6) cubic yard dumpster shall be provided for each one hundred fifteen (115) persons living in the Manufactured Home Park. The determination of the number of dumpsters required shall be based on the following ratio; 2.5 persons per single-section unit; 4 persons per each multi-section unit. 
9.3.1.6  The owner of the manufactured home park shall provide each individual manufactured home with either a patio or deck with minimum dimensions of ninety-six (96) square feet adjacent to at least one (1) of said manufactured home's entrances. Each manufactured home shall be provided with prefabricated or permanent stairs with landing, constructed from pressure treated lumber, masonry or metal sufficient to provide ingress and egress from two (2) exterior doors of the manufactured home unit. Loose, stacked steps are strictly prohibited. 
9.3.1.7  The manufactured home must be supported by piers as prescribed by the Southern Building Code or manufacturer's instructions, whichever is more stringent. The foundation must be enclosed by manufactured skirting material, masonry construction or other materials manufactured for such purpose. Materials not manufactured for such purpose may be used if approved by the Building Inspector prior to installation. Materials not manufactured for such purpose must be installed to the same standards as materials manufactured for such purpose. 
9.3.1.8  Except as otherwise provided, lands comprising at least ten (10) percent of the total usable area to be subdivided shall be reserved for parks, playgrounds, and/or recreational purposes in a location with suitable park resident access within a manufactured home park. 
9.3.1.9  All property proposed for open space shall be: (1) shown on the plan, and (2) located as to be free of traffic hazards. 
9.3.1.10  All streets within the manufactured home park shall be paved and lighted and lights shall be spaced at a minimum of two hundred (200) foot intervals. The first light shall be within one hundred (100) feet from the entrance to the manufactured home park. 
9.3.2  Buffers. 
9.3.2.1  A minimum buffer strip of at least twenty (20) feet in width shall be located adjacent to each exterior property line of the manufactured home park. The buffer strip shall not be included within any individual manufactured home lot. This buffer strip shall be increased to a total width of forty (40) feet when the manufactured home park is located adjacent to single family residences. 
9.3.2.2  The required buffer strip shall be planted in the setback area and shall consist of evergreen trees and/or shrubs which will normally obtain a height of eight (8) feet within three (3) years. Maintenance of the buffer strip shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Dead trees or shrubs used in the buffer area shall be replaced by the property owner no later than the next spring or fall planting season but no later than twelve (12) months from notification by the Zoning Administrator. 
9.3.2.3  If the buffer area is naturally wooded, then it shall be left in its natural state. If not, the buffer area, should be planted with trees to further diffuse from sound, light transmission, and visual impact. The required planting area shall be planted in such a manner as to preserve the natural topography of the land and the natural growth. If the natural growth is too dense to allow for preferred growth, the natural growth shall be thinned. Under all circumstances, diseased, dangerous or decayed growth shall be removed. 
9.3.2.4  Any grading, improvements or construction adjacent to the buffer shall be conducted far enough from the buffer area so as not to disturb or encroach upon said buffer area. 
9.3.3  Park Landscaping. Each manufactured home park shall be landscaped with trees, ground covers, and exterior screen plantings in accordance with a landscape plan submitted with the preliminary plat and approved. 
9.3.4  Lot Rental. No lot shall be rented for residential use of a manufactured home in any park except for periods of thirty (30) days or more, and no manufactured home shall be admitted to any park unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of any additional laws and regulations of the governing authority. 
9.3.5  Required Improvements. In every manufactured home park, the following street improvements and utilities shall be planned for and provided by the developer, by installation prior to the approval of the manufactured home park and shall also meet the requirements of the Greene County Subdivision Regulations. 
9.3.5.1  All streets shall be named and marked with signs and all individual manufactured home lots shall be marked by a number. Individual manufactured home lot numbers shall be consecutive and in accordance with the numbering system established by the Greene County numbering system. Street names and lot numbers for the manufactured home park shall be noted on the final plat and said plat shall be delivered by the park owner to Greene County public service and emergency agencies governing the area in which the manufactured home park is located. Street signs and lot number signs shall be maintained by the park owner. 
9.3.5.2  Sanitary sewer lines shall be provided to each manufactured home unit if said unit is located within a reasonable distance to an existing trunk line or central septic system at the time of development of the manufactured home park. If said manufactured home unit is not located within a reasonable distance to an existing trunk line, central septic tanks, or other approved individual sewage disposal system such system shall be installed by and at the expense of the developer in conformity with the requirements of the Greene County Health Department for interim use by each manufactured home. 
9.3.5.3  Water lines with connection to each individual manufactured home unit if said unit is located within a reasonable distance to an existing trunk line at the time of development of the park. If said manufactured home unit is not located within a reasonable distance to an existing trunk line the developer shall provide an individual water outlet for each manufactured home in conformity with the requirements of the Greene County Health Department for interim use. 
Sec. 9.4. - Manufactured home installation. 
9.4.1  Installation. All manufactured homes, located to or moved within Greene County, Georgia, at or after the adoption of this ordinance shall be installed by a licensed installer as required by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-164, and in accordance with the applicable manufacturer's installation instructions, specifically including, without limitation, correctly installed tie-downs and anchors. In the absence of such instructions, installations shall be performed in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations adopted by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner. (See O.C.G.A. §8-2-160 et seq.) 
9.4.2  Penalties for Improper Installation. Failure by the owner of a manufactured home to obtain and utilize tie downs and anchors for his manufactured home or modular home placed in Greene County, Georgia, after the effective date of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500. 
9.4.3  Home Orientation. All manufactured homes are subject to the following conditions: 
9.4.3.1  No manufactured home shall be located within thirty (30) feet of any permanent type of building. 
9.4.3.2  The manufactured home unit must be fitted with skirting/underpinning that completely encloses the undercarriage, and the unit must be connected to water and sewerage in compliance with the applicable ordinance of Greene County. 
9.4.3.3  All manufactured homes shall meet the adopted building, gas, plumbing, electric, and other codes and ordinances of Greene County, Georgia. 
9.4.3.4  All manufactured homes shall be located on a permanent foundation. 
9.4.3.5  No manufactured home shall be allowed to be occupied in Greene County, Georgia, unless it bears an insignia issued by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the Building Inspector of Greene County, Georgia, finds that the manufactured home is in compliance with all Greene County, Georgia building codes, housing codes, mechanical codes, plumbing codes, gas codes, electrical codes, fire prevention codes and all ordinances of Greene County, Georgia. 
However, a manufactured home that has been continuously and legally located in Greene County, Georgia shall be allowed to remain if the following conditions are met: 
1.  All ad valorem taxes on the manufactured home have been timely paid in full; 
2.  The Building Inspector of Greene County, Georgia finds that the manufactured home is in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local codes. 
9.4.3.6  Non-conformance. Any manufactured home which does not meet the requirements in the above paragraphs shall be removed after receipt of notice of its non-conformance from the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 9.5. - Townhouses, condominiums, apartments, and multi-family dwellings. 
9.5.1  Townhouses and Condominiums. 
9.5.1.1  No more than ten (10) nor fewer than three (3) continuous townhouses or condominiums shall be built in a row with approximately the same front line. Density shall not exceed eight (8) dwelling units per acre of buildable land and no more than fifty (50) percent of the lot area shall be occupied by dwelling units and accessory buildings. 
9.5.1.2  No side, or rear yard as such is required in connection with any townhouse or condominium, except that the front yard shall be no less than twenty (20) feet in depth from the street right-of-way of a minor or local residential street, including cul-de-sacs, and where the parking is not directly in front of each dwelling unit. If the parking for the dwelling unit is in front of the dwelling unit, front setback shall conform to Article VIII. Corner lots shall have the same side yard as established in Article VIII, and the end buildings in any townhouse or condominium grouping shall conform to the side yard requirements of that district. Each townhouse shall have its own lot yard at least twelve (12) feet in depth that is private and reasonably secluded from view from the streets or from neighboring property, including adjacent townhouses. Such yard shall not be used for any accessory building. 
9.5.1.3  No more than fifty (50) percent of the lot area shall be occupied by buildings. 
9.5.1.4  Insofar as practicable, off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in interior blocks; and no off-street parking space shall be more than one hundred (100) feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it intends to serve. All parking shall be paved. 
9.5.1.5  All townhouse or condominium complexes shall be served by a sanitary sewer system and a central water system. No other means of waste disposal shall be permitted or authorized. 
9.5.1.6  All other requirements within the district in which the townhouses are located shall prevail. 
9.5.1.7  A preliminary plat prepared in ink or pencil on a reproducible medium shall be submitted to the Planning Commission prior to any grading, construction, or installation of improvements. No grading, construction, or installation of improvements shall be had until the Board of Commissioners formally approves the preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall illustrate the ultimate development of the entire plat owned by the applicant and shall identify the section for which formal plat approval will initially be requested. The preliminary plat shall be prepared at a scale of one (1) inch equal one hundred (100) feet and shall, at a minimum, include the following. 
1.  Development name if within an existing development. 
2.  Proposed name, if not within a previously platted development. 
3.  Name, address, and telephone number of legal owner or agent of the property. 
4.  Name, address, and telephone number of registered professional responsible for development design, design of improvements, and for survey. 
5.  Date, scale, and north arrow. 
6.  Vicinity map including zoning classification of all adjacent parcels. 
7.  Total acreage. 
8.  Location of existing property lines, major easement/right-of-way, required setbacks, watercourses, drainage areas and ditches, and distinctive natural features. 
9.  Existing buildings and roads. 
10.  The location of all proposed buildings, the number of dwelling units per building, the square footage of each building, the square footage of each dwelling unit, and all proposed roads. 
11.  The location of flood hazard areas as taken from FEMA, FIRM or HUD maps. Where no such map exists, Soil Conservation Service maps may be used. 
12.  Statement of proposed water/sewer supply or collection method. 
13.  Information and data relating to surface water runoff as it effects storm water drainage and impact on adjacent areas. 
14.  If development is to be located in the Watershed Protection District, the percentage of impervious surface must be shown. 
9.5.1.8  All townhouse or condominium complexes must receive approval from the Board of Commissioners after review by the Planning Commission prior to any grading, construction, or installation of improvements. 
9.5.2  Apartments and Multi-Family Dwellings. 
9.5.2.1  Density of apartments and multi-family dwellings shall not exceed ten (10) units per acre of buildable land. 
9.5.2.2  All parking shall be off-street parking and shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to the street or in interior blocks. The developer shall demonstrate that distances from parking to the units have been taken into consideration in the overall design of the project. All parking shall be paved. 
9.5.2.3  All streets, drives or alleys in the development shall have a pavement width of twenty (20) feet, and have a bituminous, concrete surface, or asphalt surface. 
9.5.2.4  Minimum building setback shall be the minimum setback for the district in which the apartments are located, provided that if required parking is in the front of the apartment, then the building setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet from street right-of-way. 
9.5.2.5  All other requirements within the districts in which the apartments and multi-family dwellings are located shall prevail. 
9.5.2.6  All apartments and multi-family dwellings shall be required to tie into a sanitary sewer and central water system. No other method of waste disposal shall be authorized or permitted. 
9.5.2.7  All apartment and multi-family dwellings must receive approval from the Board of Commissioners after review by the Planning Commission and prior to any grading, construction, or installation of improvements. 
9.5.2.8  All apartments and multi-family developments must meet the buffer requirements of Section 6.7.7. 
Sec. 9.6. - Accessory buildings, accessory structures, and temporary buildings. 
9.6.1  Accessory Buildings. Attached and detached accessory buildings must meet the following requirements: 
9.6.1.1  No storage trailer shall be used as a temporary or accessory structure except in an emergency. A variance may be applied for from the Planning and Zoning Board. 
9.6.1.2  No temporary or permanent living or sleeping quarters are permitted in a structure that is a basement without a house above. No temporary or permanent living or sleeping quarters are permitted in a garage unless it is attached to a dwelling and meets codes and ordinances pertaining to same. 
9.6.1.3  Setbacks and Building Heights: A detached accessory building shall meet all requirements of Section 8 [Article VIII]. For structures to be constructed near a setback line, a surveyor should be utilized to establish the property and setback lines prior to construction. 
9.6.1.4  No detached garage and/or accessory building, or portion thereof, may be built upon a public easement. 
9.6.2  Attached Accessory Buildings. The location of attached accessory buildings and uses in residential and commercial districts must meet the following requirements: 
9.6.2.1  Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, a substantial part of one wall of the accessory building shall be an integral part of the main building or such accessory building shall be attached to the main building in a substantial manner by a roof, and therefore meet requirements applicable to the main building. 
9.6.3  Detached Accessory Buildings. The location of detached accessory buildings and uses in residential and commercial districts must meet the following requirements: 
9.6.3.1  All lots other than residential lots: 
1.  Accessory buildings shall not be built on lots without a dwelling except may be built before a dwelling when both are submitted together for a building permit and a surety bond is submitted and approved by the Building Official. 
2.  A detached accessory building in a B1, B2, and OI district, shall not be more than two (2) stories in height or the height of the principal building, whichever is less. 
9.6.3.2  Residential lots: 
1.  Mobile or manufactured homes shall not be used as accessory buildings on residential lots. 
2.  The accessory buildings must maintain an architecturally compatible appearance and shall not produce impacts detrimental to adjacent properties as a result of traffic, noise, light, refuse, parking or other activities. 
3.  Guest Houses. Guest houses shall comply with the following: 
a.  Guest houses are permitted only in as a conditional use. 
b.  No more than one guest house shall be located on any lot. 
c.  Maximum Floor Area. The gross building floor area of the guest house may not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the main house (principal building). 
d.  Use. Guest houses shall not be rented or otherwise occupied separately from the main residence, except for non-paying guests or domestic employees residing on the premises and sharing meals in the principal dwelling. 
4.  Accessory buildings shall not be built on lots without a dwelling except may be built before a dwelling when both are submitted together for a building permit and a surety bond is submitted and approved by the Building Official. 
5.  No accessory building shall be utilized unless the principal structure is occupied. No accessory building shall be used for any type of human habitation except for guest houses. 
6.  Residential accessory buildings and structures such as garages, greenhouses or workshops, shall not be rented or occupied for commercial purposes. 
7.  Detached Accessory Buildings to Front Side of Principal Building shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Structure shall comply with front setback requirements in Section 8 [Article VIII]. 
b.  Detached accessory buildings within 30 feet of the principal building must be of like exterior materials, and design as the principal building. 
8.  The total square footage of all detached accessory buildings shall not exceed two (2) percent of lot square footage or 600 square feet, whichever is greater. 
9.  Number of Detached Accessory Buildings - The number of detached accessory buildings shall be limited to: 

 
The maximum number count does not include in the count well/pump houses, dog houses, playhouses consisting of 70 square feet or less, or open air structures. 
9.6.4  Accessory Structures. Accessory structures must meet the following requirements: 
9.6.4.1  Accessory Structures Requiring a Building Permit: The following structures do require a Building Permit and shall not be permitted to encroach within required setbacks. 
1.  Structural retaining walls. 
2.  Pergolas, trellises and arbors. 
3.  Decks. 
4.  Swimming pools and spas. 
5.  Flag poles - must meet all setback requirements. 
6.  Fire pits, outdoor fireplaces and grills - must meet all setback requirements. 
7.  Fountains and other water features. 
9.6.4.2  Accessory Structures Not Requiring a Building Permit: The following uses do not require a Building Permit: 
1.  Tennis courts and other fenced recreational courts. 
2.  The following accessory structures are permitted to encroach within required setbacks, unless specifically provided for in this section. 
a.  Gardens, wood piles or landscape materials. 
b.  Uncovered patios, driveways and other paved areas. 
c.  Fences and landscape walls - see § 9.6.4.3. 
d.  Basketball hoops provided they are installed outside of the right-of-way and any temporary road or cul-de-sac easements. No such basketball goal shall be erected in such a manner that the play area for the basketball goal is located within any portion of a public right-of-way. 
e.  Mail boxes and newspaper tubes. 
f.  Non-fenced recreational courts. 
g.  Statuary or art objects less than 3 feet tall. 
h.  Swing sets, trampolines and similar recreational equipment. 
i.  Freestanding air conditioning or heating units or backup generators. 
j.  Bird baths. 
k.  Well houses. 
9.6.4.3  Fences and Walls: Fences and walls on residential lots shall comply with the following requirements. 
1.  Fences shall be maintained in good condition and be structurally sound at all times without any advertising thereon without proper sign permits. 
2.  Fences shall be constructed so as not to obstruct visibility or cause an unsafe condition for motor vehicles, cyclists or pedestrians along any adjacent road right(s)-of-way. 
3.  For walls or fences to be constructed near a property line, a surveyor should be utilized to establish the property line prior to construction. 
4.  Property located between the fence and any property lines shall also be regularly maintained. Fences shall be split rail, basket-weave, picket, board of batten, baffle, stockade, estate rail or solid wood, chain link, woven welded lawn, hinge-joint, stone, and/or brick masonry and other comparable types. 
5.  The smooth finished side of the fence or wall shall be the side that faces outward from the yard being fenced, and any horizontal, diagonal, or supporting members shall be on the interior side of the fence. 
6.  No fence in any side or rear yard shall exceed eight (8) feet in height. Where side yards adjoin public right(s)-of-way, excluding controlled access highways, fences shall comply with the regulations for fences in front yards. 
7.  Walls, Fences, and Entrance Structures located in a front yard: 
a.  No wall or fence shall be constructed in a public right-of-way, and such wall or fence shall not be constructed any closer than three (3) feet from any fire hydrant. 
b.  Any vehicular driveway shall have a minimum clearance of 14 feet in width and 14 feet in height to allow for the passage of emergency vehicles. 
c.  No fence in any front yard, or in any yards adjacent to the public right(s)-of-way, excluding controlled access highways, shall exceed four (4) feet in height. 
d.  In any residential zoning district where horses are kept in accordance with zoning district, a wall or fence made of chain link or other wire materials is exempt from the four (4) foot maximum height requirement and shall not exceed a maximum of five (5) feet in height in a front yard. 
8.  No fence on any residential lot shall be constructed, in whole or in part, of barbed wire, concertina wire, or guard rail. 
9.6.5  Temporary Buildings and Structures. 
9.6.5.1  Temporary structures shall include storage units, trailers, tents, and construction dumpsters. 
9.6.5.2  Temporary buildings, or structures or trailers used in conjunction with construction work shall not be permitted on any residential lot. 
9.6.5.3  Temporary construction equipment, materials and dumpsters used in conjunction with construction work, maintenance or repair on site shall be permitted only during construction activity occurring on the property and shall immediately be removed upon completion of the work. 
9.6.5.4  Temporary buildings and structures shall not be used for a residential purpose and shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction. 
9.6.5.5  No flammable or explosive materials may be stored in the temporary buildings or structures. 
9.6.5.6  No temporary building or structure shall be used to store materials related to an off premise business or a home occupation. 
9.6.5.7  Temporary outdoor storage units are prohibited from being placed within the right-of-way, on the frontage of a property, or in any temporary road or cul-de-sac easements. Units must be kept in the driveway, or on a paved surface, at the furthest accessible point from the street, or as otherwise approved by the Building Official. 
9.6.5.8  Tents: 
1.  Tents shall be in compliance with the International Fire Code. 
2.  Tents and membrane structures having an area in excess of 400 square feet shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without first obtaining a permit and approval from the Fire Code Official. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes. 
b.  Tents open on all sides which comply with all of the following: 
1.  Individual tents having a maximum size of 700 square feet. 
2.  The aggregate area of multiple tents placed side by side without a fire break clearance of 12 feet, not exceeding 700 square feet total. 
3.  A minimum clearance of 12 feet to all structures and other tents. 
3.  Regardless of size, tents to be used for greater than 10 consecutive days shall require a special use permit. 
4.  Erection of tents shall be completed no more than forty-eight (48) hours before the event is scheduled to occur. 
5.  Removal of tents shall be completed within forty-eight (48) hours after event, weather permitting. 
6.  Tents shall not encroach on any established setback lines. 
7.  Any event shall have adequate parking and sanitation facilities available as determined by the Building Official. 
8.  Additional requirements for tents on residential lots: 
a.  Use is restricted to one event. Approved uses are weddings and wedding receptions, family reunions, holiday celebrations, private parties. 
b.  Sale of food or beverages at the event is not permitted. 
c.  Tents shall not be used for any commercial purpose. 
d.  The event shall not exceed 50 people. 
9.  Additional requirements for tents in areas other than residential lots: 
a.  Tents shall not be erected on any road right-of-ways without a Special Use Permit. 
Sec. 9.7. - Home occupation. 
9.7.1  Residential Home Occupation. The conduct of business in residential units may be permitted under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of this section to: ensure the compatibility of home occupations with other uses permitted in the applicable districts; maintain and preserve the character of residential neighborhoods; and provide peace, quiet, and domestic tranquility within all residential neighborhoods within the district, in order to guarantee to all residents freedom from excessive noise, excessive traffic, nuisance, fire hazard, and other possible effect of commercial uses being conducted in this district. Residential home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements: 
9.7.1.1  A home occupation is subordinate to the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes. 
9.7.1.2  No more than one (1) home occupation shall be permitted within a single dwelling unit. 
9.7.1.3  No more than 3 persons shall be employed in the conduct of a home occupation. 
9.7.1.4  A home occupation shall produce no noise or obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes, or electrical interference detectable to normal sensory perception outside the structure. 
9.7.1.5  A home occupation which will constitute a fire hazard to neighboring residences, will adversely affect neighboring property values, or will constitute a nuisance or otherwise be detrimental to the neighbors because of excessive traffic, excessive noise, odors, or other circumstances is not be permitted. 
9.7.1.6  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupations in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off-street and other than in a front yard. 
9.7.1.7  On the premises, retail sales are prohibited except for the retail sales of products or goods produced or fabricated on the premises as a result of the home occupation. 
9.7.1.8  There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal use. 
9.7.1.9  No on-street parking of business related vehicles (either marked or commercially equipped) shall be permitted at any home. No business vehicles larger than a van, panel truck, or pick-up truck is permitted to park overnight on the premises. The number of business related vehicles is limited to 1. 
9.7.1.10  Permitted residential home occupations: 
1.  Architectural services. 
2.  Art Studio. 
3.  Consulting Services. 
4.  Data Processing. 
5.  Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Jaffra, Tupperware, and Herbalife). 
6.  Drafting and graphic services. 
7.  Dressmaking, sewing, tailoring, contract sewing (1 machine). 
8.  Electronic assembly. 
9.  Engineering service. 
10.  Financial planning or investment services. 
11.  Flower arranging. 
12.  House cleaning service. 
13.  Insurance sales or broker. 
14.  Interior design. 
15.  Locksmith. 
16.  Real estate sales or broker. 
17.  Tutoring. 
18.  Writing, computer programming. 
19.  Other similar uses as approved by the Board of Commissioners, upon recommendation by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
9.7.1.11  Prohibited residential home occupations: 
1.  Ambulance service. 
2.  Appliance repair. 
3.  Automobile or boat repair, parts sales, upholstery, or detailing, washing service (including businesses working at customer's home). 
4.  Boarding house. 
5.  Carpentry, cabinet makers. 
6.  Contracting, masonry, plumbing, or painting. 
7.  Medical or dental office (nor any practice of physical or medical application, including chiropractors). 
8.  Restaurants, food preparation. 
9.  Tow truck services. 
10.  Veterinary uses (including care, grooming or boarding). 
9.7.2  Rural Home Occupation. Rural home occupations in the agricultural districts may be permitted under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of this section to ensure the compatibility of rural home occupations with other uses permitted in the applicable districts; maintain and preserve the agricultural or rural character of the area and not create a nuisance for residents in the area by excessive traffic, smoke, noise or be a fire hazard. 
The purpose of rural home occupations are to provide a means for residents in the larger lot agricultural districts to participate in the type of businesses permitted in residential districts, be able to conduct the home occupation in an accessory building where necessary, and to park, on-site, vehicles required for the home occupation. 
Rural home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements: 
9.7.2.1  The minimum lot size is five (5) acres. For lots less than five (5) acres, the home occupation is limited to the provision of § 9.7.1.10. 
9.7.2.2  The rural home occupation must be clearly subordinate to the principal use of the parcel for dwelling and agricultural purposes and must not change the residential and agricultural character of the area. 
9.7.2.3  The rural home occupation may be conducted within a dwelling or within an accessory building provided that all structures used are harmonious in appearance with the zoning district where the rural home occupation will locate. 
9.7.2.4  One accessory building not exceeding the ground floor living area of the principal dwelling may be used in connection with the home occupation. 
9.7.2.5  Unless otherwise determined by the Board of Commissioners, no sales of products or service not produced on the premises is permitted. 
9.7.2.6  The existence of the rural home occupation must not be apparent outside the dwelling or accessory building in which the rural home occupation is conducted, except that one (1) display sign limited to 9 sq. ft. of sign area is permitted. The display sign added to all other signs on the parcel shall not exceed the maximum signage allowed in the district. 
9.7.2.7  No outside storage of equipment or materials used in the conduct of the rural home occupation, other than trade vehicles, is permitted. 
9.7.2.8  The rural home occupation is limited to employment of not more than three persons on the property. 
9.7.2.9  No additional points of access to any street shall be permitted, unless necessary to provide safe and proper access to the proposed use. 
9.7.2.10  The use has not been found likely to become a nuisance by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibrations, or may impose a hazard to health or property. 
9.7.2.11  Modifications from the above requirements may be approved by the Board of Commissioners, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, in individual cases if the modification is in accordance with the intent of the District. 
9.7.2.12  Additional requirements or conditions may be added as deemed necessary to insure that the rural home occupation will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the county or in any was adversely affect the character of the area. 
9.7.2.13  Permitted home occupations: 
1.  All occupations permitted in the § 9.7.1.10. 
2.  Appliance repair. 
3.  Barber shops (limited to a one barber operation). 
4.  Veterinary service other than boarding. 
5.  Ceramics. 
6.  Contracting, masonry, plumbing or painting. 
7.  House painter. 
8.  Upholstery. 
9.  Produce Stand. 
10.  Other similar uses as approved by the Board of Commissioners, upon recommendation by the Planning & Zoning Board. 
9.7.2.14  Expiration of Permit. A permit for home occupation shall expire under the following conditions: 
1.  Whenever the applicant ceases to occupy the premises for which the home occupation was issued, no subsequent occupant of such premises shall engage in any home occupation until he/she shall has been issued a new permit after proper application. 
2.  Whenever the holder of such a permit discontinues the home occupation for a period of six (6) consecutive months. 
Sec. 9.8. - Automobile service areas. 
Within the districts permitting gasoline service areas, the following requirements shall apply: 
9.8.1  Location. The property on which a gasoline service areas is located shall not be within one hundred (100) feet of any residential district, or any property containing a school, public playground, church, hospital, public library, institution for children or dependents. 
9.8.2  Site Requirements. Gasoline service areas shall have a minimum frontage on the primary street of one hundred twenty (120) feet and a minimum area of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. All buildings shall be set back forty (40) feet from all street right-of-way lines and all canopies shall be set back fifteen (15) feet from all street right-of-way lines. 
9.8.3  Access to Site. Vehicular entrances or exits at gasoline service areas: 
9.8.3.1  Shall not be provided with more than two curb cuts for the first one hundred twenty (120) feet of street frontage or fraction thereof. 
9.8.3.2  Shall contain an access width along the curb line of the street of not more than thirty (30) feet as measured parallel to the street at its narrowest point and shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet from the intersecting point of the two streets rights-of-way or ten (10) feet to the adjoining property. 
9.8.3.3  Shall not have any two (2) driveways, or curb cuts, any closer than twenty (20) feet at both the right-of-way line and the edge of the pavement. 
9.8.4  Gasoline Pump Islands. All gasoline pump islands shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line, or where a future widening line has been established, the setback line shall be measured from such line, and where pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the right-of-way line, the pump island shall be located not less than thirty (30) feet from the right-of-way line; however, the pump island shall be at least sixty (60) feet from the center line of a collector street and forty-five (45) feet from the center line of other streets. 
9.8.5  Off-Street Parking. A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces are required with an additional off-street parking space for each lubrication and wash bay. 
9.8.6  Other Site Improvements. In addition to the above requirements, the following additional site improvements shall be adhered to: 
9.8.6.1  A raised curb of at least six (6) inches in height shall be erected along the street property lines, except for driveway openings. 
9.8.6.2  A solid fence or wall six (6) feet in height shall be erected along all property lines adjacent to a residential zoned lot or a lot used for residential purposes. 
9.8.6.3  Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties and streets. 
9.8.6.4  Signs, whether permanent or temporary, shall not be placed within the public right-of-way and shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 
9.8.6.5  All drives, parking storage, and service areas shall be paved and curbed and a good stand of grass shall be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 
Sec. 9.9. - Landfills and related solid wastes. 
The permitted landfill uses are Inert Material, Construction and Demolition (C&D), Hazardous Materials, and Municipal Solid Waste (MSW). All uses are conditional uses that must be submitted to the Greene County Building Official, reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Board of Commissioners. These landfills must meet all applicable federal, state and other county requirements (including Greene County Code Chapter 16). 
All solid waste disposal areas referred to in this section are to be in one tract or a combination of contiguous tracts not separated by public road rights-of-way sufficient to yield the required area. Applicant shall possess a warranty deed giving fee simple title to all property or shall have all necessary options to purchase land before submitting a request for rezoning. Property shall front on a paved state highway or a paved county road, subject to a traffic impact study. 
Applicant shall submit a plat of property prepared by a Georgia Registered land Surveyor at the time of application for rezoning. Said plat shall show in addition to boundaries, all significant terrain features including, but not limited to, wetlands, streams, rock outcroppings, roads and wooded areas. The plat shall be prepared on 24" x 36" media. All data shown on plat shall be drawn to scale as to size and location including the meanders of all streams and cemeteries. 
9.9.1  Inert Waste Landfill. 
9.9.1.1  This type of landfill means a disposal facility accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed above. 
9.9.1.2  Requirements for Inert Waste Landfill: 
1.  Permitted only in A-1 or H-I. 
2.  All disposal and operation area cannot be visible from any portion of the right-of-way of any adjacent public road or the common boundary lines of adjacent property. Views may be screened by vegetative, natural topography or by manmade means such that a six (6') foot tall person standing on the common border cannot view the disposal or operation areas. 
3.  Minimum area of 35 acres. 
4.  Minimum buffer zone from boundary is 100 linear feet. 
5.  When the landfill is completed, it shall be covered with a final layer of 24 inches of top soil, which shall be adequately stabilized and suitable vegetative cover and landscape. 
6.  The Board of Commissioners may place requirements regarding the length of time the facility can be used, the number of truck loads (or tonnage) allowed in a specified time frame, limit it to materials hauled only from Greene County locations, limit the total number of such facilities allowed in Greene County, periodic reports on the amount and type of fill being conducted, and other requirements deemed appropriate to the specific request. 
9.9.2  Construction and Demolition (C & D). Construction and Demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to asbestos containing waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material, and other wastes which have a low potential of groundwater contamination. 
9.9.2.1  Requirements for Construction & Demolition (C & D) Landfill: 
1.  Permitted only in H-I. 
2.  All disposal and operation area cannot be visible from any portion of the right-of-way of any adjacent public road or the common boundary lines of adjacent property. Views may be screened by vegetative, natural topography or by man-made means such that a six (6') foot tall person standing on the common border cannot view the disposal or operation areas. 
3.  Minimum area of 250 acres. 
4.  Minimum buffer zone from boundary is 300 linear feet. 
5.  When the landfill is completed, it shall be covered with a final layer of 24 inches of top soil, which shall be adequately stabilized and suitable vegetative cover and landscape. 
6.  The Board of Commissioners may place requirements regarding the length of time the facility can be used, the number of truck loads (or tonnage) allowed in a specified time frame, limit it to materials hauled only from Greene County locations, limit the total number of such facilities allowed in Greene County, periodic reports on the amount and type of fill being conducted, and other requirements deemed appropriate to the specific request. 
9.9.3  Hazardous Waste. 
9.9.3.1  Hazardous Waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the Board of Natural Resources, Chapter 391-3-11. 
9.9.3.2  Requirements for Hazardous Waste Landfills: 
1.  Permitted only in H-I. 
2.  All disposal and operation area cannot be visible from any portion of the right-of-way of any adjacent public road or the common boundary lines of adjacent property. Views may be screened by vegetative, natural topography or by manmade means such that a six (6') foot tall person standing on the common border cannot view the disposal or operation areas. 
3.  Minimum area of 1,000 acres. 
4.  Minimum buffer zone from boundary is 500 linear feet. 
5.  When the landfill is completed, it shall be covered with a final layer of 24 inches of top soil, which shall be adequately stabilized and suitable vegetative cover and landscape. 
6.  The Board of Commissioners may place requirements regarding the length of time the facility can be used, the number of truck loads (or tonnage) allowed in a specified time frame, limit it to materials hauled only from Greene County locations, limit the total number of such facilities allowed in Greene County, periodic reports on the amount and type of fill being conducted, and other requirements deemed appropriate to the specific request. 
9.9.4.  Municipal Solid Waste (MSW). 
9.9.4.1  Municipal Solid Waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
9.9.4.2  Requirements for Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Landfills: 
1.  Permitted only in H-I. 
2.  All disposal and operation area cannot be visible from any portion of the right-of-way of any adjacent public road or the common boundary lines of adjacent property. Views may be screened by vegetative, natural topography or by man-made means such that a six (6') foot tall person standing on the common border cannot view the disposal or operation areas. 
3.  Minimum area of 1,000 acres. 
4.  Minimum buffer zone from boundary is 500 linear feet. 
5.  When the landfill is completed, it shall be covered with a final layer of 24 inches of top soil, which shall be adequately stabilized and suitable vegetative cover and landscape. 
6.  The Board of Commissioners may place requirements regarding the length of time the facility can be used, the number of truck loads (or tonnage) allowed in a specified time frame, limit it to materials hauled only from Greene County locations, limit the total number of such facilities allowed in Greene County, periodic reports on the amount and type of fill being conducted, and other requirements deemed appropriate to the specific request. 
9.9.5.  Other Requirements for Landfills in Greene County. 
9.9.5.1  All landfills shall be enclosed by fences (minimum height of six feet) placed along the entire perimeter of the property and along both sides of driveways. 
9.9.5.2  The developer (operator) of any landfill shall maintain records accurately documenting the quantities of materials received daily, the source of origin of the material and a location within the landfill where each day's collections are placed. 
9.9.5.3  Buffer zones shall be maintained in their natural vegetative state and shall be kept free of debris from the land fill operations. 
9.9.5.4  No landfill other than Inert Materials shall be located within 10,000 feet, measured horizontally, from any existing airport, public or private, within Greene County or any adjoining counties. 
9.9.5.5  Primary access shall be via a state, federal highway or paved county road and access to the landfill shall be by paved driveways only. 
9.9.5.6  The gates to the landfill must be manned during the times the landfill is open for daily activities and the landfill site shall be under the supervision of a responsible individual, at the disposal site, at all times during operations. 
9.9.5.7  The applicant shall submit to the County the design and operation plans of the landfill facility once they are approved by the State of Georgia, if required. The County shall have at least 90 days to review the plans internally and with consultants that may be hired by the County. The applicant must promptly reimburse any costs so incurred. 
9.9.5.8  Suitable on site means shall be provided to prevent and control fires. No burning whatsoever shall be permitted. 
9.9.5.9  Rodents and insects shall be controlled to the satisfaction of the Greene County Health Department. 
9.9.5.10  The number and spacing of driveways shall conform to State regulations if on a State route. Driveways on County roads shall be restricted to no more than one drive per 500 linear feet of right-of-way frontage or no more than three driveways per county road. All driveways shall pass through a gated entrance. Driveways shall be paved with Plant Mixed Asphaltic Concrete or Portland Cement Concrete from the public road to the inside edge of the buffer zone (minimum distance) and shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet wide measured from edge of paving to edge of paving or from lip of gutter to lip of gutter. Pavement shall be of adequate design strength to support vehicular traffic loaded to the maximum load limits permitted by regulations of the Georgia Department of Transportation for roads in the state highway system. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to bear costs of any upgrades to county roads used for access to landfill required to bring the roads up to a standard that will support the above limits. This includes all existing drainage and grade separation structures. Any required road improvements and all driveways must be designed by a Civil Engineer licensed by the State of Georgia. Said design shall be at the developer's expense. Road and driveway design shall be submitted to Greene County and approved by a Civil Engineer hired by the County. Fees for this inspection shall be reimbursed to the County by the developer. 
9.9.6  Transfer Stations. A limited number of Transfer Stations may be permitted as a conditional use in A-1, LI, or HI district following public hearing and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval of the Board of Commissioners. Requirements for such use are: 
9.9.6.1  At all times the facility must meet all federal and state solid waste requirements and recommendations. 
9.9.6.2  It must be a completely enclosed structure with doors that remain closed at all times except during the time vehicles and equipment are operating inside the building. 
9.9.6.3  It must be located on a state route or paved county road. The applicant shall provide the Planning and Zoning Commission with a traffic study that addresses traffic volume generated by the facility, any needed road improvements (turn lanes, etc.) and any upgrades to the existing road necessary to accommodate the loads the facility will generate. 
9.9.6.4  The applicant shall provide the County with plans for the facility at least sixty (60) calendar days prior to the public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Board. Due to the specific technical requirements of such a facility the County shall have a civil engineer review the design prior to the hearing. The fee for this plan review shall be paid to the County before the engineer is hired. The design of the facility shall be such that excessive noise, dust, vibration, smoke, glare and odors are not created. This may include but not be limited to placement of the building and doors with respect to the adjoining land owners, exhaust fans with air filters and rooftop exhaust vents. 
9.9.6.5  Operating procedures to reduce odor shall also be included in the plans for a recycling center. A plan for rodent and other pest control is required and must be followed at all times. Debris and waste must not be allowed to scatter inside, outside, or along the roads approaching the facility and must be cleaned up completely on a daily basis. "First-in - first-out" waste handling practices shall be utilized to keep waste on site for the shortest time possible. All waste shall be removed from the tipping floor at the end of each operating day and these surfaces swept clean and washed down. 
Any waste remaining in the facility overnight must be contained in transportation bins or vehicles in the dumping pit inside the building and with exterior doors closed. No waste shall be kept inside the facility on Sunday or on holidays or any other day in which the facility is closed. 
9.9.6.6  The principal structure(s) for this use shall be set back at least 50 feet from all property lines, a solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall be erected around all buildings, equipment, and operating area. A minimum vegetation (natural or planted) buffer of 50 feet shall be required around the outside of the fence or wall. The area within the fence shall be large enough to allow all hauling vehicles to queue inside the fence without encroaching on adjacent roads. 
9.9.6.7  No such structure shall be located closer than 500 feet from any residential use or zoning district. 
9.9.6.8  All surfaces where trucks operate shall be paved. 
9.9.6.9  Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday thru Saturday, 7:00 am thru 6:00 pm unless specifically approved in writing by the Building Official or County Manager. 
9.9.6.10  Facility cannot be located in any floodplain, wetland or river corridor or within 500 ft. of any wetland. Any runoff from wash water shall be discharged to a wastewater treatment system and, before final release, shall be treated in a manner approved by the Department of Natural Resources. 
Violation of the requirements may result in substantial fines and/or revocation of the conditional use. 
A transfer station may also contain facilities to separate recyclable material from waste brought into the facility. Any conveyors or floor space devoted to separation of recyclables must also be contained within a properly designed and constructed building. Storage and handling of materials reclaimed for recycling shall be in conformity with Article 9.9.7 of these regulations. 
9.9.7  Recycling Center. Any commercial recycling center must be constructed on a site where an approved solid waste transfer station is located. Any specific operational and environmental issues generated by the recycling center must be addressed by the design, operation and size of the transfer station. 
At all times the facility must meet all federal and state solid waste requirements and recommendations. 
Violation of the requirements may result in substantial fines and/or revocation of the conditional use. 
Sec. 9.10. - Planned industrial parks. 
A planned industrial park must meet the following conditions. 
9.10.1  Access and Egress. A planned industrial park shall have access and egress only on a major street or state highway. 
9.10.2  Minimum Acreage. The development shall have a minimum area of one hundred (100) acres. 
9.10.3  Yard Requirements. The yard requirements of the Zoning District in which the development is located may be waived, except along the exterior boundaries of the development. 
9.10.4  Uses Not Allowed. All industries that produces smoke, loud noises, dust, noxious fumes, odors, and vibrations shall be subject to State and Federal regulations and ordinances. 
9.10.5  Confinement. The manufacturing processes of industries located in an industrial park shall be confined to the interior buildings. 
9.10.6  Outside Storage. Outside storage shall be screened in accordance with § 6.7. 
Sec. 9.11. - Cemeteries. 
9.11.1  Public Cemeteries. Within the districts permitting public cemeteries, the following requirements shall apply: 
9.11.1.1  The site proposed for a cemetery must not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In addition, the site must have direct access to a thoroughfare. 
9.11.1.2  All structures must be set back no less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
9.11.1.3  All graves or burial lots must be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or minor street right-of-way lines, and not less than fifty (50) feet from any collector, arterial, expressway or freeway right-of-way line. 
9.11.1.4  The entire cemetery property must be landscaped and maintained. 
9.11.1.5  Prior to approval of the request for the location of a new cemetery, a site plan and perpetual care plan must be submitted to the Greene County Planning Commission for review and recommendation to the Board of Commissioners. 
1.  Said cemetery may front only on a collector, major street, or State highway, and the entrance to and exit from such cemetery shall be only on the street on which it fronts. 
2.  A site development sketch must be submitted with the application which shows adequate paved off-street parking. All buildings must be placed not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. Property must be bordered by a ten (10) ft. wide buffer area along its exterior boundary line, not bordering the frontage street and not extending into the required front yard. This buffer area is in addition to any setbacks, etc., required in Article VIII. The buffer area should be planted with evergreen trees or evergreen shrubs that grow at least eight (8) feet tall within three (3) years and provide an effective visual screen. 
9.11.2  Religious institution Cemetery. Within the districts permitting public cemeteries, the following requirements shall apply. 
9.11.2.1  The cemetery is located on the same property as the religious institution, is in addition to the minimum lot requirement for the religious institution and adequate off-street parking is provided. 
9.11.2.2  If the entrance and exit to the cemetery is other than that used as entrance and exit for the religious institution, then the cemetery may front only on a collector, major street or a state highway, and the entrance and exit to such cemetery shall be only from the street on which it fronts. 
9.11.2.3  All graves and burial lots must be at least twenty-five (25) feet from any property line, and at least fifty (50) feet from any collector, major street or state highway right-of-way line. 
9.11.2.4  The cemetery must be bordered by a 10-[foot] wide buffer area along its exterior boundary lines that do not border the frontage street. The buffer must not extend into the required front yard. The buffer area should be planted with evergreen trees or other evergreen shrubs that grow at least eight (8) feet tall within 5 years and provide an effective visual screen. 
Sec. 9.12. - Bed and breakfast. 
9.12.1  The acceptance of paying guests shall be an accessory use to the dwelling unit. 
9.12.2  The only uses permitted shall be the renting of rooms and the serving of foods to guests renting said rooms (accessory uses commonly associated with hotels and motels, i.e. laundry services, gift shops, banquet halls, barber and beauty shops, shall not be permitted); 
9.12.3  All parking shall be off-street; and 
9.12.4  One (1) wall sign, not exceeding four (4) sq. ft. in area, motionless, non-lighted, shall be permitted. No other signs shall be permitted on the premises. 
Sec. 9.13. - Community center or club. 
The buildings are placed not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line; 
9.13.1  There shall be a planted buffer area ten (10) feet wide along its exterior boundary lines not bordering the frontage street and not extending into the required front yard. The buffer area should be planted with evergreen trees or evergreen shrubs that grow at least eight (8) feet tall within three (3) years and provide an effective visual screen. 
9.13.2  A complete development sketch must be submitted with the application. 
9.13.3  Adequate off-street parking must be provided. Parking in Agricultural zoning districts may be gravel or grass parking, with the exception of any required handicap accessible parking. 
Sec. 9.14. - Outdoor storage yards. 
9.14.1  The storage yard must not be located within a required front yard. 
9.14.2  The storage yard must be setback at least twenty-five (25) feet from any side or rear property lines and shall be screened by a solid fence of material commonly manufactured for fencing, at least eight (8) feet high and appropriately landscaped and maintained. 
9.14.3  If an outdoor storage yard is established in connection with a permitted building, it shall meet the above requirements. 
Sec. 9.15. - Non-operating or junked vehicles. 
9.15.1  Vehicles not in operating condition shall not be parked between the residence and the street or streets the residential parcel adjoins. 
9.15.2  All vehicles not in operating condition must be parked in the rear yard, carport, or garage so as to be out of view from the public right-of-way. 
9.15.3  All automobile parts must be stored within a garage or enclosed building. 
Sec. 9.16. - Satellite dish antenna. 
9.16.1  Three feet diameter or larger satellite antenna dish must be located behind the rear building line and in compliance with the side yard setback in residential districts. 
Sec. 9.17. - Mining, mineral exploration, and borrow pits. 
9.17.1  Definitions: As used in this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires: 
AREA OF DISTURBANCE: That area of land that has undergone physical alteration to the natural topography and/or vegetation as a consequence of mining exploration. 
EXPLORED LANDS: The surface, subsurface and water of an area in which mineral exploration is being or has been conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, waste, and areas on which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, or other materials used in exploring operations are located. 
MINERAL EXPLORATION: Ordinary grading, construction of roads or platforms, core sampling and drilling, of lands for determining the feasibility of the extracting of solid minerals. 
OVERBURDEN: All the earth and other material which lies above natural deposits of ores or minerals, and includes all earth and other materials disturbed from their natural state in the process of surface mining. 
RECLAMATION OF EXPLORED LANDS: The combined process of land treatment that mitigates water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion and other adverse effects from exploration including all associated lands, so that explored lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and minimize danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. This process may extend to back filling, to original grades and previous natural conditions. 
REMOVAL: The actual process of digging or otherwise removing the substance being moved. 
9.17.2  General Provisions. 
9.17.2.1  Exploration for the existence of mineral deposits on any parcel of land in the unincorporated area of Greene County shall proceed in compliance with this section. 
9.17.2.2  Compliance with Local, State, and Federal Regulations. 
1.  All mineral/material extraction, surface mining, mining, quarrying, dimension stone quarrying, and stone crushing operations (whether strip, surface, or subsurface, and including the removal of stone, rock, gravel, sand, clay, phosphate, metallic ore, minerals, and other such solid materials or substances of commercial value found in natural deposits on or in the earth) shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations, and permitting requirements including, but not limited to, those related to water quality, air quality, and noise. 
2.  Certain of these operations may be subject to additional state or federal regulations that apply specifically to that particular industry or type of operation. For the purposes of this Ordinance, such applicable industry or operation specific state or federal regulations shall apply. Where the requirements specified herein are at variance with any applicable state or federal regulations, then the more restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall apply. Nothing in this section shall relieve owners or operators of any these operations from complying with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations, permits and requirements. 
9.17.3  Exploration Permits. 
9.17.3.1  Applicability. An exploration permit shall be obtained from the county prior to the commencement of exploration for the existence of or the expansion of the area of disturbance of an existing exploratory site for solid minerals on any parcel of land in unincorporated Greene County. 
9.17.3.2  Definition. For the purposes of this Ordinance, Surface Mining shall include but not be limited to surface mining, mining, quarrying, dimension stone quarrying, and stone crushing operations (whether strip, surface, or subsurface, and including the removal of stone, rock, gravel, sand, clay, phosphate, metallic ore, minerals, and other such solid materials or substances of commercial value found in natural deposits on or in the earth). 
9.17.3.3  Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from county exploration permits: 
1.  Hobby mining; and 
2.  Parcels of state or federal land which have operation and rehabilitation plans approved by a state or federal agency. 
9.17.3.4  General requirements for Mineral Exploration. The following are deemed to be the general and minimum requirements for mineral exploration: 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Drill rigs and accessory equipment shall not be located closer than five hundred (500) feet from any residential use structure without written permission from all property owners. 
b.  The edge of a quarry pit may not be located at any one point closer than one hundred (100) feet to right-of-way or easement access point and fifty (50) feet to any property line. 
2.  Minimum acreage shall be as follows; 
a.  50 acres minimum for site proposed to have blasting or crushing operations, and 
b.  5 acres minimum for all other sites. 
3.  Fencing. Prior to excavation, the owner, lessee of land, or their duly authorized agent for mining or mineral exploratory operations shall construct and maintain substantial fences with locking gates not less than six (6) feet in height at all points of access to the excavation site with durable warning signs posted thereon not more than two hundred (200) feet apart bearing the words DANGER and NO TRESPASSING in letters not less than six (6) inches in height, which shall be maintained by the owner or lessee so as to be clearly legible. 
a.  Additional security features, such as barbed wire above the fence top, are encouraged. 
b.  Gates for access shall be closed and locked at all times during non-operating hours. 
c.  Fences and gates shall be inspected and maintained to assure an effective barrier. The owner of the property where the pit is located shall be responsible for maintaining fences and gates at all times. 
4.  Screening. Portions of the mining operations visible from the public right-of-way or nearest residential use shall be screened with dense landscaping to achieve at least 75 percent opacity within two years. The landscape buffer shall be no less than ten feet in width at any given point and may be placed either inside or outside the required fence perimeter to achieve maximum dust and noise reduction and visible shielding. Earthen berms with a minimum height of three feet can be placed within this buffer area. 
5.  Buffers. In addition to the landscape screening noted above, a minimum ten-foot width buffer is required parallel to, and inside, the required fence. Excavation, pit operations, parking, storage and disposal of debris are not permitted within the screening or buffer areas. The setback area may not be used for truck or equipment traffic or parking, except as necessary to maintain the setback area and perimeter fence. Pit access point(s) shall be designed perpendicular to the buffer/screening width with the least disturbance to the buffer/screening zone that allows safe vehicle and equipment access to the operating site. 
6.  Grout, Rubble, Waste Rock, Waste Quarry Block, Overburden. Piles or other accumulations of grout, rubble, waste rock, waste quarry block, overburden, mine production material, or other similar materials shall not be created to a height of more than thirty-five (35) feet above the original contour. Grout, rubble, waste rock, waste quarry block, overburden, mine production material, or other similar materials shall not be placed, deposited, discarded or dumped in required setback areas, except that overburden may be used in the construction of berms. 
7.  Operations: 
a.  Operations shall not be permitted on Sundays and federal public holidays, nor will they be permitted within the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day. 
b.  Blasting - The operation shall be in compliance with the Georgia Blasting Standards Act (State of Georgia House Bill 824). Blasting shall not exceed atmospheric overpressure limits set out in said Act, as governed by the Department of the Fire Marshal for the State of Georgia. Flyrock traveling in the air or along the ground shall not be cast from the blasting site beyond the property lines of the area under ownership or control of the operator. Excavation shall not take place by blasting or use of explosives on any day between the period between sundown and sunrise the following day or during the period between 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., whichever is greater. In addition, routine production blasting shall be prohibited at any time on Sunday. 
8.  Grading or other construction activity on the site may not alter existing natural drainage ways in such a way as to adversely affect an adjacent parcel of land either by increasing or redirecting the drainage flow over that parcel, or by impeding the drainage ways flowing from that parcel. 
9.  Alteration/Relocation of Water Bodies - Natural creeks, streams, rivers, lakes, or other bodies of water shall not be altered in course or relocated by the Operator, unless such alteration or relocation has been specifically approved by applicable state and federal agencies and the Board of Commissioners as part of a Comprehensive Site Development Plan or Surface Mining Land Use Plan. 
10.  Operations shall not adversely impact adjacent properties and shall comply with the performance standards of § 7.7.3.4. 
11.  Noise generated by mineral exploration activities shall not exceed the standards set forth in any applicable law or regulation including, but not limited to, the Official Code of Georgia, or the Department of Natural Resources regulations, or § 7.7.3.4 (whichever is the most stringent). 
12.  Waste drill fluids generated on-site shall be contained on-site and/or transported from the site and disposed of in an environmentally safe and legal manner. 
13.  Drill fluid pits shall be fenced to prevent access. 
14.  Approved drainage plan, dust abatement plan, noise abatement plan, operational methods plan, rehabilitation plan, financial surety, and fire protection plan are required to be submitted in compliance with any and all applicable rules and regulations. 
15.  When residential densities exceed ten (10) dwelling units within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the drill site, only electric powered drills shall be used. Diesel generators shall not be used as the power source for electric drills. 
9.17.3.5  Application and Approval Process. 
1.  Planning and Zoning Board's Duty. The Planning and Zoning Board will review the complete application and related documents and submit recommendation to the Board of Commissions exploration permits based on adequacy of plans as outlined in § 9.17.2.4. 
2.  Application. Any person desiring approval of an exploration permit, shall file with the building official a completed application for an exploration permit and eight (8) copies of a drawing of the proposed exploration area with written data which discloses the following information: 
a.  Legal description of the area to be explored. 
b.  Specify total acreage of owned and leased lands. In addition, provide figures on the percentage of owned or leased lands to be affected by the mining/quarry operation. 
c.  Provide the names and addresses of the owner and/or lessee along with written authorization or delegation, if not owner. The applicant shall further certify that the Operator is the rightful owner and/or holds a valid lease on or option to purchase or lease said lands. 
d.  Provide the existing zoning classification and a brief description of the characteristics of the land proposed to be affected by mining and the zoning classification and a brief description of the characteristics of the surrounding lands and community in the vicinity of the proposed operation. 
e.  Written evidence by a professional geologist or other competent professional qualified to make such a judgment that the proposed site contains a mineral resource area or other valuable surface or subsurface substances that can be economically mined. 
f.  Specify the mineral or material which will be extracted by the operation and describe the general method and machinery to be used for extraction. 
g.  Estimate (projected range) anticipated average volume of mineral/material to be extracted annually and anticipated truck trips per day. 
h.  Provide anticipated date for beginning of mining/quarry operations. 
i.  Provide plans, proposals, objectives, and time-frame for land stabilization or reclamation, and re-use of the property at the cessation of the operation. 
j.  An operations plan and all documents submitted or prepared for submission to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for the purpose of obtaining a State Mining Permit. It shall be the continuing responsibility of the applicant to provide the county with all information submitted and received during the State application process and to inform the Building Official of the final disposition of the State permit process. Operation plans, if approved, shall be considered conditions of development approval, unless otherwise specified by the Building Official. Said plan shall also describe the nature of mining operations, method(s) of extraction, and equipment and materials (e.g., explosives) to be used. 
k.  Provide a copy of all applicable State and Federal permits, as required, or applications for such permits. 
l.  A detailed site plan shall, at a minimum, indicate the following: 
1.  The location of existing roads, streets or thoroughfares and other natural features affecting existing roads. 
2.  The location of residential structures within five hundred (500) feet of a proposed drill or mining site. 
3.  A layout of proposed roads, streets or ingress/egress, exploration sites, and easements; the layout shall include both on-site and those off-site which lead to the area of exploration. 
4.  Proposed location of phased mining operations. 
5.  Proposed locations or disposition of topsoil, overburden, and by-products, on-site or off-site. 
6.  Approximate location of natural drainage ways. 
7.  Adequate drainage calculations to support drainage way improvement proposed. 
8.  Erosion and sediment control plan. 
9.  Drainage plans for roads, platforms or any disturbed area. 
10.  A fire protection plan. 
m.  An impact statement prepared by a qualified professional that addresses the impact of the proposed mining operation on abutting and nearby buildings, uses, and properties. The impact statement shall address those external effects determined by the director to be likely to exist if said use is established, including, but not limited to, as appropriate, electromagnetic interference, noise, vibration, fumes, odors, dust and air particulates, illumination, truck traffic, and water table protection. The impact statement shall recommend specific measures to mitigate such impacts and provisions for monitoring and enforcing mitigation measures, and, if approved, the recommendations of the impact statement shall be considered conditions of approval unless otherwise specified by action of the Board of Commissioners. 
n.  A reclamation plan that conforms to the requirements defined in § 9.17.4. 
3.  Adequacy and Distribution of Plans. If the Planning and Zoning Board determines that the plans submitted contain sufficient data to furnish a basis for its approval or disapproval, and that the drawing of access and on-site roads is adequate to aid the Planning and Zoning Board in recommending acceptance of the drainage and reclamation plans, the Building Official shall affix a file number and date of receipt to the application, and within ten (10) working days shall distribute copies of the application to those agencies listed below, which, in his/her judgment, should make a review. 
a.  Building Official. 
b.  Greene County Health District. 
c.  Appropriate fire protection official. 
d.  Georgia Department of Transportation, if access road attached to a state highway. 
e.  United States Forest Service, if abuts a National Forest Service property. 
f.  Other appropriate agencies. 
4.  A notice of proposed mineral exploration shall be issued by the Building Official to property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property where mineral exploration is being conducted. Property owners shall be allowed fifteen (15) working days to respond to the notice of proposed mineral exploration before any action is taken on the application. 
5.  Contamination/Interruption/Diminution of Public/Private Drinking Water Supply. In the event of excavation below the seasonal high water table, the operator of a mining/quarrying activity that affects by excavation activities a public drinking water source or private drinking water supply by contamination, interruption or diminution must restore or replace the affected water supply with an alternate source of water, adequate in quantity and quality for the purpose served by the supply. This provision is not intended to replace any independent action that a person may have whose water supply is affected by excavation activity. 
6.  Approval. The Planning and Zoning Board shall review and submit recommend to the Board of Commissions for an exploration permit when all of the following exist: 
a.  When it is found the public interest will be protected by approval of the exploration permit and the application indicates compliance with § 9.17.2.5 of this ordinance; and 
b.  When the applicant has signed an undertaking for the reclamation of explored lands approved by the Planning and Zoning Board with performance guaranteed by an adequate financial surety held by a United States institution located within the continental United States in U.S. dollars to the amount of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the estimated cost of reclamation and approved by the County Attorney. This surety shall be retained for one year after the end of the growth season following the completion of reclamation. 
9.17.3.6  Change of Ownership. 
9.17.3.6.1  Should a change in legal ownership of the mining/quarrying operation occur, the new owner(s) shall have sixty (60) days from the date of consummation of the ownership change to submit to the Building Official written proof of the assumption of responsibility and submission of any required sureties or bonds by the new owner, and shall submit the appropriate information and details necessary to update the existing Comprehensive Site Development Plan for the operation as specified in § 9.17.2 and subsequent sections, or a copy of the updated Surface Mining Land Use Plan filed with the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. The operation may continue under the new owner during the sixty (60) day grace period. Failure of the new owner(s) to place on file with the County the necessary information and documents within said sixty (60) day period shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. 
9.17.3.6.2  Updating the information in the existing Comprehensive Site Development Plan for the operation to reflect a change of legal ownership of the mining/quarrying operation shall not constitute an amendment to the plan, unless significant changes are proposed to the nature or intensity of the operation itself or to plans, proposals, objectives, or time-frame for land stabilization or reclamation. 
9.17.3.7  Cessation of Operation. 
9.17.3.7.1  Upon cessation of operation, defined as no physical operations on-site within a consecutive period of one (1) year, the operator shall begin with the reclamation or land stabilization, as specified in § 9.17.4, herein, unless an application for inactive status has been submitted and approved. 
9.17.3.7.2  The operator shall have up to twenty-four (24) months after the date of cessation of operations to submit a written application to the Building Official, requesting that the mining/quarry site be placed on inactive status. Said inactive status shall be granted for up to three (3) years with no effect on its zoning status. If, at the end of three years, active mining/quarrying has not been resumed, it shall be deemed that mining/quarry operations have permanently ceased. At such time, the operator shall complete reclamation or land stabilization, as specified in § 9.17.4, herein. When a mining/quarry site is placed on inactive status, all exposed critical disturbed areas shall be stabilized and all measures employed for erosion and sedimentation control shall be maintained by the operator until such time as active mining/quarrying is resumed or said reclamation/land stabilization has been completed or said reclamation/land stabilization has been completed. 
9.17.3.8  Amendments to Plan. Unless otherwise specified herein, once approved, there shall be no significant changes or variation involving the nature or intensity of the operation itself or to the plans, proposals, objectives or time-frame for land reclamation/land stabilization in the Comprehensive Site Development Plan, unless approved, after a public hearing as set out in Article XIII, Amendments, of this ordinance, by the Board of Commissioners and all applicable state regulating authorities. The Operator shall submit any proposed changes in the approved Plan to the Board of Commissioners or their designated official(s) and to the appropriate state agencies for approval as an amendment to this Plan prior to changing or varying from this Plan. Request for amendment shall be complete in all details necessary to show the new plan of action and all lands to be affected. This requirement shall not apply to existing operations for which no Comprehensive Site Development Plan or Surface Mining Land Use Plan exists, provided that such existing operations shall comply § 9.17.2.9, Existing Mineral-Material Extraction and Surface Mining Operations, and § 9.17.2.10, Registration Required, herein. 
9.17.3.9  Existing Mineral-Material Extraction and Surface Mining Operations. For the purposes of this section, an existing mineral/material extraction or surface mining operation shall be defined as one with a valid business license and on which active physical operations on site exist at the time this Ordinance is adopted; or any such proposed operation for which a valid Surface Mining Permit has been issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and for which a reclamation bond has been funded, prior to the adoption of this Ordinance. 
1.  In order to provide the local governing authority with accurate and current information concerning existing surface mining, mineral/material extraction, quarrying, or stone crushing operations and in order to enforce the provisions that will apply to such existing operations upon adoption of this Ordinance, the owners of said existing operations shall be required to register with the County as specified in § 9.17.2.10, herein. 
2.  Any existing mineral/material extraction or surface mining operation, which does not meet all of the requirements for a new operation as specified herein, shall be considered non-conforming for the purposes of this Ordinance. Such operation is deemed "grandfathered" as to this ordinance and may continue operation and excavation expansion in compliance only with all existing local, state, federal regulations, and permits to which it was subject prior to the adoption of this ordinance, provided that: 
a.  Any expansion of the existing excavations or areas of operation shall be permitted only within the property lines of the existing tract on which the operation is located; except that adjacent tracts(s) under the same ownership or lease prior to the adoption of this ordinance and with existing physical operations on site shall be included as part of the existing operation. For operations subject to EPD permitting, any expansion of existing excavations or areas of operation shall be permitted only within the established boundaries of the EPD permitted and bonded area(s). 
b.  Unless part of an approved Comprehensive Site Development Plan or EPD permitted Surface Mining Land Use Plan, the initiation of any new excavation or area of operation, which is not part of the incremental expansion of the existing excavation/operation, but which has a separate and distinct location, shall be permitted only in conformance with the § 9.17.2 and subsequent sections, and § 9.17.4, Reclamation/Land Stabilization requirements, herein. 
c.  For those operations requiring EPD permits and bonds, there shall be no expansion of an existing operation beyond the established boundaries of the EPD permitted and bonded area(s) for the operation, or onto any property unless application for rezoning and conditional use permits first shall have been approved as specified in § 9.17.2 and subsequent sections, herein. 
3.  Should a change in ownership of an existing operation occur, the new owner(s) shall comply with the requirements specified in § 9.17.2.5 and § 9.17.2.10, herein. 
9.17.3.10  Registration Required. 
1.  In order to provide the governing authority with accurate and current information for all mineral/material extraction and surface mining operations within Greene County, all owners of such operations located within Greene County shall be required to register with the County Building Official and provide information about the operation, as specified herein. Any new operation approved and permitted by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to this Ordinance shall be automatically registered with the County. Any operation already in existence prior to the adoption of this Ordinance must register with the County and provide the required information within one (1) year of the adoption of this Ordinance. Failure to register or to truthfully report all information required shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. 
2.  Registration Information - The required registration shall include the following information for each operation: 
a.  The name of the local entity operating the activity, name of parent entity (if different from local entity), name of owner(s) of all entities, contact information including but not limited to the business address and telephone number. 
b.  Provide the name and address of all land owner(s) and, if appropriate, the name and address of the lessee (if different from the owner of the operation). The registrant shall certify that the owner/operator is the rightful owner and/or duly authorized to act and has a valid current lease on said lands, if applicable. 
c.  The contact information for the on-site manager including but not limited to: name, title, mailing address and telephone number. 
d.  Specify the mineral or material which is being extracted and the type of operation and general method used for extraction. 
e.  Provide an average range of the volume of mineral/material extracted annually and truck trips per day. 
f.  Specify the tax parcel number(s) and total acreage of land owned and/or leased by the owner/operator for the operation. For each tax parcel, specify the total current acreage of each extraction area and the total acreage of land on which actual active physical operations are occurring at the time of registration. 
g.  If applicable, provide a copy of the current Surface Mining Land Use Plan and permit as approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for the operation; 
h.  The information requested by this subsection shall be updated at any time that the information provided is no longer current. 
9.17.3.11  Penalties and Surety Claims. 
1.  Action to Restrain Violations. Any person exploring any parcel of land for solid minerals without complying with the provision of this section shall be deemed to be in violation of this resolution. 
2.  Discontinuance of Exploratory Activity. If mineral exploration on any parcel of land shall be abandoned or discontinued for a period of one year and reclamation not completed as identified in approved plans, Greene County shall claim the required surety and proceed with reclamation. 
3.  Revocation of Permit(s). Any non-compliance with the applicable requirements of Section 9.17 shall result in the revocation of permit(s). 
4.  Penalties. This section may be enforced by the County Attorney by civil action for injunctive, declaratory, or such other relief as necessary to ensure that mining exploration shall not be conducted except as authorized by permit as provided in this resolution and that any degradation of the environment caused by mining exploration shall be restored to its previous natural condition or in accordance with any undertaking for the reclamation of explored lands as provided by any applicable exploration permit. 
9.17.4  Borrow Pits. 
9.17.4.1  Borrow Pits shall comply with the following requirements with the exception of the following: 
1.  Extraction of minerals by a landowner for his/her unprocessed form for non-commercial use on property owned by him or her. 
2.  Borrow pits for highway construction with a Department of Transportation reclamation plan and bond. 
3.  Excavation or grading incidental to the construction of a building on a lot or parcel for which a building permit has been issued. This authorization shall only apply to the land shown on the site plan submitted with the application for a building permit. Once a certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to said building permit that authorization shall not apply to any subsequent acquisition of land. 
4.  Excavation or grading performed in accordance with a site plan or subdivision plat which has been reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning Board and for which all necessary permits have been issued. 
5.  Bona fide agricultural operations as defined in Article III. 
6.  Activities incidental to the operation of public utilities. 
The above operations are required to comply with State requirements with sediment and erosion control. 
9.17.4.2  General Requirements for Borrow Pits. Excavations of any type or creation of borrow pits, may be permitted in certain zoning districts only after approval of a site plan by Building Official. Such excavations shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Side slopes requirements. The angle of repose for borrow pit/mining slopes shall be no greater than 2:1 (i.e., two feet horizontal for each one foot vertical) unless a professional engineer (P.E.) or professional geologist (P.G.) certifies that an angle of repose exceeding this ratio will prohibit any potential erosion or slumping, factoring into account the type of soil (i.e., clay, sand, etc.) and pertinent environmental conditions of the area. 
2.  Side slopes steeper than 2:1 defined above shall have perimeter security fence as specified in § 9.17.3.5. 
3.  If excavation extend deeper than the water table, the excavation shall be to a minimum depth of 2 feet below the water table. 
4.  Borrow pits shall be located so that no one point of the bank shall be closer than seventy-five (75) feet to any part of the underground and/or above ground, septic tank system. 
5.  Excavation and borrow pit operations shall be controlled to provide reasonable and continued protection of the surrounding properties with regard to the use and cleanliness of the streets for access to the subject premises. Hours of operation may be imposed to protect the peace, well-being, compatibility and character of surrounding properties. 
6.  In no case shall the aquifer be penetrated. 
7.  No excavation shall be permitted which in any way interferes with natural or planned drainage. 
8.  Borrow pits shall not encroach into or be located in a jurisdictional wetland area as defined by the Army Corps of Engineers. 
9.  As a part of the site plan review, a reclamation or restoration plan shall be required prior to approval and issue of a development order as defined in § 9.17.4. 
9.17.4.3  Borrow Pits less than or equal to 2 acres. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  The edge of a borrow pit may not be located at any one point closer than fifty (50) feet to right-of-way or easement access point. Borrow pits may be closer to the right-of-way with a conditional permit. 
b.  The edge of a borrow pit may not be located at any one point closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any property line. 
9.17.4.4  Borrow Pits greater than 2 acres. 
1.  Borrow pits will not be larger than 25% of tract or 25 acres, whichever is less. Larger borrow pits shall phase their operations and reclaim inactive phases. 
2.  Setbacks: 
a.  The edge of a borrow pit may not be located at any one point closer than one hundred (100) feet to right-of-way or easement access point. Borrow pits may be closer to the right-of-way with a conditional permit. 
b.  The edge of a borrow pit may not be located at any one point closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line. 
c.  Back to back pits. The setback for slope commencement excludes property boundary lines between active pits using the same excavation area. 
d.  Increased setbacks may be required by the Building Official to protect wellheads, environmental areas, and/or adjacent properties from adverse impacts. 
3.  Buffers and Screening. 
a.  Portions of the pit visible from the public right-of-way or nearest residential use shall be screened with dense landscaping to achieve at least 75 percent opacity within two years. The landscape buffer shall be no less than ten feet in width at any given point and may be placed either inside or outside the any required fence perimeter to achieve maximum dust and noise reduction and visible shielding. Earthen berms with a minimum height of three feet can be placed within this buffer area. 
b.  Buffers. In addition to the landscape screening noted above, a minimum ten-foot width buffer is required parallel to, and inside any required fence. Excavation, pit operations, parking, storage and disposal of debris are not permitted within the screening or buffer areas. The setback area may not be used for truck or equipment traffic, except as necessary to maintain the setback area and perimeter fence. Pit access point(s) shall be designed perpendicular to the buffer/screening width with the least disturbance to the buffer/screening zone that allows safe vehicle and equipment access to the operating site. 
9.17.4.5  Fencing. 
1.  All borrow pits shall have substantially built, aesthetically pleasing fencing with locking gates not less than six (6) feet in height at all points of access. Gates for access shall be locked at all times during unsupervised or non-operating hours. 
2.  Required Fencing: For borrow pits with slopes exceeding 2:1 as described in § 9.17.3.2.2. 
a.  Prior to excavation, the owner or lessee of land containing borrow pit operations shall construct and maintain aesthetically pleasing security fences not less than six (6) feet in height along the outer perimeter of the proposed excavated area. 
b.  Additional security features, such as barbed wire above the fence top, are encouraged. 
c.  Fence Alternative: as an alternative to fencing, a six (6) foot high earthen berm can be utilized. 
3.  Signage: 
a.  Signs shall be durable and bear the words DANGER and NO TRESPASSING in letters not less than six (6) inches in height, which shall be maintained by the owner or lessee so as to be clearly legible. 
b.  Signs shall be posted on all gates. 
c.  Signs shall be posted on any required fencing at no more than two hundred (200) feet apart. 
4.  Fences and gates shall be inspected and maintained in a safe and secure condition to remain an effective barrier. The owner of the property where the pit is located shall be responsible for inspecting and maintaining the fence at all times. 
9.17.5  Reclamation/Land Stabilization. In addition to other requirements herein, all land involved in the operation shall be put back in a useable and safe fashion after the extraction operations are terminated. The affected land must be restored to a condition that is similar to or compatible with the conditions that existed before excavation. 
9.17.5.1  Reclamation/Land Stabilization Plan - shall include the following: 
1.  A grading plan showing existing contours in the area to be extracted and proposed future contours showing the topography of the area after completion. Such plans shall include the surrounding area within five hundred (500) feet of the property boundary line, drawn to an appropriate scale with contour lines at intervals of two (2) feet or less. 
2.  Existing and proposed drainage of the area. 
3.  Details of re-grading and re-vegetation of the site during and at conclusion of the operation. 
4.  Statement of intended future use of the land. 
5.  Phasing and timing estimates of reclamation and rehabilitation activities. Completion of Plan shall be not be exceed twenty-four (24) months from date of cessation, except as otherwise specified and approved by the Building Official. 
6.  The plan shall also include an estimation of cost for rehabilitation. 
9.17.5.2  Reclamation plans, if approved, shall be considered conditions of development approval, unless otherwise specified by the Building Official. The Board of Commissioners may require an applicant to post a bond calculated on a specific amount per acre for the purpose of insuring proper reclamation of the land. 
9.17.5.3  Amendments: There shall be no amendment to the Plan unless such amendments are first approved by the Board of Commissioners or their designated official(s). 
9.17.5.4  Requirements: The following requirements shall be met in the Rehabilitation/Land Stabilization Plan: 
1.  When any extraction has been completed, such area shall either be left as a permanent spring-fed lake or the floor thereof shall be leveled in such manner as to prevent the collection and stagnation of water and to provide proper drainage without excessive soil erosion, and shall otherwise comply with these requirements. 
2.  All affected land (excluding dimension stone quarry excavation pits) shall be graded into a rolling topography and blended in with the existing landscape. Boulders, and overburden may be incorporated into protective barriers or berms, as necessary, provided such materials shall not be deposited in the required buffer areas except as specifically provided in § 9.17 and subsequent sections, herein. 
a.  If grades are to be left below the water table, the excavation shall extend to a depth of two (2) feet below a water producing level. 
b.  Excavated area shall be graded to blend with the surrounding topography. 
c.  If backfilling the excavation, the backfill shall be non-noxious and non-inflammable solids to assure that the excavated area will not collect and retain stagnant water. The graded and/or back-filled surface shall create a gentle rolling topography to minimize erosion by wind or rain and substantially conform to the contour of the surrounding area. 
d.  The banks of all extraction, when not back-filled, shall be sloped at a grade of not less than two (2) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical. 
e.  Spoil banks shall be graded to a level suiting the existing terrain. 
f.  All banks and extracted areas shall be surfaced with at least six (6) inches of suitable soil, except exposed rock surfaces, and shall be planted or seeded with trees, shrubs, legumes or grasses and maintained until the soil is stabilized. 
3.  All equipment and structures shall be removed within three (3) months of the completion of the extraction of materials. 
4.  All accessory structures, mechanical equipment, and stockpiled materials associated with the operation shall be removed within three (3) months of completion of the extraction of materials. 
5.  Vegetative Stabilization - The Owner or lessee shall provide a high quality, enduring vegetative ground cover of properly planted and nurtured perennial vegetative species suited for the specific planting zone involved. The perennial vegetative species shall provide a complete, thorough stabilization by providing root mass and cover for the total disturbed area. If forest land is the reclamation objective, a vegetative ground cover will also be provided prior to or concurrent with tree seeding or the planting of tree seedlings. 
6.  Structural Stabilization - Permanent structural control measures, i.e. stone riprap, ditches, berms, paved chutes, or piped down drains, etc., shall be utilized to convey concentrated storm flows down slopes to stable outlets. These measures shall be necessary in areas where concentrated storm flow velocities may cause erosion. 
7.  Lakes or Ponds - All proposed lakes or ponds shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal regulations and requirements. 
8.  All exposed critical disturbed areas shall be stabilized and all measures employed for erosion and sedimentation control shall be maintained by the operator until reclamation or land stabilization can be completed. 
9.  Any security fencing or barriers shall be removed upon the closure of the borrow pit and completion of reclamation except those needed to secure dimension stone quarry excavation pits. 
Sec. 9.18. - Planned Unit Development (PUD) and Commercial Planned Unit Development (CPUD). 
The provisions of this Section 9.18 shall become applicable upon and after completion of rezoning any tract of land to a PUD or CPUD. Upon successful rezoning, at the time the developer desires to commence development, the developer shall make submissions for development approvals pursuant to the Greene County Subdivision Regulations, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, preliminary plats, final plats, and construction drawings all as set out in the Greene County Subdivision Regulations. Each such submission shall be accompanied by a development time table for the proposed and submitted phase or subdivision, the original plans or those plans amended as a result of recommendations or requirements of the Commission and any other data or proof of compliance to the conditions provided in the Subdivision Regulations all of which shall conform to the guidelines therein. The Planning Commission may recommend for approval or denial such applications as submitted, or may recommend for approval the application subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. County approval of any detailed construction plan shall lapse unless construction is started in the approved section, within one year. No conveyances of subdivided land within the development shall be made until the developer has complied with the Greene County Subdivision Regulations for said phase or subdivision and the developer has either completed all approved subdivision infrastructure improvements or deposited surety with the county for those infrastructure improvements as required by the Greene County Subdivision Regulations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this Section 9.18 shall not apply to property that is annexed into an existing PUD or CPUD unless said property is included in a subsequent application for development approval by the owner of the majority of the PUD or CPUD. 
9.18.1  Dimensional Requirements for PUD only. 
9.18.1.1  Subject to the open space requirements in § 9.18.1.2 the PUD may be occupied for residential uses which includes streets, alleys, parking areas, and private lots. 
9.18.1.2  In order to maintain the desired rural setting of openness and a livable, appealing environment, open space, as defined in Article III, will be required based on the overall number of PUD dwelling units. For purposes of determining the number of dwelling units per acre for the PUD, platted residential lots which have yet to be built upon shall be considered a dwelling unit. 
1.  A minimum of 35% open space is required for PUDs containing 3.51 to 4.00 dwelling units per acre for the total acreage of the PUD. 
2.  A minimum of 30% open space is required for PUDs containing 3.01 to 3.50 dwelling units per acre for the total acreage of the PUD. 
3.  A minimum of 25% open space is required for PUDs containing 2.51 to 3.00 dwelling units per acre for the total acreage of the PUD. 
4.  A minimum of 20% open space is required for PUDs containing 2.01 to 2.50 dwelling units per acre for the total acreage of the PUD. 
5.  A minimum of 15% open space is required for PUDs containing 1.51 to 2.00 dwelling units per acre for the total acreage of the PUD. 
6.  No open space is required in PUDs having less than 1.51 dwelling units per acre for the total acreage of the PUD. 
9.18.1.3  Upon submittal of a Preliminary Plat and Final Plat as described in Section 9.18, the submittal must be accompanied by a certification from the developer designating the total acreage of the PUD, amount of total in use(s) complying with § 9.18.1.1, and amount of total in use(s) complying with § 9.18.1.2. 
9.18.1.4  The total number of residences shall not exceed four dwelling units per acre in the total PUD. Land devoted to residential use, as defined in § 9.18.1.1, shall not exceed 10 units per acre of land. 
9.18.1.5  There is no minimum lot size or width. However, every single-family dwelling shall have access to a street, court, or walkway or other area dedicated to community use. There are no required setbacks within a PUD except that no single-family or two-family dwellings or accessory building shall be erected within 20 feet of any other structure. 
9.18.1.6  Maximum height of all other structures is 40 feet, excluding religious institutions and approved towers or antennas. 
9.18.1.7  Maximum length of a continuous structure of townhouse or condominiums is 8 dwelling units. 
9.18.1.8  Parking shall meet the requirements of Article [Section] 6.2. 
9.18.1.9  Signs shall meet the requirements of Article X. 
9.18.2  Dimensional Requirements for CPUD only. 
9.18.2.1  A minimum of 25 percent of the total CPUD will be occupied for residential uses which includes streets, alleys, parking areas, private open spaces and courts which abut and service adjacent residences or groups of residences. It does not include usable open space available for use by the general public. 
9.18.2.2  A minimum of 25 percent of the total CPUD will be occupied by non-residential uses (commercial, institutional, utility, etc.) which include streets, alleys, parking areas, private open spaces and courts which service adjacent non-residential uses. It does not include usable open space available for use by the general public. 
9.18.2.3  Upon submittal of a Preliminary Plat and Final Plat as described in Section 9.18, the submittal must be accompanied by a certification from the developer designating the total acreage of the CPUD, amount of total in use(s) complying with § 9.18.2.1, and amount of total in use(s) complying with § 9.18.2.2. 
9.18.2.4  The total number of residences shall not exceed four dwelling units per acre in the total CPUD. Land devoted to residential use, as defined in § 9.18.2.1, shall not exceed 10 units per acre of land. 
9.18.2.5  There is no minimum lot size or width. However, every single-family dwelling shall have access to a street, court, or walkway or other area dedicated to community use. There are no required setbacks within a CPUD except that no single-family or two-family dwellings or accessory building shall be erected within 20 feet of any other structure. 
9.18.2.6  Maximum height of all other structures is 40 feet, excluding religious institutions and approved towers or antennas. 
9.18.2.7  Maximum length of a continuous structure of townhouse or condominiums is 8 dwelling units. 
9.18.2.8  Parking shall meet the requirements of Article 6.2. 
9.18.2.9  Signs shall meet the requirements of Article X. 
Sec. 9.19. - Recreational campgrounds. 
9.19.1  Setbacks. The site of the actual camp facilities, i.e., car parking, shelter, cooking and sanitary facilities must be no less than 200 feet from any adjacent property and/or any public right-of-way. 
9.19.2  Sanitary Facilities. Any campground that accommodates six (6) or more people must be equipped with a concealed restroom facility which may be a Port-o-Toilet, an outhouse, or a bath building. 
9.19.3  Litter. Campgrounds must be kept clean of trash and debris at all times, and are subject to current state and county anti-littering statutes. 
9.19.4  Restricted Districts. Recreational campgrounds are permitted in zoning districts A1 and A2. 
9.19.5  Permanent Structures. Permanent structures on a campground that are used to house or shelter campers must meet the safety standards of the Georgia Building Code and of Article VI of this ordinance. 
Sec. 9.20. - Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND). 
"Traditional neighborhood development" means a compact, mixed-use neighborhood where residential, commercial and civic buildings are within close proximity to each other. 
9.20.1  Permitted in CPUD. Traditional Neighborhood Development is a permitted use within a CPUD District. Where differences in the CPUD and TND requirements exist, the requirements for TND shall prevail. Traditional Neighborhoods are designed as compact, walkable, diverse, safe, and attractive neighborhoods. They are defined by the following principles. 
1.  Compact and walkable. Neighborhoods should be compact enough to encourage development of pedestrian connections and destinations without excluding automobiles. 
2.  A hierarchy of interconnected streets. Streets and roads function as a connected network, dispersing traffic and offering a variety of pedestrian and vehicular routes to any destination while connecting and integrating the neighborhood with surrounding communities. 
3.  An identifiable neighborhood/community center and edges. A center that includes public spaces, such as a square, green or important street intersection; and public buildings, such as a library, church or community center, and retail businesses; all of which provides a civic focus and informal place of gathering; and edges that promote neighborhood identity. 
4.  A variety of housing choices within the same neighborhood. The neighborhood includes a variety of dwelling types so that younger and older people, singles and families, of varying income levels may find places to live. 
5.  A diverse mix of activities (residences, shops, schools, workplaces and parks, etc.) occur in proximity. A variety of uses within the same building, block and neighborhood is an essential component to the function and character addressed by traditional neighborhood development (TND) mixed use. Many activities of daily living should occur within walking distance, allowing independence to those who do not drive and adding to neighborhood vitality. 
6.  A range of transportation options. Streets are designed to promote the safe and efficient use by walkers, bikers, and drivers. 
7.  Pedestrian-friendly. Features such as safe, attractive and comfortable streets and public spaces promote walking as a viable option to auto trips. 
8.  Open spaces, greens, and parks. Significant cultural and environmental features are incorporated into the design of the development. A range of parks, from tot-tots and village greens to ball fields and community gardens, are distributed within neighborhoods. 
9.20.2  Dimensional Requirements for TND. 
9.20.2.1  Overall Size: 
1.  Traditional Neighborhoods should be large enough to contain a mix of uses, and conform to the principles for a TND. They should be small enough to allow a pedestrian to travel from the center to the edge in five to ten minutes. 
2.  The minimum size of a Traditional Neighborhood shall be 35 acres. 
3.  Sites larger than 70 acres may be developed as multiple neighborhoods, with each neighborhood designed to be integrated into an overall plan and the total site subject to all the provisions. 
4.  Applications for sites less than 35 acres shall be considered when adjacent to or integrated with an existing or approved Traditional Neighborhood that is consistent with the principles for a TND. 
9.20.2.2  Densities: 
1.  Residential: The number of residences will not exceed four (4) dwelling units per acre in the total TND. Residential density will not exceed ten (10) units per acre of land in any single phase. 
2.  Commercial, Institutional, or Other Uses (Non-residential): The total ground floor area of non-residential development uses shall be a minimum of 10 percent of the traditional neighborhood development. 
3.  Common Open Space: At least twenty (20) percent of the gross acreage of the Traditional Neighborhood Development must be common open space. Open space may include parks, recreation areas, or un-developable areas such as steep slopes and wetlands. At least 25 percent of the common open space must be dedicated to the public for parks and recreation. 
4.  Upon submittal of a Preliminary Plat and Final Plat, the submittal must be accompanied by a certification from the developer designating the following: 
a.  All certification requirements for the underlying zoning district (CPUD). 
b.  Total acreage of the TND. 
c.  Total acres in phase and total acres developed in TND. 
d.  Number of residential units in phase and total residential units developed (including proposed units). 
e.  Residential density developed (including proposed units) per gross acre of total TND; 
f.  Percent proposed in phase and developed in TND for residential, open Space - both common open space and parks/recreational areas, other uses and future development. 
9.20.3  Traditional Neighborhood Development Design Standards. 
9.20.3.1  Neighborhood Uses: In order to achieve the proximity necessary to make neighborhoods walkable, the TND will have a mix of land uses. The traditional neighborhood development will consist of a mix of residential uses, a mixed use area, and open space. 
9.20.3.2  Mixed Residential uses can occur anywhere in the traditional neighborhood development. The mix of residential uses will be for more than one income level and age group. Residential uses permitted will be consistent with uses permitted in the Zoning District. 
a.  There shall be no minimum standards for lot size. 
b.  Every single-family dwelling shall have access to a street, court, or walkway or other area dedicated to public use. 
c.  Maximum length of a continuous structure of townhouse or condominiums is 8 dwelling units. 
d.  Curb cuts for driveways to individual residential lots shall be prohibited along arterial streets. Curb cuts shall be limited intersections with other streets or access drives to parking areas for commercial, civic or multifamily residential uses. 
9.20.3.3  Mixed use area of the TND shall be composed of commercial, residential, civic or institutional, and open space uses. All residents shall be within approximately ¼ mile or a 5-minute walk from existing or proposed commercial, civic, and/or open space areas. Uses permitted will be consistent with uses permitted in the underlying Zoning District. 
9.20.3.4  Open space uses shall be incorporated in the traditional neighborhood development as appropriate. 
9.20.3.5  Setbacks: 
a.  Building Setback, Front - Along Existing Public Rights-of-Way Internal to the TND: Structures shall have a minimum building setback of 10 feet. 
b.  There are no building setbacks within the TND. 
9.20.3.6  Building Separation: There will be no minimum separation of buildings, but all buildings must comply with the Standard Building Code. 
9.20.3.7  Building Heights: Maximum height of all structures will comply with § 9.18.2.6. 
9.20.3.8  Circulation Standards: The circulation system shall allow for different modes of transportation. The circulation system shall provide functional and visual links within the residential areas, mixed use area, and open space of the traditional neighborhood development and shall be connected to existing and proposed external development. The circulation system shall provide adequate traffic capacity, provide connected pedestrian and bicycle routes (especially off street bicycle or multi-use paths or bicycle lanes on the streets), control through traffic, lot access to streets of high traffic volumes shall be discouraged, and promote safe and efficient mobility through the traditional neighborhood development. 
9.20.3.9  Pedestrian Circulation: Convenient pedestrian circulation systems that minimize pedestrian-motor vehicle conflicts shall be provided continuously throughout the Traditional Neighborhood Development. 
a.  Sidewalks shall form an interconnected network. 
b.  Sidewalks will be provided on a minimum of one (1) side of cul-de-sac streets, unless topographic conditions prohibit. 
c.  Sidewalk requirements may be waived where open space abuts a street if an accessible pedestrian path or trail is provided within two hundred (200) feet of said street and links with required sidewalks at each end. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be provided where residential or mixed uses border the street. 
e.  Sidewalks in residential areas will be a minimum of 5 feet in width, depending on projected pedestrian traffic, and will connect all dwelling entrances to the adjacent public sidewalk. 
f.  Sidewalks in mixed use areas will connect building entrances to the adjacent public sidewalk and to associated parking areas. Such walkways shall be a minimum of 5 feet in width. 
9.20.3.10  Motor Vehicle Circulation: Motor vehicle circulation shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and bicycles. Traffic calming features may be used to encourage slow traffic speeds. 
a.  Street Hierarchy: Each street within a traditional neighborhood development shall be classified according to: 
b.  Major Collector: This street provides access to commercial or mixed-use buildings, but it is also part of the TND's major street network. On-street public parking, whether diagonal or parallel, helps to slow traffic. Additional parking in accordance with Greene County parking requirements shall be provided in lots to the side or rear of buildings. Design speed is 30 mph. 
c.  Minor Collector: This street provides primary access to individual residential properties and connects streets of lower and higher function. Design speed is 25 mph. 
d.  Local Street: This street provides primary access to individual residential properties. Design speed is 20 mph. 
e.  Alley: These streets provide access to residential properties where street frontages are narrow, where the street is designed with a narrow width to provide limited on-street parking, or where alley access development is desired to increase residential densities. Alleys may also provide delivery access or alternate parking access to commercial properties. 
f.  Street jogs and offsets will be permitted at a minimum of 75 feet on TND Local streets and Alleys only. 
9.20.3.11  Street Widths and Design Criteria: 
a.  Public Roads: Roads proposed for dedication to Greene County will be designed and constructed in accordance with the Greene County Subdivisions Regulations and Greene County road standards. 
b.  Private Roads: Private roads may be designed and constructed according to alternate engineering standards. These alternative standards and justification will be provided to the Greene County Planning and Zoning Commission when the Preliminary Plat for the TND is submitted. 
c.  Developments designed to have private roads will indicate on the Preliminary and Final Plat which roads are to be designated as Private Roads. The Preliminary and Final Plats will have the following Owner's Waiver: 
"I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described herein and, for roads designated as "Private" on this plat, I (we) hereby waive the right to seek future acceptance of the roads as county owned roads for maintenance purposes, unless prior to such request the "Private Roads" have been brought into compliance with the current Subdivision Regulation of Greene County road standards." 
This statement shall be signed and dated by the owners, proprietors, or trustees, if any, prior to the final plat submittal. 
9.20.3.12  Parking: Parking shall meet the requirements of Article [Section] 6.2. In areas other than single-family residential, on-street parking on private streets available along the frontage lines that correspond to each lot may be counted toward the minimum parking requirements of the lot. 
9.20.3.13  Signage: Signs shall meet the requirements of Article X. 
Sec. 9.21. - Personal care home. 
9.21.1  Prior to application for a conditional use permit the Applicant shall obtain qualification inspection from the County Building Official to determine if any existing building proposed for use as any type Personal Care Home will be satisfactory for the requested use. 
9.21.2  The application for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a site plan based upon a boundary survey by a Georgia Registered Land Surveyor. The site plan shall show all existing or proposed improvements on the property including water source, sewage disposal, electric or other public utilities, driveways, parking and distances from any structure to the nearest boundary line. This site plan must be drawn to scale and shall be on media no smaller than 8.5"x11" and no larger than 24"x36". 
9.21.3  Any type personal care home under this ordinance must be on a minimum lot size that conforms to the zoning district in which it is located. 
9.21.4  Personal care homes must be located on a paved road. 
9.21.5  Parking shall be limited to one space per bedroom plus one per paid on-duty staff member. Parking areas shall have adequate turn-around areas so that all vehicles may enter the street in a forward manner. 
9.21.6  Parking areas shall be designed so that sanitation, emergency and other public service vehicles can serve the facility without the necessity of backing unreasonable distances or having to make hazardous or dangerous turning movements. 
9.21.7  Prior to receiving a Certificate Of Occupancy the applicant must furnish to the County Building Official an official report from the Greene County Health Department that any on-site well, or septic systems are adequate for the number of residents to be served by the facility. 
9.21.8  An operating permit for a Personal Care Home from the Georgia Department of Human Resources must be issued and a copy of said permit filed with the Greene County Building Inspector prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or the connection of permanent power to said building. 
9.21.9  A personal care home will be subject to an annual inspection by the Greene County Building Official. 
Sec. 9.22. - Solar farms. 
9.22.1  It is the purpose of this Section to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of solar farm development, construction and operation. Solar farms shall be a Conditional Use in the HI (Heavy Industrial) District, and a Conditional Use in the A1 (Agriculture-Intensive Farming) District. 
9.22.2  Solar farms shall only be located on parcels larger than twenty-five (25) acres. 
9.22.3  Solar farms shall not be visible from any portion of the right-of-way of any adjacent public road or the common boundary lines of adjacent property. 
9.22.4  A chain link fence eight (8) feet tall with three strands of barbwire installed atop of the chain link fencing must surround the solar farm, and all gates must be locked. The chain link fence must be setback at least seventy-five (75) feet from every property line 
9.22.5  In addition to the requirements in § 9.22.3, the solar farm and fencing shall be surrounded by a vegetative buffer having an opacity of sixty-percent (60%) or greater that is capable of growing to a height of at least eight (8) feet within two years, and shall be maintained as long as the facility is in operation. Such screening shall be sufficient so that a six (6) foot tall person standing on the common border cannot view the solar farm. 
9.22.6  A solar farm shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from any existing home, church, or public facility, and at least three hundred and fifty (350) feet from the parcel boundary. 
9.22.7  The design of the solar farm shall adhere to existing structural height requirements. If the solar farm requires a roof mounting on buildings on the property, the roof mounted installation may not exceed the maximum principal building height or accessory building height specified for the building type in the underlying zoning district. 
9.22.8  Solar panels shall be placed and arranged such that reflected solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto adjacent buildings, properties or roadways, and no solar farm shall be located within two (2) miles of the Greene County Regional Airport. 
9.22.9  A solar farm shall not be used to display advertising, including signage, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, balloons, flags, banners, or similar materials, with the exception of necessary equipment information, warnings, or indication of ownership, or where required by applicable Code requirements. 
9.22.10  Wall mounting or any other form of face mounted solar panels on any building or structure is prohibited. 
9.22.11  The applicant for any proposed solar farm shall be required to submit a letter from an electric utility company acknowledging the solar farm will be interconnected to the utility grid in order to sell electricity to the utility. Such letter shall be submitted to the Greene County Tax Assessors' Office notifying the Board of Tax Assessors of the change in use of the property. 
9.22.12  A solar farm which has not been in active and continuous service for one (1) year shall be removed at the owners or operators expense, and the site shall be restored to as natural a condition as reasonably possible within six (6) months of the removal of the solar farm. Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for the solar farm, the permit applicant shall be required to file with the board of commissioners a bond executed by a surety or guaranty company qualified to transact business in the State of Georgia payable to the County in an amount sufficient to cover removal and simple cleanup to restore the site to as natural condition as possible, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, in order to assure the obligations of this section are satisfied. The bond shall be maintained for so long as the solar farm exists. In the event that the owner fails to comply with this section, the County shall be authorized to call the bond and use the proceeds to bring the site into compliance with this section. Bonds tendered pursuant to this section shall be released or returned, as the case may be, at such time as the Zoning Administrator shall deem the property in compliance with this section. 
9.22.13  A solar farm development shall include an emergency plan that provides for a twenty-four (24) hour contact person with appropriate contact information that shall be filed with the Greene County E911 Center. The contact person and information shall be posted at the site of the solar farm in a prominent location. 
Sec. 9.23. - Utility facilities. 
9.23.1  Telecommunications towers are covered in the Greene County Tower Ordinance. 
9.23.2  Minor Utility Facilities: 
9.23.2.1  Size: Exempt from minimum lot size required in zoning district and are less than one-quarter acre. 
9.23.2.2  Setbacks: Exempt from setback requirements. 
9.23.2.3  Buffer requirements: 
a.  Fenced areas shall have an appropriate planted buffer. 
b.  Minor utility facilities greater than 1,600 square feet shall have an appropriate planted buffer. 
c.  Facilities greater than 6-feet tall, with the exception of utility poles, shall have an appropriate planted buffer. 
d.  An appropriate planted buffer shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide planted strip containing evergreen vegetation that will attain a height of eight (8) feet within three (3) years. 
9.23.2.4  Any lighting on the property shall be such that it does not cause glare to adjacent properties or streets. 
9.23.2.5  Property shall not be used for the storage of vehicles or service equipment. 
9.23.3  Major Utility Facilities: 
9.23.3.1  Size: One-quarter acre or larger. 
9.23.3.2  A site development plan shall be submitted and approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
9.23.3.3  Setbacks: As defined for the zoning district. 
9.23.3.4  Buffer requirements: minimum 20 foot planted buffer strip shall be provided as suitable screening along property lines or within 60 feet of developed areas with the exception of Heavy Commercial or Industrial uses. An appropriate planted buffer shall contain evergreen vegetation that will attain a height of eight (8) feet within three (3) years. 
ARTICLE X. - SIGNS 

Sec. 10.1. - General purposes and findings. 
The Greene County Board of Commissioners finds that signs and outdoor advertising provide an important medium for individuals or entities to convey messages if displayed in a reasonable, safe, non-distracting and orderly manner. Failure to regulate the placement, installation and maintenance of signs and outdoor advertising, which are intentionally designed to attract attention and be unavoidable, threatens the health, safety, welfare and general well-being of the citizens of Greene County. Unbridled placement, installation and maintenance activities create traffic hazards due to the visual distractions; infringe upon the tranquility of areas; decrease overall attractiveness and aesthetics of the topography and natural resources; and fail to protect both public and private investments in streets, roadways and property. By enacting this resolution, the County Commission regulates the placement, installation and maintenance of signs and outdoor advertising so as to: 
10.1.1  Balance the rights of those desiring to convey their messages through signs and outdoor advertising with the right of the public to be protected against unrestricted proliferation of such; 
10.2.2  Protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
10.2.3  Avoid unnecessary traffic and pedestrian distractions and hazards; 
10.2.4  Ensure compatibility among the County's scenic rural corridors, visual beauty and natural resources; 
10.2.5  Protect property values throughout the County; 
10.2.6  Promote economic and tourist development; and 
10.2.7  Ensure fair and consistent enforcement of sign and outdoor advertising regulations. 
Sec. 10.2. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, each word used in this Article has its customary dictionary definition. For the purpose of this Article, certain words or terms used herein are defined as follows: 
A.  Abandoned Sign. A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be found. 
B.  Administrator. That person designated by the Board to administer and enforce the provisions of this Article. 
C.  Back-to-Back Sign. A sign constructed on a single set of supports with messages visible on any side, provided that double message boards are physically contiguous. 
D.  Banners. Pennants and Balloons. Any animated, rotating, fluttering or non-stationary device made of flexible materials designed to attract attention. 
B.  Board of Adjustment. The duly appointed board authorized by the Board to hear and act upon any appeal of a decision of the Administrator or any request for a variance from any provision of this Article. 
F.  Canopy. A structure constructed of rigid materials, including, but not limited to, metal, wood, concrete, plastic, canvas or glass, which is attached to and supported by a building or by columns, poles or braces extended to the ground. 
G.  Canopy Sign. A sign which is suspended from, attached to, supported from or forms a part of a canopy. 
H.  Changeable Copy Sign. A sign on which message copy is changed manually in the field, through the utilization of attachable letters, numbers, symbols and other similar characters or changeable pictorial panels. 
I.  Commercial or Industrial Center. Two (2) or more separate occupancies located within the same or adjacent building or buildings on the same commercial or industrial plat or record. 
J.  Dilapidated Sign. Any sign that is structurally unsound, has defective parts or is in need of painting or maintenance. 
K.  Directional Sign. A sign, permanently erected or permitted in the public right-of-way or private property by the County or any other governmental agency to denote the name of any thoroughfare, the route to any city, town, village, educational institution, public building, historic place, shrine or hospital, or other area of specific interest to the public. 
L.  Directory Sign. A sign listing only the names and/or use, or location of more than one (1) business, activity or professional office conducted within a building, group of buildings or commercial center. 
M.  Double-Faced Sign. A sign with two (2) faces which are usually, but not necessarily, parallel. 
N.  Electrical Sign. A self-illuminated sign or sign structure in which electric wiring, connections and/or fixtures are used as part of the sign proper. 
O.  Existing Sign. Any sign that was legally erected, mounted, or displayed prior to the adoption of this Article. 
P.  Facade. The entire building wall, including main street wall face, and parapet, facia, windows, doors, canopy and roof on any complete evaluation. 
Q.  Fixed Projecting Sign. A sign, other than a flat sign, which extends outward for more than six (6) inches from the facade of any building and is rigidly affixed thereto. 
R.  Flashing Sign. Any lighted or electrical sign which emits light in sudden transitory bursts. 
S.  Flat Sign. A sign erected parallel to and extending not more than twelve inches (12") from the facade of any building to which it is attached and supported, throughout its entire length, by the facade of the building and not extending above the building. 
T.  Freestanding Sign. A sign supported by a sign structure secured in the ground and which is wholly independent of any building, fence, vehicle or other support. 
U.  Frontage. The length of the property line of any one premises parcel serving as a public right-of-way line. 
V.  Frontage Wall Face. The building facade, excluding parapet, facia, soffit, mansard and roof, which faces a frontage of the premises. 
W.  Height of Sign. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the nearest road centerline to the top of the sign face or sign structure, whichever is greater. 
X.  Illuminated Sign. 
a.  External. Any sign that is directly lighted by an external source. 
b.  Internal. Any sign that transmits light through its face or any part thereof. 
Y.  Inflatable Sign. A sign that is either expanded to its full dimensions or supported by gasses contained within the sign, or sign parts, at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. 
Z.  Ingress/Egress Sign. A sign which designates only the direction of ingress or egress of a parking area or driveway, such as "In," "Out," "One-Way," "Do Not Enter," or "No Exit." 
AA.  Nonconforming Sign. Any sign which has a valid permit, was erected or displayed prior to the effective date of this Article or any subsequent amendment hereto and does not conform to any provision of this Article. 
BB.  Occupancy. Any use of or activity upon the premises. 
EE.  Painted Wall Sign. A sign painted directly on any exterior building wall or door surface, exclusive of window and door glass areas on any outside wall or roof or on glass of any building. 
FF.  Panel. The primary surface of a sign upon which the message of the sign is carried. 
GG.  Parapet. A vertical false front or wall extension above the roof line. 
HH.  Pennant. See § 10.2.D. 
II.  Permitted Sign. A sign for which a valid permit has been issued. 
JJ.  Political Sign. A sign erected by a political candidate, group or agent thereof for the purpose of advertising a candidate or stating a position regarding an issue upon which the voters of the County shall vote. 
KK.  Portable Sign. Any sign which is not permanently affixed to a building, structure or the ground, or which is attached to a mobile vehicle. 
LL.  Premises. The plat of record which is affected, either directly or indirectly, by the contents of this Article. 
MM.  Project Sign. Any sign erected and maintained on the premises temporarily while undergoing construction by an architect, contractor, developer, finance organization, subcontractor or materials vendor upon which property such individual is furnishing labor, services or material. 
NN.  Public Right-of-Way Line. The line where the property meets the public right-of-way at a public street or public waterway, provided that this definition shall not include unimproved alleys, easements or other similar dedicated uses. 
OO.  Public Way. Any street, highway, road, path or right-of-way, whether privately or publicly owned, which is designed or used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, either by public right or custom, or by invitation of two (2) or more common owners. 
PP.  Real Estate Sign. A temporary sign erected by the owner, or his/her agent, identifying the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease or sale. 
QQ.  Roof. The exterior upper covering of the top of a building. 
RR.  Roof Sign. A sign erected over or on, and wholly or partially dependent upon, the roof of any building for support, or attached to the roof in any way. 
SS.  Rotating Sign. Any sign which revolves around one or more fixed areas. 
TT.  Seasonal/Holiday Sign. A sign used for emphasizing the celebration of a nationally recognized holiday which is erected for a limited period of time. 
UU.  Sidewalk or Sandwich Sign. A movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or any building or structure. 
VV.  Sign. Any device or representation for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others, which is located on or attached to premises, real property, structures on real property or a vehicle. 
WW.  Sign, Area of. The square feet area enclosed by the perimeter of the Sign Face. With respect to signs which are composed of individual symbols, letters, figures, illustrations, message, forms or panels, sign area shall be considered to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background on which they are displayed, any frame around the sign and any "cutouts" or extensions, but shall not include any supporting structure or bracing. 
XX.  Sign Face. The part of the sign that is or can be used to identify, advertise or communicate information or for visual representation which attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. Sign Face includes any background material, panel, trim, color and direct or self-illumination used that differentiates the sign from the building, structure, backdrop surface or object upon which or against which it is placed. The sign structure shall not be included as a portion of the Sign Face, provided that no message, symbol or any of the aforementioned Sign Face criteria are displayed on or designed as part of the sign structure. 
YY.  Sign Structure. A supporting structure erected, used or intended for the purposes of identification or attracting attention, with or without a sign thereon, situated upon or attached to the premises, upon which any sign may be fastened, affixed, displayed or applied, provided however, this definition shall not include a building, fence, wall or earthen berm. 
ZZ.  Snipe Sign. A sign which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, or fences, or to other objects, and the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the present use of the premises upon which such sign is located. 
AAA.  Swinging Sign. A sign installed on an arm, mast or spar that is not, an addition, permanently fastened to an adjacent wall or upright pole, or constructed to prevent a swinging movement. 
BBB.  Temporary Sign. Any sign or information transmitting structure intended to be erected or displayed for a limited period. 
CCC.  Time and Temperature Sign. An electrical sign utilizing lights going on and off periodically to display the current time and temperature in the community. 
DDD.  Traffic Direction/Safety Sign. A sign consisting of type and/or an arrow and is designed, sized or erected solely for the purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic direction or safety on a particular premise. 
EEE.  Vehicle Sign. A permanent or temporary sign affixed, painted on or placed in or upon any parked vehicle, trailer or other device capable of being towed, which is displayed in public view. 
FFF.  Window Sign. Any sign which is painted on, applied to, attached to or projected upon or within the exterior or interior of a building glass area, including doors, or located within fifteen (15) feet of the interior of a building glass area, including doors, whose identification, message, symbol, insignia, visual representation, logotype, or any other form which communicates information, can be read from contiguous property or public right-of-way. 
GGG.  Window Sign, Temporary. A window sign of a temporary nature used to direct attention to the sale of merchandise, or a change in the status of the business, including, but not limited to, signs for sales, specials, going out of business, and grand openings. 
Sec. 10.3. - Existing signs. 
A.  Illegal Signs. Any sign erected or existing as of the effective date of this Article which does not have a valid permit from the Board, or any sign so reclassified pursuant to § 10.3.C.1 is hereby deemed to be an illegal sign, and such sign and the person or persons responsible for such sign shall be subject to the provisions of this Article. 
B.  Legal Signs. 
1.  Any existing and permitted sign that complies with the provisions of this Article, and any subsequent amendment hereto, is hereby deemed to be a legal sign. Any proposed alteration to or relocation of such sign shall not be undertaken until a permit is issued, unless the proposed alteration is specifically exempted from such permit requirement under this Article. 
2.  Any legal sign which does not comply with the provisions of this Article solely due to the enactment of any amendment hereto subsequent to the effective date of this Article shall, upon the effective date of such amendment, becomes a nonconforming sign and subject to the provisions of § 10.3.C. 
C.  Nonconforming Signs. 
1.  Any sign erected or existing as of the effective date of this Article which has a valid permit from the County, but which does not conform to the provisions of this Article, or any sign pursuant to § 10.3.B.2, is hereby deemed to be a nonconforming sign. A nonconforming sign may be maintained only by painting or refinishing the surface of the sign face or sign structure so as to keep the appearance of the sign as it was when the prior permit was issued or the County permit tag affixed. Upon a determination by the Administrator and notice to the permittee that a nonconforming sign has become dilapidated or structurally unsound, such sign shall be moved within twenty (20) days, unless an appeal of such determination has been previously filed with the Board of Commissioners. 
2.  Any nonconforming sign may become a legal sign if; after compliance with the provisions of Section 10.6 of this Article, it is brought into conformity with the provisions of this Article. 
3.  Any nonconforming sign, (whether permanent or changeable) is considered an unnecessary and undesirable sign if for a period of six (6) months it meets one or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Requires repainting or structural repairs. 
b.  Contains no advertising message or only a message to make a contact to place an advertisement. 
c.  Has an advertising message, which is badly worn and/or dilapidated. 
The Greene County Code Enforcement Officer will notify the owner of the sign (only if the sign is registered with the County) and the property owner where the signs located, that in thirty (30) days the sign must have the above conditions(s) corrected or the sign will be removed. If the condition is not corrected or the sign removed with thirty (30) days, the County will have the sign removed at the property owner's expense. 
Sec. 10.4. - Prohibited signs. 
A.  Prohibited Signs. Except as may be hereinafter specifically permitted, it shall be unlawful after the effective date of this Article, or any amendment hereto, for any person to erect, place or use within the County, or visible from any public way or Lake Oconee, any of the following signs: 
1.  Swinging signs. 
2.  Snipe signs. 
3.  Sidewalk and sandwich signs. 
4.  Banners, pennants and balloons. 
5.  Interstate signs except as permitted by § 10.7.H. 
6.  A sign which contains any moving, flashing, animated lights, visible moving or moving parts, or giving the appearance of animation. 
7.  Roof signs. 
8.  Vehicle signs. Prohibited vehicle signs does not include personal or company vehicles, licensed and in operable condition, with company name, phone number, address, or company logo on the vehicle. 
9.  Any sign which emits a sound, odor or visible matter. 
10.  Any sign that obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exit. 
11.  Any sign and/or sign structure that obstructs the view of; may be confused with or purports to be a governmental or traffic direction/safety sign. 
12.  Any sign or sign structure, other than freestanding and vertical wall extension, which any portion extends above the parapet, building roof line or canopy against which the sign is located. 
13.  Signs using the words "stop," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that misleads, confuses or distracts a vehicle driver. 
14.  Except as otherwise provided, no sign, whether temporary or permanent, except by a public agency, is permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
15.  Signs painted on or attached to trees, fence posts, rocks, or other natural features, telephone or utility poles or painted on the roofs of buildings visible from any public thoroughfare. 
16.  Abandoned or dilapidated signs. 
17.  Any sign on or towed behind a boat, raft, aircraft or helicopter. 
18.  Signs or other advertising structures that contain obscene or indecent material; 
a.  Material is obscene if both of the following apply: 
(1)  To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, excretion; and 
(2)  The material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined as: 
(a)  Acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; 
(b)  Acts of masturbation; 
(c)  Acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; 
(d)  Acts if bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or 
(e)  Sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. 
b.  Material is indecent if the sign depicts the following parts of the human anatomy: 
(1)  Any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; 
(2)  Any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
19.  Portable signs. 
20.  Signs affixed to a private residence or dwelling or displayed upon the grounds thereof, except one (1) personal identification sign not exceeding two (2) square feet and one (1) non-illuminated "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign not exceeding six (6) square feet. 
21.  Inflatable signs. 
22.  If illuminated, contains, includes, or is illuminated by any flashing, intermittent, or moving light or lights except those giving public service information such as time, date, temperature, weather, or other similar information. 
Sec. 10.5. - Permissible signs. 
A.  Permit Required. Unless specifically exempted pursuant to this Section, no sign or sign structure shall be erected, displayed, moved, relocated, or altered, unless specifically exempted pursuant to § 10.5.C until a permit fee has been paid and a sign permit issued by the Administrator pursuant to Section 10.8 of this Article. 
B.  Signs Exempt from Permit Requirement. A permit is not required for the following types of signs, after proper notification is made to the Administrator: 
1.  An official sign or notice issued by any court, public agency or office. 
2.  A traffic directional, warning or information sign authorized by any public agency. 
3.  An ingress/egress sign that does not exceed four (4) square feet per sign face. 
4.  Any sign located within a private residential community, provided that the sign is not visible to the general public from areas outside the community. 
C.  Sign Alterations Exempt from Permit Requirements. A permit is not required to engage in sign alterations if such alterations involve only: 
1.  The changing of copy on a permitted changeable copy sign; or 
2.  The painting or refinishing of the surface of a sign face or sign structure of a permitted sign so as to keep the appearance of such sign as it existed on the date such sign received a permit tag. 
Sec. 10.6. - General sign standards. 
A.  Setback from Right-of-Way. In order to provide room for future or current sidewalks, all signs shall be required to be set back at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way. However, if a sidewalk exists or has been planned in such a manner as to make this impractical, this setback may be reduced or waived by the Administrator. Further, this setback may be increased as deemed necessary by the Administrator for the protection of the public health, safety or welfare. 
B.  Sign Illumination. 
1.  Electrical Requirements. Electrical requirements pertaining to signs shall be in accordance with all applicable codes. 
2.  If illuminated, signs shall be illuminated only by the following means: 
a.  By a white, steady stationary light of reasonable intensity directed solely at or from within the sign. 
b.  Light source(s) to illuminate signs shall be shielded from all adjacent buildings and streets and shall not be of such brightness so as to cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or auto drivers or so as to create a nuisance to adjacent property. 
C.  Material and Style. 
1.  The various parts of a sign shall be constructed of compatible materials. 
2.  All signs shall be standard geometric shapes. 
D.  Dimension and Quantity. 
1.  Area and Quantity. The area and quantity of any sign face shall conform to the following: 
a.  Major residential development consisting of more than five hundred (500) dwelling units shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign per entrance with not more than two hundred forty (240) square feet of sign face per sign, equally divided among not more than four (4) sign faces. No single sign face shall exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
b.  Secondary residential development consisting of five hundred (500) dwelling units or less, but more than three hundred (300) dwelling units, shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign per entrance with not more than one hundred sixty (160) square feet of sign face per sign equally divided among not more than four (4) sign faces. No single sign face shall exceed eighty (80) feet. 
c.  Minor residential development consisting of three hundred (300) dwelling units or less shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign per entrance with not more than eight (80) square feet of sign face per sign, equally divided among not more than four (4) sign faces. No single sign face shall exceed forty (40) square feet. 
d.  Major commercial development consisting of retail and public commercial uses, either exclusive or mixed with residential uses, which contain more than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of heated floor space open to the public shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign per entrance but no more than two (2) identification signs for the development. Said signs shall not have more than two hundred forty (240) square feet of sign face per sign, equally divided among not more than four (4) sign faces. No single sign face shall exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
e.  Secondary commercial development consisting of retail and public commercial uses, whether exclusively or mixed with residential uses, which contain one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or less, but more than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, of heated floor space open to the public shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign per entrance but no more than two (2) identification signs for the development. Said sign shall not have more than one hundred sixty (160) square feet of sign face per sign, equally divided among not more than four (4) sign faces. No single sign face shall exceed eighty (80) square feet; excepting that if the commercial use herein is mixed with residential use which exceeds five hundred (500) dwelling units, the provisions of subparagraph 1. A. shall apply to said development. 
f.  Minor commercial development consisting of retail and public commercial uses, whether exclusively or mixed with residential uses, which contain forty thousand (40,000) square feet or less, but more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, of heated floor space open to the public shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign per entrance, but no more than two (2) identification signs for the development, with not more than eighty (80) square feet of sign face per sign, equally divided among not more than four (4) sign faces. No single sign face shall exceed forty (40) square feet, excepting that if the commercial use herein is mixed with residential use which exceeds three hundred (300) dwelling units, the provisions of subparagraphs a. or b. shall apply, as the case may be. 
g.  A commercial development consisting of retail and public commercial uses which contains two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less of heated floor space open to the public shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign. Said sign shall have not more than forty (40) square feet of sign face, equally divided between not more than two (2) sign faces. If an applicant in this category shall waive the right to have a freestanding sign the applicant shall be permitted to exceed the building sign wall graphics, and window graphics limitations of § 10.7.A by fifty percent (50%). 
2.  Developments that, because of their composition, may qualify for more than one (1) of the above categories, may select the single category that provides them with the largest sign. The above categories shall not be cumulative. 
3.  Height. The maximum height of any freestanding sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet above the average elevation of the nearest public highway. The bottom edge of the sign face shall not exceed four (4) feet in height from average grade. 
4.  Width. The maximum width of the entire sign structure shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
5.  Structure Size. The size of the support structure for any freestanding sign shall not exceed the sign face by more than 100%. Unless the primary purposes of the support structure is other than sign support (i.e. fences or walls). 
Sec. 10.7. - Special sign standards. 
A.  Sign Standards (Building, Wall, Window, Freestanding). 
1.  Building and wall graphics signs shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the signable space on any one facade of a building with a maximum size of the sign limited to forty (40) square feet. 
2.  Window graphics, which otherwise comply with this Article, may be displayed, provided no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of a window may be occupied by signage. 
3.  Freestanding signs on any premises, other than those visible from the main traveled way of Interstate 20 and within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way in Greene County, Georgia, shall be spaced at a minimum two hundred (200) feet interval along each public way which views the premises. In the event that less than two hundred (200) feet of any premises is visible from any one public way, only one (1) sign shall be permitted along that public way. 
4.  Any sign shall be erected so as to not obstruct or impair driver vision at business ingress/egress points and intersections. 
B.  Temporary Signs and Standards. 
1.  Types. Temporary Signs include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  "Grand Opening," "Going-Out-Of-Business," and "Sale" signs of business and services; 
b.  Signs for work under construction; 
c.  Land subdivision or development signs; 
d.  Signs advertising the sale or lease of property upon which they are located. 
2.  Area, Height, Location. 
a.  Area. The total area of temporary signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet and twenty (20) square feet per sign face, except for real estate signs for residential property, which shall not exceed the limitations of § 10.7.C. 
b.  Height. The maximum height of temporary signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet, while the lower edge shall not exceed four (4) feet in height from the average grade. 
c.  Location. 
(1)  No temporary sign shall be located so as to obstruct or impair driver vision at business ingress/egress points and at intersections. 
(2)  No temporary sign shall be located nearer than one hundred (100) feet to any church, cemetery, public building, historic site or district, and intersection of two (2) or more public streets or highways. 
(3)  Temporary signs are not to be located any closer than one hundred (100) feet from any other sign on the same premises. 
(4)  No temporary sign is to be in the public right-of-way. 
3.  Time Limits. 
a.  "Grand Opening" Signs. Temporary "Grand Opening" signs shall be erected for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
b.  "Going-Out-Of-Business" and "Sale" Signs. "Going-Out-Of-Business" and "Sale" signs may be erected for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days for "Going-Out-Of-Business" signs and thirty (30) days for "Sale" signs. 
c.  Project Signs. Signs for work under construction may be erected upon the issuance of a final development permit on the construction site during the construction and shall be removed within seven (7) days following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
d.  Signs Announcing the Subdivision of Land. Temporary signs announcing the subdivision of land may be erected on the land being developed and shall be removed when ninety percent (90%) of the development lots are conveyed. 
e.  Display. The display of all other temporary signs not listed above shall not exceed sixty (60) days and shall not be displayed more than two (2) times per year. 
f.  Removal. Signs advertising the sale or lease of property shall be removed at the completion of the transaction advertised or for a term not to exceed six (6) months, whichever comes sooner. An extension maybe permitted. 
C.  Real Estate Signs. One (1) commercial real estate sign' not exceeding six (6) square feet in sign area per face and, if freestanding, not exceeding four (4) feet in height shall be permitted. Property with two (2) or more frontages shall be permitted one (1) additional sign per frontage. 
D.  Canopy Signs. A commercial center shall be permitted one (1) canopy sign per occupancy, not to exceed six (6) feet in length and eighteen (18) inches in height, placed entirely under a canopy or marquee directly in front of said location, identifying the occupancy. 
E.  Multiple-Use Shopping, Business, Office and Professional Centers; Freestanding Directory Signs. 
1.  Any multiple-use shopping, business, office and professional center or mall shall be allowed to have not more the two (2) freestanding directory signs for individual business, provided they meet the following requirements: 
a.  Information. Signs shall be for directory information purposes only. 
b.  Location. Either the area of the directory sign shall be contained within the limits for total signage area at said center or mall or the sign shall not be visible from any public way. 
2.  Freestanding signs on outlying parcels that do not have direct traffic access to the adjacent roadway will be permitted a sign at one-half (½) the size authorized in § 10.6.D. 
F.  Gasoline Filling Areas. 
1.  Travel Center or Truck Stop. This section shall apply to establishments that are located at an interchange of an Interstate Highway where such Interstate intersects with a State Route with at least one of the establishment's parcel boundaries adjoining the Interstate Right-of-Way and at least one of the establishment's boundaries adjoining the State Route's Right-of-Way, and such establishment includes all of the following: 
a.  A minimum of eight (8) double-sided diesel pumps. 
b.  A minimum of six (6) double-sided gas pumps. 
c.  The primary building footprint must be at least 15,000 square feet. 
d.  A convenience store, sit-down restaurant, and a fast-food restaurant must be located within the primary building. 
e.  Showers, laundry area, phone booth area, lockers, driver's lounge, and a game room must be located and available on the premises. 
f.  A minimum of parking to accommodate 150 tractor trailer trucks, 100 cars and light trucks, and 8 recreational vehicles must be available on the premises. 
2.  Signage Allowed. 
a.  FREESTANDING SIGNS. A total of three (3) freestanding business signs shall be allowed per Travel Center or Truck Stop establishment. The total aggregate area of all freestanding signs shall not exceed thirteen hundred (1,300) square feet with the maximum for any one sign not to exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet. One freestanding sign may be erected up to a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) feet. Any additional freestanding signs shall have a maximum height of seventy (70) feet. 
b.  BUILDING AND/OR WALL SIGNS. A maximum of 400 square feet of building or wall signage is allowed. No single building or wall sign shall exceed 200 square feet in aggregate area, and if one such sign is used, all other building and wall signs shall not exceed 100 square feet. There is no maximum number of building or wall signs provided the total aggregate area does not exceed the 400 square feet maximum. 
c.  ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER. This sign displays a message which scrolls across the screen to provide information related to the time, weather, public service message, and/or advertisement of products, pricing, and services. A maximum of two (2) electronic message centers are allowed provided that the total aggregate area does not exceed 320 square feet, and any single such sign shall not exceed 220 square feet. If two signs are used, one sign shall only be allowed to display fuel pricing, while the other may be used for fuel pricing, products, weather, and/or services. 
d.  OTHER. Safety, traffic movement, directional, and customer convenience signs shall be allowed at the discretion of the Building Official. The size, location, and content must be approved by the Building Official. 
3.  All Other Fuel Facilities. Any facility not meeting the criteria of a Travel Center or Truck Stop but offering the sale of fuel as a principle component of the business shall be governed by the commercial signage regulations of this Ordinance, and by (a) and (b) below: 
a.  Petroleum products pumps and dispensers which are within view of a public way shall be permitted to display only information required by law in addition to the brand name and type of product being dispensed. 
b.  Premises which dispense retail bulk petroleum products by pump shall be permitted one (1) additional sign announcing the price per gallon of no more than four (4) products, with characters not exceeding twelve (12) inches in height. In lieu of the one (1) additional sign permitted above, the price per gallon may be displayed on each individual pump structure with characters not exceeding six (6) inches in height. 
G.  Flags. 
1.  Nongovernmental flags are deemed to be signs, except when a single project flag is flown in conjunction with governmental flags and shall be subject to the provisions of this Article, except that no such flag shall exceed forty (40) square feet per face. 
2.  Governmental flags must be displayed in a dignified, noncommercial manner. No such flag shall exceed forty (40) square feet per face. 
H.  Interstate Signs. This section shall apply to all outdoor advertising signs visible from the main traveled way of Interstate 20 and within six hundred sixty (660) feet of its nearest edge of the right-of-way in Greene County, Georgia. 
1.  No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this Article and State laws, rules and regulations. 
2.  All signs located on sites adjacent to or visible from the main traveled way of Interstate 20 shall conform with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70, et seq., as amended, (the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Control Section) and shall meet all Federal and State requirements necessary to obtain a permit under said Code Section. In instances where the sign controls of this Article are stricter, these regulations shall apply. 
3.  Interstate signs shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Uniform Size. The outside measurements of all such signs shall be fourteen (14) feet in height and forty-eight (48) feet in length, with or without trim. 
b.  Height. No sign shall be erected which exceeds seventy (70) feet above the natural ground or the main traveled way of the roadway, whichever is the least restrictive, as measured from the highest part or portion of the sign structure. 
c.  Extrusions Prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
d.  Spacing. Sign locations shall be no less than five hundred (500) feet apart, as measured from the two (2) closest points. 
e.  Allow six (6) outdoor advertising signs per interchange adjacent to the Interstate highway, a maximum of three signs per direction of travel. These signs must be within an area zoned B-2 and restricted to an area twelve hundred (1,200) feet long, beginning five hundred (500) feet from the furthest point where the pavement widens or ceases to widen on the main traveled way at entrances to or exits from the main traveled way. 
f.  The minimum lot size for the construction of an interstate sign is 150 feet by 150 feet. 
Sec. 10.8. - Administration. 
A.  Application for Permit. 
1.  Where to apply. Applications for a sign permit shall be submitted to the Building Inspector. 
2.  Information Required. The following information shall be submitted with an application for a sign permit: 
a.  Name, address, telephone number and signature of the owner or duly authorized lessee of the premises granting permission for the construction, operation, maintenance, or displaying of sign or sign structure. 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of Greene County contractor, if any, including such contractor's Greene County business license number. 
c.  Legal description and/or street address of premises or property upon which the sign is to be located. 
d.  The approximate value of the sign to be installed, including the installation cost. 
e.  Type of sign for which a permit is being sought. 
f.  Three (3) copies of a sketch, blueprint, blue line print or similar presentation drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing elevations of the sign as proposed on a building facade, awning or canopy; provided, further, the relationship to other existing adjacent signs shall also be shown. In the case of a freestanding sign' said sketch shall include a site plan showing the sign location and any existing or proposed landscaping which is affected by such sign. 
g.  If requested by the Building Inspector, copy of stress sheets and calculations indicating that the sign is properly designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction. 
h.  If applicable, the appropriate Greene County development permit number. 
i.  If applicable, evidence of approval by an appropriate architectural review board or other applicable governing agency. 
j.  Such other information as the Building Inspector may require which is necessary to verify full compliance with all applicable provisions contained in the Code of Greene County, Georgia. 
B.  Freestanding Signs: Location Identification. The proposed location for a new freestanding sign shall be clearly identified by a white stake(s) visible above the ground line at each location at which a support pole will be embedded in the ground. This location will be reviewed by the Building Inspector prior to the issuance of the sign permit. 
C.  Fees. 
1.  Regular Fees. In order to defray some of the administrative costs associated with processing permit applications and inspections of signs, at the time of submission of an application for a sign permit, a non-refundable fee shall be paid. When application for a permit is approved, and before a permit is issued, a permit fee shall be paid based on the fee schedule maintained by the Zoning Administrator. 
2.  Re-inspection Fee. When re-inspection is required, a re-inspection fee shall be charged. 
3.  Penalty Fee. A double fee will be charged for sign(s) posted without prior permit. 
D.  Contents of Permit. Upon compliance with the provisions of this Article, the Building Inspector shall make a decision to issue, deny or issue with conditions a permit for such sign or sign structure within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a complete permit application. Permits shall be numbered and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The type of sign as defined in this Article; 
2.  The street address of the property upon which said sign is proposed to be located and the proposed location of the sign on said property; in the absence of a street address, an acceptable method of location shall be used; 
3.  The amount of the fee paid for such permit; 
4.  The date of issuance; and 
5.  In the case of a temporary sign, the date of expiration of the permit. 
E.  Expiration of Permit. A sign permit shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of its issuance as noted on the permit. Unless a thirty (30) day extension is granted for good cause by the Building Inspector, failure to erect or complete the otherwise approved work related to the permitted sign within such ninety (90) day period shall result in the expiration of such permit. 
F.  Sign Inspection. 
1.  Within ten (10) working days of completion of approved work related to a permitted sign, the permittee or sign contractor shall notify the Building Inspector that such sign is ready for a final inspection. The Building Inspector conducts the final inspection for the purpose of verifying that the sign is in compliance with the requirements of the permit and all other provisions of this Article. 
2.  Failure to notify the Building Inspector within ten (10) working days of work completion that the sign is ready for inspection shall result in the requirement of an additional fee. 
3.  Failure to obtain a satisfactory inspection result shall render the permit invalid and the applicant shall be required to reapply for a permit or remove the sign or sign structure. 
G.  Display of Permit. 
1.  Display of Permit Tag. Following completion of a satisfactory final inspection, the Building Inspector shall issue and affix a permit tag to the sign. 
2.  Relocation of permit Tag or Sign. Under no circumstances may the permit tag be moved from one sign to another, nor may the sign to which it is attached be relocated to another location. 
3.  Transfer of Ownership: Dismantling or Removal of Sign. In the case of ownership transfer, provided no changes are made to the sign, or, if a permitted sign is dismantled or removed, the Administrator shall be notified. 
4.  Lost or Illegible Permit Tag. If a permit tag is lost, defaced, destroyed or otherwise becomes illegible through normal wear or an act of vandalism, a renewal application shall be submitted to the Building Inspector. 
Sec. 10.9. - Enforcement. 
A.  Violation Notice. The Building Inspector and duly authorized staff shall have the authority to issue a sign violation notice and shall be empowered to enter upon the premises of any person subject to this Article for the purposes of enforcing the provisions herein. 
B.  Violation Sticker. When a sign requiring a permit under the terms of this Article is erected without a sign permit, the Building Inspector and his/her staff shall use the following procedure: 
1.  Violation Sticker. The inspector shall attach a highly visible sticker of at least forty (40) square inches reading "VIOLATION" to the face of the sign. The sticker shall include the date that is was attached to the sign and instructions to call the Building Inspector to obtain a permit application for the sign. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the Building Inspector or his/her designee to remove the sign violation sticker attached to the sign. 
2.  Failure to Obtain Permit. Within fourteen (14) days of attachment of the violation sticker, the owner of the sign shall bring the sign into conformity with this Article or submit a completed application for a permit for the sign. lf the application for a sign is not submitted on time or if the application is denied, or if the sign is not brought into conformity with this Article in a timely manner, the Building Inspector shall have the sign removed and impounded without any further notice, unless the Building Inspector files a written statement with the County Manager stating why removal and impoundment will be deferred. 
C.  Impoundment of Signs. 
1.  The Building Inspector and his/her staff shall have the authority to remove all non-permitted signs placed within any street or highway right-of-way, signs attached to trees, fence posts, telephone and utility poles, other natural features, or signs otherwise prohibited by this Article, and to impound them without notice to the owner. 
2.  The owner of an impounded sign may recover same upon the payment of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each sign' within ten (10) days of impoundment. In the event an impounded sign is not claimed within ten (10) days, the Building Inspector shall have authority to dispose of such sign. 
D.  Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this Article, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall forfeit and pay such penalties as the court may decide, not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) or thirty (30) days imprisonment, or both, at the discretion of the court for each violation. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 10.10. - Appeals and variances. 
A.  Appeal. Please see Section 15.7. 
B.  Variance. Recognizing that the strict application of the requirements of this Article may work an undue hardship on certain applicants, variances from the strict application of the provisions of this Chapter may be granted by the Board of Commissioners. Each application for a variance under this Section shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for the request for a variance in accordance with rules and fee schedules established by the Board of Commissioners. The application shall be signed by the applicant and the sign company, if any, responsible for the sign for which the variance is being sought. The Board of Commissioners shall grant the variance, grant the variance with conditions, or deny the application within sixty (60) days after the appeal is filed. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Board may appeal as provided by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 10.11. - Interpretation and conflict. 
A.  Minimum Requirements. The standards and provisions of this Article shall be interpreted as being the minimum requirements necessary to uphold the purposes of this Article. 
B.  Other County Requirements. Whenever this Article imposes a higher standard than required by any other County ordinance or requirement, the provisions of this Article shall govern. Whenever any other County ordinance or requirement imposes a higher standard than required by this Article, the provisions of such Ordinance or requirement shall govern. 
C.  Private Restrictions. Whenever this Article imposes a higher standard than required by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this Article shall govern. 
D.  Statutes. When the provisions of any applicable state or federal statute impose a higher standard than required by this Article, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
ARTICLE XI. - CONDITIONAL USES AND VARIANCES 

Sec. 11.1. - Conditional use and variance procedures. 
The property owner or its authorized agent may initiate an application for a conditional use permit and a variance. When an agent is authorized to act on behalf of an owner, such certificate of authorization shall be notarized on the application. All petitions for conditional use or variance approval shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least 20 days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Commission Meeting on application forms supplied by the Zoning Administrator along with a fee as determined by the Board of Commissioners. Incomplete applications will not be placed on the agenda. Applications for conditional uses or variance must be accompanied by the following information: 
Sec. 11.2. - Conditional use. 
11.2.1  Three (3) copies of a written description of the proposal designed to inform the County, in detail, about all aspects of the proposed use and its anticipated impact on the community. The description should include, when pertinent, information on the hours of operation, number of employees, number of dwelling units, vehicle trip ends, noise, water usage, sanitary waste treatment and any other relevant concerns identified by the County or applicant. 
11.2.2  Three (3) copies of preliminary building and site plans drawn to scale showing the following information: 
11.2.2.1  Three (3) copies of surveyed plat signed by a registered surveyor. 
11.2.2.2  Project name. 
11.2.2.3  Project owner. 
11.2.2.4  Date, scale, and north arrow. 
11.2.2.5  Vicinity map. 
11.2.2.6  Use of adjacent property. 
11.2.2.7  Exterior dimensions of the site. 
11.2.2.8  Total project acreage. 
11.2.2.9  Location, name and width of all existing or proposed streets. 
11.2.2.10  Location of all proposed structures. 
11.2.2.11  Location of all off-street parking and driveway serving the project. 
11.2.2.12  Proposed buffers and/or screening. 
11.2.2.13  Location, height, fixture type and wattage of site lighting. 
11.2.2.14  Dumpster locations. 
11.2.2.15  Rough floor plans, including gross floor area. 
Sec. 11.3. - Variance. 
11.3.1  Three (3) copies of building and/or site plans drawn to scale showing the following information: 
11.3.1.1  Property owner. 
11.3.1.2  Date, scale and north arrow. 
11.3.1.3  Use of adjacent property. 
11.3.1.4  Exterior dimensions of the site. 
11.3.1.5  Proposed buffers or screening. 
11.3.1.6  Exact dimensions of the requested variance with result indicated on the plat. 
11.3.1.7  Correspondence from affected adjacent property owners stating their approval is recommended. 
11.3.1.8  Building height. 
11.3.1.9  The submittal of inaccurate or incomplete information may be cause for denial of the request, or, if said discrepancies are realized after approval of the petition or issuance of the relevant local permits, cause for the revocation of the approval and any related permits by the Board of Commissioners. 
Sec. 11.4. - Procedures. 
11.4.1  The Zoning Administrator shall prepare information regarding the petition for consideration by the Planning Commission at its regularly scheduled meeting. 
11.4.2  The Planning Commission shall hold one public hearing on the proposed use in accordance with the hearing provisions governing zoning amendment set forth in Article XIII at Section 13.3.9 and 13.3.10. The Planning Commission shall then review the report and conduct a comprehensive review of the proposed use and forward a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners. Said recommendation may be to approve, approve with condition, or deny the request. 
11.4.2.1  Not less than (15) days, and not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing, the Zoning Administrator shall advertise the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Greene County. The notice shall also include the location of the property, the conditional use sought if the petition seeks a conditional use and the nature of the variance sought if the petition seeks a variance. 
11.4.3  The Board of Commissioners shall issue its findings within forty (40) days of the receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation. The Board of Commissioners may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request. The county clerk shall notify the applicant by regular U.S. mail of any action (including tabling of action) taken by the Board of Commissioners. All actions of the Board of Commissioners shall be deemed to be effective as of the date of the action. 
11.4.4  In determining the compatibility of a conditional use with adjacent properties and the overall community, the Board of Commissioners must make the following findings if the use is to be approved or approved with conditions: 
11.4.4.1  Adequate provision is made by the applicant to reduce any adverse environmental impacts of the proposed use to an acceptable level; 
11.4.4.2  Vehicular traffic and pedestrian movement on adjacent streets will not be substantially hindered or endangered; 
11.4.4.3  Off-street parking and loading, and the entrance to and exit from such parking and loading, will be adequate in terms of location, amount and design to service the use; 
11.4.4.4  Public facilities and utilities are capable of adequately serving the proposed use; 
11.4.4.5  Granting the request would not be an illogical extension of a use which would intrude a damaging volume of agricultural, commercial, industrial, or high density apartment use into a stable neighborhood of well-maintained single-family homes, and likely lead to decreasing surrounding property values, neighborhood deterioration, spreading of blight, and additional requests of a similar nature which would expand the problem; 
11.4.4.6  Granting the request would not lead to congestion, noise and traffic hazards or overload public facilities current or planned; 
11.4.4.7  Granting this request would conform to the general expectations for the area population growth and distribution according to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan; 
11.4.4.8  Granting this request would not lead to a major negative change in existing levels of public service, government employees or fiscal stability; and 
11.4.4.9  Granting this request would not have a "domino effect," in that it becomes the opening wedge for further rapid growth, urbanization or other land-use change beyond what is indicated in the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
11.4.4.10  A variance may be authorized for specific individual cases where the literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship as long as the variance, if granted, is not contrary to the public interest, and public safety and welfare remain secured. 
Variances may be granted in such individual cases of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship only upon a finding by the Planning and Zoning Board that all of the following conditions exist: 
11.4.4.10.1  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
11.4.4.10.2  The application of this ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
11.4.4.10.3  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this ordinance; and 
11.4.4.10.4  The special circumstances surrounding the request for a variance are not the result of known acts by the applicant. 
11.4.4.11  Unless otherwise noted, the site plan submitted in support of an approved conditional use or variance shall be considered part of the approval and must be followed. 
Approval of a proposed use by the County Commission does not constitute an approval for future expansion of or additions or changes to the initially approved operation. Any future phases or changes that are considered significant by the County Zoning Administrator and not included in the original approval are subject to the provisions of this Article and the review of new detailed plans and reports for said alterations by the governing authority. The applicant for a conditional use must obtain a construction and building permit, if applicable, within one year. The County Building Official may approve two separate one year extensions. At the end of three years, the conditional use permit will expire and the applicant must reapply. 
11.4.4.12  Building permits will not be issued without verification of the variance being recorded. The variance plat must be recorded within 30 days of the date of approval by the Board of Commissioners. 
ARTICLE XII - ZONING ADMINISTRATION ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 12.1. - Zoning administrator. 
The Zoning Administrator of Greene County, Georgia, and other persons designated by the Board of Commissioners, are hereby given the authority and responsibility to act as the Code Enforcement Officer for Greene County, Georgia, and to administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator does not have the authority to take final action on applications or matters involving variances, non-conforming uses, or other exceptions which this Ordinance has reserved for public hearings. The Zoning Administrator shall keep records of all and any permits, the Certificates of Occupancy issued, and all submitted subdivision plats, with notations of all special conditions involved. The Zoning Administrator shall file and safely keep copies of all sketches and plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of Zoning Administrator's office and shall be made as public records. 
Sec. 12.2. - Building permits. 
It shall be unlawful for any building to be structurally altered and/or any building to be located, erected, moved, or added to without obtaining a Building Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. No Building Permit shall be issued except in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the adopted standard building code. This does not include repair and maintenance of an existing building. 
Sec. 12.3. - Application for permits. 
12.3.1  An application shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of a dimensional sketch or a to-schedule plan, signed by the owner, or his authorized agent, to include, as a minimum, the following: 
12.3.1.1  Lot dimensions with property line monuments located thereon; 
12.3.1.2  Shape, size, height, and location of the buildings proposed to be erected, demolished, altered, or moved, and of any buildings already on the lot, yard dimensions and use of structures, including the number of dwelling units within each structure where appropriate; 
12.3.1.3  Easements (private and public); 
12.3.1.4  Water courses; 
12.3.1.5  Fences; 
12.3.1.6  Street names and street right-of-way lines; and 
12.3.1.7  Such other information regarding abutting property as directly affects the application. 
12.3.1.8  Current erosion and sedimentation requirements set by state law and county ordinances. 
12.3.2  Each permit shall be conspicuously posted and displayed on the premises described during the period of construction or reconstruction. 
12.3.2.1  If the proposed excavation, filling, construction, or movement set forth in said sketch or plan are in conformity with the provision of this Ordinance, and other appropriate codes and ordinances of Greene County then in effect, the Zoning Administrator shall sign and return one (1) copy of the sketch plan to the applicant and shall issue a Building Permit. The Zoning Administrator shall retain one (1) copy of the Building Permit and one (1) copy of the sketch or plan for his records. 
12.3.2.2  If the sketch or plan submitted describes work which does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall not issue a Building Permit but shall return one (1) copy of the sketch of plan to the applicant along with a signed refusal and shall cite the portions of these Ordinances with which the submitted sketch plan does not comply. The Zoning Administrator shall retain one (1) copy of the sketch plan and two (2) copies of the refusal. 
12.3.2.3  Any Building Permit shall automatically expire six (6) months from the date of issuance if the person, firm, or corporation to which the certificate or permit was issued has not clearly demonstrated that the permit is being exercised for the purpose for which it was issued, or if the work so authorized is suspended or discontinued for a period of one (1) year. 
Sec. 12.4. - Issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
The Zoning Administrator shall sign and issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the proposed use of land or buildings, as stated on the application for such certificate and signed thereto by the owner or his appointed agent, is found to conform to the applicable provisions or this Ordinance and if the Building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan submitted for the Building Permit. 
Sec. 12.5. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of the Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished for each offense according to law. Each day such a violation continues shall be considered as a separate offense. 
Sec. 12.6. - Remedies. 
In the event any building is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator of Greene County, Georgia, is authorized and required to institute injunction, mandamus, warrant for arrest, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate the violation in the case of each building or land use. The Zoning Administrator is the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Any person who would be damaged by such violation may also institute action to prevent or abate the violation. 
Sec. 12.7. - Developments of Regional Impact (DRI). 
The Georgia Planning Act of 1989 authorized the Department of Community Affairs to establish procedures for regional review of development projects that are of sufficient size that they are likely to create impacts beyond the jurisdiction in which the project will be located. The DRI review process involves the host local government, the reviewing Regional Development Center (RDC), and other potentially affected local governments, RDC's and agencies. 
Thresholds are used to determine whether a proposed development is a DRI. Because positive and negative impacts of DRI's are not necessarily confined to the host local governments' jurisdictional boundaries, impacts on other jurisdictions need to be assessed. 
If a development project is submitted to the Greene County Planning Commission or the Board of Commissioners for review, then the time deadlines imposed in Article XV are suspended until the DRI review process is completed. 
ARTICLE XIII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 13.1. - Authority. 
The Board of Commissioners may from time to time amend the boundaries of the districts established on the Official Zoning Map of Greene County and/or the ordinances set forth in this Ordinance. 
Any proposed amendment to the boundaries of the districts shall first be submitted to Planning Commission for its recommendation. The Planning Commission has thirty (30) days following the public hearing within which to submit its report. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within the thirty (30) day period, it is deemed to have recommended approval of the proposed amendments. 
Sec. 13.2. - Application for amendment to the official zoning map. 
An application for amendment must be filed with the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30)) days prior the Planning Commission meeting at which the request will be heard. The Planning Commission, the Board of Commissioners, a property owner, or the authorized agent of a property owner may initiate an application to amend the official zoning map (rezone property). When an agent is authorized to act on behalf of an owner, such certificate of authorization shall be notarized on the application. An application for amendment must contain the following information: 
13.2.1  A survey of the property prepared by a licensed surveyor showing existing and proposed structures and uses, access drives, easements, utilities, buffers, existing zoning, and any other supporting documentation required by the Zoning Administrator to assist the Board of Commissioners in rendering a decision, including concept plans; 
13.2.2  A list of adjoining property owners as shown on the tax rolls; 
13.2.3  Any additional information the application or the Zoning Administrator believes to be pertinent. 
13.2.4  Additionally, the applicant, if other than the Board of Commissioners, must pay the required application fee to cover the administrative and adverting costs of the application and sign a statement certifying he/she has at least a fifty-one percent (51%) ownership interest in the property. 
13.2.5  Once the application is submitted it cannot be amended. Incomplete applications will not be processed. 
13.2.6  The Zoning Administrator shall present the application and all its supporting documents, along with a written analysis of the requested zoning's impact, to the Planning Commission prior to the public hearing on the application. The written analysis shall show that the Zoning Administrator has considered the proposed change in relation to the following, where applicable. 
13.2.6.1  What is the existing land use pattern in the area? 
13.2.6.2  Would approval create an isolated district designation unrelated to adjacent and nearby district designations? 
13.2.6.3  Would approval significantly increase or possibly overtax available infrastructure including, but not limited to schools, streets, and public safety services? 
13.2.6.4  Are the existing boundaries illogically drawn in relation to existing conditions on the property proposed for change? 
13.2.6.5  Would changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed amendment necessary? 
13.2.6.6  Will the proposed change adversely influence living conditions in the neighborhood? 
13.2.6.7  Will the proposed change create or excessively increase traffic congestion or otherwise affect public safety? 
13.2.6.8  Will the proposed change seriously reduce light and air to adjacent areas? 
13.2.6.9  Will the proposed change adversely affect property values in the adjacent area? 
13.2.6.10  Will the proposed change be a deterrent to the improvement or development adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations? 
13.2.6.11  Will the proposed change constitute a grant of special privilege to an individual owner as contrasted with the public welfare? 
13.2.6.12  Are the substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with its existing zoning? 
13.2.6.13  Is the proposed change out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or the county? 
13.2.6.14  To what extent is the proposed change consistent with the county's Comprehensive Plan? 
13.2.6.15  What other factors, if any, should be considered in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety morality or general welfare against the right to unrestricted use of the property? 
Sec. 13.3. - Public hearings, procedures, and rezoning standards. 
13.3.1  Public Hearing Required. Before enacting an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, one (1) public hearing must be held. 
13.3.2  Applicant Notification. The Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of the required public hearing. 
13.3.3  Publication of Notice. Not less than fifteen (15) days, and not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing, the Zoning Administrator Inspector shall advertise the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Greene County. The notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning of the property. 
13.3.4  Sign. In addition to the newspaper notice, the Zoning Administrator shall cause to have posted at least one (1) sign in a conspicuous place on the lot or parcel to be rezoned. The sign shall be posted not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the Planning Commission public hearing. The sign shall include the application number, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
13.3.5  Notice to Adjacent Property Owners. At least fifteen (15) but not more that forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing, the Zoning Administrator may, in his discretion, notify all owners of property lying within a radius of 300 foot radius of the property that is subject of the zoning amendment application. If the Zoning Administrator exercises his discretion, the notice contemplated herein shall be in writing and forwarded via regular U.S. Mail to the address on file with the Greene County Tax Commissioner's Office. The failure to notify as contemplated herein shall not invalidate any rezoning adopted hereunder. 
13.3.6  Planning Commission Action. A public hearing is scheduled by the Zoning Administrator. The Planning Commission may recommend that the application be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification of the zoning amendment requested in the application, or it may recommend that the application not be granted. The Planning Commission must transmit its recommendation to the Board of Commissioners within thirty (30) days. If the Planning Commission fails to submit its recommendations within the thirty (30) day period, it is deemed to have recommended approval of the proposed amendment. 
The Planning Commission must investigate each zoning application and make its recommendations(s) to the Board of Commissioners. Such recommendations(s) shall become part of the official public record relating to the application. 
13.3.6.1  Withdrawal. If an application for an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance or Official Zoning Map is withdrawn in writing by the applicant at any time after the publication of the newspaper notice and posting of the required sign, but prior to the public hearing, then the same property may not be considered for zoning by the Planning Commission until the expiration of at least sixty (60) days immediately following the withdrawal of the rezoning application. The withdrawal must be in writing and signed by the applicant. 
The application will be considered to have been withdrawn if the applicant, his/her authorized agent or his/her attorney fails to appear at the Planning Commission hearing. By withdrawing in this manner, the same property may not be considered for rezoning by the Planning Commission until the expiration of at least sixty (60) days from the date of the scheduled public hearing for which the applicant failed to appear. 
13.3.7  Board of Commissioners Action. The Board of Commissioners shall review the record prepared by the Planning Commission and vote on the proposed amendment to the zoning map. The Board of Commissioners may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. If the Board of Commissioners fails to act on the application within thirty (30) days of its submission to the Board, the application is deemed to have been approved. 
13.3.7.1  Denial. If the Official Comprehensive Zoning Map amendment is denied by the Board of Commissioners, then the same property may not be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least one (1) year immediately following the denial of the rezoning by the Board of Commissioners. 
13.3.7.2  Notice. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of any action (including tabling of action) taken by the Board of Commissioners. All actions of the Board of Commissioners shall be deemed to be effective as of the date of the action. 
13.3.8  Zoning Amendment Criteria. In the adoption of an amendment to the official Zoning Map, the Board of Commissioners shall consider factors relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morals or general welfare against the right of the individual to the unrestricted use of property and must specifically consider the following factors as they may be relevant to the application: 
13.3.8.1  The existing land use pattern; 
13.3.8.2  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
13.3.8.3  The population density pattern and possible increase or over-taxing of the load on public facilities including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and streets; 
13.3.8.4  The cost of the County and other governmental entities in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and other public safety measures; 
13.3.8.5  The possible impact on the environment, including but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality and water quality; 
13.3.8.6  Whether the proposed zoning map amendment will be a deterrent to the value or improvement or development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations; 
13.3.8.7  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing regulations; 
13.3.8.8  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area; 
13.3.8.9  The extent to which the proposed zoning map amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
13.3.8.10  The possible effect of the proposed zoning map amendment on the character of a zoning district, a particular piece of property, neighborhood, a particular area, or the community; 
13.3.8.11  The relation that the proposed zoning map amendment bears to the purpose of the overall zoning scheme, with due consideration given to whether or not the proposed change will help carry out the purposes of these zoning regulations; 
13.3.8.12  The consideration of the preservation of the integrity of residential neighborhoods shall be considered to carry great weight; 
13.3.8.13  In those instances in which property fronts on a major thoroughfare and also adjoins an established residential neighborhood, the factor of preservation of the residential area shall be considered to carry great weight. 
After hearing evidence at the zoning hearing, the Planning Commission shall apply the evidence of the zoning amendment criteria in making their decision. It will not be required that the Planning Commission consider every criteria contained in the Standards of Review. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that the proposed zoning map amendment promotes the public health safety, morality or general welfare. 
13.3.9  Procedure for Conducting a Public Hearing for a Zoning Map Amendment and Petitions filed under Article XI. All public hearings held pursuant to this ordinance shall be conducted as follows: 
13.3.9.1  The presiding officer shall allow the Zoning Administrator to present an overview of the application. Following this presentation, the applicant or the applicant agent or attorney shall be allowed to present the applicant's case and then shall be afforded an opportunity, prior to the closing of the public hearing, to answer questions and respond to objections of others in attendance. There is a minimum of ten (10) minutes for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion by proponents of each zoning decision and a minimum of ten (10) minutes for presentation by opponents of each proposed zoning decision. 
13.3.9.2  Others desiring to speak or make a statement shall be given reasonable opportunity to do so but must first be recognized by the presiding officer. Upon rising to speak, the person recognized will state his/her name. The presiding officer may also request that the person furnish a home or business street address, as may be appropriate. The person speaking will be allowed two (2) minutes to express opinions and make points on each separate element of the proposed revision which they wish to address, with a maximum to ten (10) minutes allowed per person. 
13.3.9.3  Groups, affiliations, and associations shall designate a spokesperson who shall speak for the group. The spokesperson will be allowed a total of thirty (30) minutes to express opinions and make points on the proposed revisions. 
13.3.9.4  Both proponents and opponents of the matter under consideration shall be given comparable time and opportunity by the presiding officer to speak. 
13.3.9.4.1  All materials which proponents desire to be considered shall be submitted by the close of the presentation of the proponents' case. Notwithstanding the foregoing, applicant or his agent(s) can present materials which are clearly for rebuttal purposes if time for rebuttal was reserved. 
13.3.9.4.2  All materials or evidence which persons in opposition wish to be considered must be submitted by the conclusion of the opposition portion of the hearing. 
13.3.9.4.3  When proponents and opponents of the application have been heard in accordance with the foregoing procedures, the public hearing is closed and no further evidence or testimony may be presented unless either the record is left open based on a request for additional material or report, or questions are asked of the applicant or opposition in which case both sides shall be entitled to response but there is no right of rebuttal. 
13.3.9.5  Questions shall be directed only to the presiding officer who shall respond or designate another person for the response. 
The presiding officer may limit or terminate the discussion, statements or comments because of time, repetitiveness or irrelevancy. 
After all discussion concerning the zoning application is concluded, the presiding officer shall close the public hearing for that particular zoning application, and shall address each zoning criteria listed in § 13.3.8. The rationale as well as the determination for each standard will be duly recorded in the minutes. 
13.3.10  Meeting Format. 
13.3.10.1  Minutes of the meeting will be taken by the Planning Commission Secretary. Should a complete transcript of the meeting be requested it will be provided at the expense of the person making the request. 
13.3.10.2  Following is an outline of how the meeting will be held: 
1.  Hearing called to order. 
2.  Proposal summarized. 
3.  Applicant or proponent states his case. 
4.  Persons in favor testify. 
5.  Persons against testify. 
6.  Hearing closed. 
7.  Recommendations submitted by Planning Board to official body. 
Sec. 13.4. - Evaluation criteria. 
The same criteria shall be used to evaluate and determine if changes proposed by the Board of Commissioners and/or the Planning Commission are to be recommended. 
Sec. 13.5. - Publication of standards. 
The above criteria shall be available to the public to aid in the preparation for a change in the Zoning Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map of Greene County, Georgia. 
Sec. 13.6. - Reversion to previous zoning classification. 
Within three years of the date the Board of Commissioners approves a rezoning of property, rezoned property shall be utilized for uses allowed in the new zoning district or substantial development shall be demonstrated toward such utilization. Failure to so utilize or demonstrate substantial development may subject the property to consideration for reversion to the previous zoning classification. In such event, public hearings shall follow the established procedures for application for zoning herein and a final decision shall be rendered by the Board of Commissioners. 
Sec. 13.7. - Amendments to the zoning ordinance. 
13.7.1  Intent. The purpose of this Section is to describe and establish procedures for making textual changes to this Code (i.e., amending the text of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or the adoption of a new zoning ordinance), which are hereinafter collectively referred to as "legislative changes." Legislative changes require approval by the Board of Commissioners in order to be implemented. 
13.7.2  Initiation of Legislative Changes. Proposed legislative changes may be initiated by the Planning Commission, the Board of Commissioners, the County Manager or by a member of the general public (not including employees of the county). 
13.7.3  Public hearings relating to legislative changes. 
a.  Prior to a final decision by the Board of Commissioners which results in legislative changes, one public hearing shall be held before the Board of Commissioners pursuant to "The Zoning Procedures Law." 
b.  The public hearing relating to proposed legislative changes shall be held by the Planning Commission. 
c.  Public hearings on proposed legislative changes shall be conducted with 15 minutes provided for the proponents and 15 minutes provided for the opponents of the proposed legislative action. If necessary, the Chairman may allocate an equal amount of additional minutes for both the proponents and the opponents. 
d.  All materials which proponents desire to be considered shall be submitted by the conclusion of the proponent portion of the public hearing. 
e.  All materials or evidence which persons in opposition wish to be considered must be submitted by the conclusion of the opposition portion of the hearing. 
f.  When proponents and opponents of the proposed legislative changes have been heard in accordance with the foregoing procedures, the public hearing is closed and no further evidence, argument or testimony may be presented unless the record is left open based on a request for additional material or report. 
g.  The proposed legislative change shall be evaluated by considering the necessity and reasonableness of the particular legislative proposal. 
13.7.4  Publication of Notice. Not less than fifteen (15) days, and not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing, the Zoning Administrator shall advertise the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Greene County. 
ARTICLE XIV. - DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14.1. - Disclosure of financial interests. 
A county official who knows or reasonably should know him or her: 
a.  Has a property interest in any real property affected by a rezoning action upon which that official's local government will have the duty to consider or, 
b.  Has a financial interest in any business entity which has a property interest in any real property affected by a rezoning action which that official's local government will have the duty to consider; or 
c.  Has a member of the family having any interest described in paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the Board of Commissioners. 
The county official who has an interest as defined in paragraph (a), (b), or (c) of Section 14.1 of this ordinance, shall disqualify himself from voting on the rezoning action. The disqualified county official shall not take any other action on behalf of himself or any other person to influence action on the application for rezoning. Disclosures provided for in the section shall be a public record and available for public inspection at any time during normal working hours. 
Sec. 14.2. - Disclosure of campaign contributions. 
14.2.1  When any applicant for zoning action has made, within two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the applicant's application for the rezoning action, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official who will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the applicant to file a disclosure report with the Board of Commissioners showing: 
14.2.1.1  The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
14.2.1.2  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the city official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each such contribution. 
14.2.2  When any opponent of a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the rezoning action being opposed, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official which will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the opponent to file a disclosure with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
14.2.2.1  The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
14.2.2.2  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the opponent to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each such contribution. 
14.2.3  Any disclosure required by §14.2 shall be filed at least five (5) calendar days prior to the first hearing by the local government or any of its agencies on the rezoning application. 
14.2.4  Any person knowingly failing to comply with the disclosure requirements or violating the provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
ARTICLE XV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 15.1. - Conflict with other laws. 
When the provisions of this Ordinance specify more restrictive standards than required by any other statute, the requirements of this Ordinance shall govern. Whenever, the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
Sec. 15.2. - Severability. 
Should any section or part of a section or any provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Sec. 15.3. - Repeal of conflict in ordinances. 
All Ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed. 
Sec. 15.4. - Incorporation by reference of maps. 
The official district zoning maps and atlas of maps of Greene County, Georgia, are by reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
Sec. 15.5. - Copies. 
This zoning ordinance of Greene County, Georgia shall be and is hereby executed in triplicate, each signed copy being an original to be marked and distributed as follows: 
15.5.1  Planning Commission Copy. Delivered to the Greene County Planning Commission chair and maintained in that office. 
15.5.2  County Work Copy. Shall be maintained in the Zoning Administrator's office for day to day use in zoning and planning. 
15.5.3  Minute Book Original. Shall be incorporated into the minutes of the meeting of the Board of Commissioners of Greene County and maintained by the County Clerk. The Minute Book original shall hereafter be deemed the original or official copy. Any subsequent amendment shall be made only by official action as prescribed herein. The original shall not be altered but amendments shall be identified on separate sheets each separately numbered and supported by the date and official action ordinance amendment in which the change was approved. In the case of a comprehensive amendment to the zoning ordinance, a copy of all proposed changes may be incorporated into one (1) document. Since a comprehensive amendment may incorporate substantial material changes as well as insignificant technical changes, all substantial material changes must be made available to the public separate from the complete zoning ordinance and clearly identifiable. Substantial changes must be approved individually by the Board of Commissioners. 
Sec. 15.6. - Enforcement. 
If the Zoning Administrator determines that any person is in violation of this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall issue an order requiring the owner to cease and desist and/or to comply with this ordinance including orders requiring restoration of pre-existing conditions and orders requiring restitution to the county by means that are deemed appropriate by the county. In addition, the county may bring a civil action for enforcement and may seek equitable and injunctive relief under this ordinance. 
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be punished by imprisonment of not more than 6 months or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, for the first offense and by imprisonment of not more than one (1) year or by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or both for each subsequent offense. Additionally, any violation of any provision of this ordinance of failure to comply with any of its requirement shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any and all permits. 
Sec. 15.7. - Appeals. 
15.7.1  Appeal from the Zoning Administrator. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of Greene County Zoning Administrator shall have the right of appeal to Greene County Board of Commissioners if such appeal is filed with the Clerk of the Greene County Board of Commissioner within thirty (30) days of the rendering of the decision. 
15.7.2  Appeal from Board of Commissioners. Any party aggrieved by any decision of the Greene County Board of Commissioners may seek review of such decision by a Court of Record, as provided by law. 
Sec. 15.8. - Effective date. 
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1998 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1998 Code, as updated through November 17, 2009, which are included herein. Sections of the 1998 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1998 Code, as updated through November 17, 2009, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1998 Code, as updated. This tables contains some ordinances which precede November 17, 2009, but which were never included in the 1998 Code, as updated, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since November 17, 2009, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within these Local Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 