CODE OF ORDINANCES LAURENS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2016 by Order of the Board of County Commissioners 
____________ 

PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Laurens County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1994 Code, as supplemented through September 3, 1996, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of county commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1994 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Senior Code Attorney, and Kellyn Wilcox, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Bryan Rogers, County Manager, and Billy Kight, County Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Laurens County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Laurens County, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Laurens County, Georgia. 2016. 
PART I - LOCAL ACTS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are acts of the general assembly relating to the board of commissioners of the county which have been enacted since 1960. Legislation enacted prior to that year which may not have been specifically repealed has been omitted by the editor as superseded, no longer relevant or otherwise inapplicable. Section number designations and catchlines have been supplied by the editor to facilitate use of this compilation. Citations to the original act from which a particular section derives are indicated by parenthetical history notes following each section. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20, the words "roads and revenues" have been stricken from the name of the governing authority. 

Sec. 1.1. - Commissioner districts created. 
For purposes of electing members of the board of commissioners, the county is divided into five commissioner districts. One member of the board shall be elected from each such district. The five commissioner districts shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts described in, attached to and made a part of House Bill 783 identified as "Plan: laurensccR-2012. Plant Type: Local Administrator: Laurens CC. User: SE," subject to the following: 
(1)	When used in such attachment, the term "VTD" (voting tabulation district) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Federal Bureau of the Census for the decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(2)	The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the federal Bureau of the Census for the decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the county that is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part that contains the least population according to the federal decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)	Any part of the county that is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part that contains the least population according to federal decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(4)	Except as otherwise provided in the description of any education district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the federal decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.2. - Election; qualifications; terms; vacancies. 
(a)	The board of commissioners of Laurens County, Georgia, shall be composed of five members. One commissioner shall be elected from each of the commissioner districts designated in Section 1.1. In any such election for members of the board of commissioners, at the time of qualifying each candidate shall designate the commissioner district for which such person is offering. No person shall be eligible to serve as a member of said board of commissioners unless at the time of election such person is a qualified voter and shall have been a resident of Laurens County at least 12 months and is at least 21 years of age. 
(b)	Those persons serving as members of the board of commissioners shall be elected by the qualified voters of the county and shall serve terms of four years, beginning on January 1 following their election and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)	Any vacancy occurring on the board of commissioners within the last 12 months of a term of office shall be filled by a majority of the remaining members of the board appointing a person to serve out the unexpired term of office. Any vacancy occurring other than within the last 12 months of a term of office shall be filled for the unexpired term by a special election which shall be held within 45 days after such vacancy occurs. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, page 3016) 
Secs. 1.3, 1.4. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1.5. - Compensation. 
Each member of the board of commissioners of Laurens County shall receive as compensation for his services a sum, determined within the discretion of the board of commissioners, not to exceed $4,800.00 per annum and payable in equal monthly installments. Commissioners who have completed certified county commissioner training shall receive an additional $100.00 per month supplement in addition to other compensation they receive. They shall be required to give all of the time and attention necessary to adequately and efficiently perform their duties as is required of them by law and good business practice. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 4485) 
Sec. 1.6. - Certified public accountant to audit books and records of county officials. 
The board of commissioners shall appoint, no later than July 15 of each year, a certified public accountant or a firm of certified public accountants to audit for the current fiscal year of Laurens County, which shall be from July 1 to June 30 inclusive, all the books and accounts of the county officials hereinbefore named and all other county officers, officials and persons receiving or disbursing county funds. Said accountant or accountants shall audit all books, accounts vouchers, warrants, and other records of the entire county up to the first day of July of the year following his or their appointment and make a report of the findings, together with his or their comments, criticisms, and recommendations, to the board of commissioners for their review and consideration . The board of commissioners shall prescribe the amount to be paid for the services of said accountant and shall provide for the payment of such amount. 
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 2077; 1964 Ga. Laws Ex Sess, page 2335) 
Sec. 1.7. - Employment of commissioners' relatives. 
(a)	The board of commissioners is prohibited from employing as administrator, attorney or auditor of the county any person related to any member of board of commissioners within the following degree: father, mother, brother, sister, son, daughter, uncle, aunt, niece or nephew. Any employment of any person within any of the degrees of relationship herein listed is hereby prohibited, and shall be illegal. 
(b)	The county administrator is prohibited from employing as officer, agent, servant or employee of the county any person related to the administrator or any member of the board of commissioners with the following degree: father, mother, brother, sister, son, daughter, uncle, aunt, niece or nephew. Any employment of any person within any of the degrees of relationship herein listed is hereby prohibited, and shall be illegal. 
(c)	Any person hired or employed in violation of this section shall not be entitled to receive any compensation whatsoever for any services rendered. 
(d)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to any county employee who is already employed by the county when his relative is elected to a county office which would otherwise disqualify him from employment under the terms of this section. 
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 2077; 1982 Ga. Laws, page 5166) 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1987 Ga. Laws, page 5552, which provides for the office of county administrator. Amendments to the original act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The provisions of this act were also adopted by the board of commissioners as an ordinance on October 21, 1986. 
State Law reference— County manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22. 

Sec. 2.1. - County administrator. 
There is hereby created the office of county administrator of Laurens County. The county administrator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the board of commissioners of Laurens County to serve at the pleasure of said board for an indefinite term. In addition to the duties contained herein, the county administrator shall assume all of the duties of the clerk to the board of commissioners. The position of county clerk shall be abolished. No member of the board of commissioners shall be appointed county administrator during the term of office for which he or she is elected or for a period of one year thereafter. 
Sec. 2.2. - Qualifications of county administrator. 
The county administrator shall be chosen by the board solely upon the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications with specific reference to his or her actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of his or her office as set forth in this section. 
Sec. 2.3. - Duties of county administrator. 
The board of commissioners of Laurens County shall continue to be the chief executive entity of the county, and it shall be the duty of the board to set the overall executive policies and procedures of the county. The county administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the county and shall be responsible to the board for the proper and efficient administration of all the affairs of the county except as otherwise provided by law. In addition, it shall be the duty of the county administrator to: 
(a)	To appoint and remove all officers and employees of the county which the commissioners have been heretofore empowered to appoint and discharge, except the county attorney and the outside auditor, who shall be appointed and removed by the board of commissioners; 
(b)	To see that all laws and ordinances of the county are enforced; 
(c)	To exercise control over all departments or divisions of the county which the board has heretofore exercised or that may hereafter be created; 
(d)	To prepare and submit to the board of commissioners an annual budget; 
(e)	To keep the board of commissioners fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of said county; 
(f)	To supervise and direct the official conduct of all county officers and department heads appointed by the county administrator; 
(g)	To attend all meetings of the board with the right to take part in the discussion, provided he or she shall have no vote before the board; 
(h)	To be responsible for keeping all records of the board of county commissioners and for attesting to all signatures contained on documents of Laurens County; and 
(i)	To perform such other duties as may be required by the board. 
Sec. 2.4. - Additional duties of county administrator. 
(a)	The county administrator shall be the chief purchasing agent for the county, by whom all purchases of supplies and all contracts therefor shall be made. He shall countersign with the chairman or, in the absence of the chairman from the county, the vice-chairman, or in the instance that both are absent from the county, any commission member, checks and all vouchers for the payment of the same under such rules and regulations as the board may adopt not inconsistent herewith. The board shall adopt rules for regulating purchases made by the county and the county administrator shall be governed thereby. In no event shall the county administrator be authorized to spend in excess of $2,500.00 for the purchase of any item for use by the county without the prior consent of a majority of the duly qualified members of the board. 
(b)	The county administrator is further vested with the authority to countersign with the chairman or, in his absence from the county, the vice-chairman, or in the instance that both are absent from the county, any other commission member, all payroll checks for the employees of Laurens County. 
(c)	The county administrator shall be directly responsible for the construction and maintenance of all roads and bridges under the jurisdiction of Laurens County. He or she shall appoint a public works director whose primary duties shall be to supervise the construction and maintenance of all county roads and bridges. 
Sec. 2.5. - Bond of county administrator. 
The county administrator shall be required to execute and deliver a good and sufficient bond payable to Laurens County to be approved by the board of commissioners and conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties. The amount of said bond shall be determined by the board of commissioners. Said bond shall be delivered to the board within five days of the county administrator assuming his or her duties and, upon receipt, shall be filed by the chairman of the board in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Laurens County. 
Sec. 2.6. - Noninterference of the board of commissioners. 
Except for the purpose of inquiry and investigation, the board of commissioners shall deal with county employees who are subject to appointment and removal by the county administrator solely through the county administrator and shall not give orders or directions to any such employee, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. 
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1962 Ga. Laws, page 1160, which provides for the City of Dublin and County of Laurens Development Authority. Amendments to the original act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 3.1. - Creation; funding; membership; property; purpose. 
Article VII, section V, paragraph I, of the Constitution, relating to the taxing power and restriction of contributions of counties, cities and political subdivisions, is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
(1)	There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "City of Dublin and County of Laurens Development Authority" which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, its scope and jurisdiction to be limited to the territory embraced by the City of Dublin and County of Laurens. The city and county may contract with the Authority as a public corporation as provided by the Constitution of Georgia. 
(2)	The city or county is authorized to levy a tax on all taxable property therein not to exceed two mills for the purpose of securing a fund to be set aside and used by said authority for the general purposes hereinafter prescribed. 
(3)	The members of the Authority, their qualifications, terms and method of election or appointment, shall be prescribed by law by the General Assembly. The Authority shall have such duties, powers, and authority as shall be prescribed by law and the General Assembly may pass all other necessary legislation for the implementation of this amendment. 
(4)	All lands and improvements thereon, the title to which is vested in the Authority, and all debentures and revenue bonds issued by the Authority shall be exempt from State and local taxation. 
(5)	Said Authority is created for the purpose of developing, promoting and expanding for the public good and general welfare, industry, agriculture, commerce, natural resources, and vocational training and for the making of long-range plans for the coordination of such development, promotion and expansion within its territorial limits. The Authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt as against the State of Georgia, the City of Dublin or the County of Laurens. The Authority is created for nonprofit purposes, and all property acquired by the Authority and any funds realized by the Authority shall be used continually and exclusively for the purposes for which the Authority is created. 
Sec. 3.2. - Continuation of development authority. 
That constitutional amendment creating the City of Dublin and County of Laurens Development Authority (1962 Ga. Laws, page 1160) shall not be repealed or deleted on July 1, 1987, as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia but is specifically continued in force and effect on and after that date as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 4525) 
LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Local Acts and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances and resolutions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "Code of Ordinances, Laurens County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1994, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners of the county: 
Board of commissioners. The term "board of commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of Laurens County, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Laurens County, Georgia. 
Commissioners. The term "commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of Laurens County. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time, except hours prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "county" means Laurens County, Georgia. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Governing body. The term "governing body" means the Board of Commissioners of Laurens County, Georgia. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper, proprietor. The term "keeper" or "proprietor" means and includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Land, real estate. The term "land" or "real estate" includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The initials "O.C.G.A." mean the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, societies, clubs, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place where the public is invited to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the county which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the county clerk, where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads and all other public highways in the county. 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1994, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6; official names of county governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20. 
Sec. 1-3. - Effect of repeal of ordinance or resolution. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not revive any ordinances or resolutions in force before or at the time the ordinance or resolution repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance or resolution repealed. 
(Code 1994, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)	Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)	Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)	Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)	Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)	Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)	The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(11)	The ordinance adopted October 21, 1986, providing for a county administrator. 
(12)	Any cable television franchise agreement. 
(Code 1994, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Applicability of Code. 
The provisions of this Code, unless otherwise clearly specified, shall apply only in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 1994, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances and resolutions. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1994, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Catchlines of sections; history and reference notes. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1994, § 1-7) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances. 
(a)	All ordinances and resolutions passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included in this Code which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances or resolutions, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(b)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(c)	The enactment of a resolution or ordinance, in the absence of language to the contrary, shall not repeal any resolution or ordinance theretofore passed dealing with the same matter, except where in direct conflict therewith. 
(Code 1994, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on at least an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners of the county during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1994, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners of the county, which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1994, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty. 
In the exercise of any and all of the legislative powers delegated in this Code, the board of commissioners of the county may provide that violators shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county and, upon conviction, may be punished as provided by the laws of the state pertaining to that court, except that penalties and punishment shall not exceed six months in the county jail and a fine of up to $1,000.00, either or both, each day's violation constituting a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 1-11) 
State Law reference— Violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; punishment for misdemeanors, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a). 
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners of the county that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the commissioners without incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or otherwise invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1994, § 1-13) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-13. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)	Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)	Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
(Code 1994, § 1-14) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Matters over which county commission has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1. 

Sec. 2-19. - Meetings. 
(a)	The board of commissioners shall hold regular meetings on the first Tuesday of each month at 5:30 p.m. unless otherwise ordered by the board. 
(b)	Special meetings may be held upon call by the chairman of the board of commissioners or any three members. Due notice of such meetings shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
(c)	Meetings shall be held at the Laurens County Courthouse Annex, Dublin, Georgia. 
(d)	There shall be a written agenda prepared prior to each board meeting. The chairman of the board of commissioners retains the discretion to recognize any person attending a county commission meeting. 
(Code 1994, § 2-26; Mo. of 1-3-1977; Res. of 11-2-1982(1)) 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Secs. 2-20—2-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-42. - Workers' compensation coverage. 
Certain elected officials of the county shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their elected duties, the board of commissioners, sheriff, clerk of court, coroner, probate judge, tax commissioner, chief magistrate, magistrates, volunteer firefighters, emergency management, first responders, and county attorney shall be covered under the workers' compensation laws of the state. 
(Code 1994, § 2-1; Res. of 12-20-1983; Res. of 11-17-1987, § I) 
State Law reference— Workers' compensation, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-43—2-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND SIMILAR BODIES (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-75—2-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 2; discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; local political subdivision purchases, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-92. - Fiscal year established. 
It is hereby resolved by the board of commissioners that the fiscal year under which the county governmental agencies operate shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of each calendar year. 
(Code 1994, § 2-46; Res. of 2-5-1985(1)) 
State Law reference— Requirement for governing authority to establish a fiscal year, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-93. - County officials to submit annual budget requests. 
All county officials who make annual budget requests to the board of commissioners will have their annual budget requests for the next fiscal year submitted to the county governing authority as established by the county administrator from year to year. 
(Code 1994, § 2-47; Res. of 2-5-1985(1)) 
Sec. 2-94. - Approval of county budget. 
The board of commissioners will approve the total county budget for the next fiscal year at the last public meeting of the board of commissioners in June. 
(Code 1994, § 2-48; Res. of 2-5-1985(1)) 
Sec. 2-95. - Check signing procedure. 
(a)	All payroll and general fund checks up to $2,500.00 will be signature stamped by a check-writer with the signatures of the chairman of the board of commissioners and the county administrator. 
(b)	All checks of $2,500.00 or more will be manually signed by a member of the board of commissioners and the county administrator or, in his absence, the finance officer. 
(c)	The finance officer will review and approve the county payroll and review and initial each voucher supporting the general fund checks. 
(Code 1994, § 2-49; Ord. of 3-3-1987) 
Sec. 2-96. - E-911 charge. 
(a)	The board of commissioners do hereby request that Progressive Rural, Glenwood, Pineland, Contel, and Southern Bell/Bell South begin immediately billing a monthly charge upon each exchange access facility, as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134. 
(b)	The amount of such charge shall be $1.50 per month, per exchange access facility provided to the telephone subscriber. 
(c)	Pursuant to the O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133, which provides for this charge to become effective 120 days after the passing of the resolution contained in this section, it is therefore requested the effective date shall be November 16, 1991. 
(Code 1994, § 2-50; Res. of 7-16-1991) 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 911 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 
Secs. 2-97—2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BIDDING 

Sec. 2-121. - Sealed bids required; exception. 
(a)	Purchases of any item of more than $500.00 but less than $2,500.00 shall require obtaining informal bids. 
(b)	Purchases $2,500.00 or greater shall require obtaining written bids. 
(c)	Emergency purchases and sole source purchases are not subject to sealed bid procedures. 
(Code 1994, § 2-61; Ord. of 6-18-1985; Ord. of 7-5-1988; Ord. of 4-6-1993) 
Sec. 2-122. - Advertisement; changes. 
(a)	All items offered for bid will be advertised once prior to the opening of the bids at a bid-opening conference giving date and time of the public invitation to bid meeting. The ads will run in the county legal gazette. 
(b)	Changes concerning any aspect of the bid will be made known to all concerned by means of an addendum. 
(Code 1994, § 2-62; Ord. of 6-18-1985; Ord. of 7-5-1988; Ord. of 4-6-1993) 
Sec. 2-123. - Procedure. 
(a)	Openings. Bid openings will be conducted by the county administrator or his representative. All bids will be opened, read aloud, and recorded and may be reviewed by any bidders or other parties present. Bids received after bid-opening deadline will be rejected unopened. 
(b)	Review; recommendation. The bids will be reviewed by the county administrator and will be summarized for presentation to the board of commissioners, along with a recommendation for the bid award. The bid awarding will be placed on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled commission meeting or, if necessary, at a meeting called for this purpose. 
(c)	Single bid. Notwithstanding the foregoing, when only one bid is received by the county administrator, the bid shall not be opened by the county administrator until the single sealed bid is presented for consideration to the board of commissioners at their next meeting. Prior to opening the bid, the board of commissioners shall determine whether to proceed with opening and considering the single bid, readvertising for the purchase or taking other action. 
(Code 1994, § 2-64; Ord. of 6-18-1985; Ord. of 7-5-1988; Ord. of 4-6-1993) 
Sec. 2-124. - Determination of best bid. 
Subject to this division, it will be the policy of the county to accept the best bid submitted, as determined by the following criteria: 
(1)	The cost of the item to be purchased; 
(2)	The ability, capacity and skill of bidder to perform required services; 
(3)	Whether bidder can perform service promptly or within specified time; 
(4)	The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of bidder; 
(5)	The performance of previous contracts; 
(6)	The suitability of equipment or material for county use; and 
(7)	The ability of bidder to provide future maintenance and parts service. 
(Code 1994, § 2-65; Ord. of 6-18-1985; Ord. of 7-5-1988; Ord. of 4-6-1993) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. 3, sec. 9, par. 6(e); Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Church means any permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Distance means the measurement from building to building along the nearest practical street route. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. This shall not be a mobile home which can be moved, but will be a permanently emplaced structure with permanent foundation. This includes Butler buildings and those of a similar type. It shall also be in compliance with all laws, rules and regulations of the state, state and county health departments, EPA, department of human and natural resources and other state and county agencies. 
Private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state actively in operation within the corporate limits of the county, and having members who regularly pay monthly, quarterly or semiannual dues. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one nor more than three families customarily reside and shall not include a mobile home, a boardinghouse where there are five or more boarders or roomers, or any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retailer or retail package dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages, in unbroken packages, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine or vinous liquors means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Code 1994, § 6-1; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 1.0) 
Sec. 4-2. - Applicability of chapter. 
All businesses, the applicant for the license, the agent in charge of the business, and the owner thereof shall observe and obey the following regulations prescribed by the board of commissioners in this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-2; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 7.0) 
Sec. 4-3. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)	Upon conviction in the county magistrate court or superior court of any violation of any penal provision of this chapter, unless otherwise provided, the punishment shall be as set by the judge as allowed by section 1-11 and the laws of the state. 
(b)	Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended for a period of time not exceeding six months or may be revoked by the county administrator or the board of commissioners by reason of any disturbance, acts of disorderly conduct, violence, gambling, or by reason of any conviction for violation of this chapter having occurred in the establishment or on the premises thereof, provided that, when the license of any establishment has been revoked, no further license shall be issued under this chapter to any person at that location for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation. 
(c)	All owners or officers of establishments licensed under this chapter shall be criminally responsible for any violation of this chapter by an employee thereof, provided the court may only impose a just fine under this subsection. 
(d)	Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be treated as a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1994, § 6-3; Ord. of 10-27-1989, §§ 19.0, 25.0) 
Sec. 4-4. - Establishments open to inspection. 
Any establishment holding a license issued under this chapter shall at all times, during the period allowable by law for operation of the business, be open to inspection by any officer of the sheriff's department, any license inspector to the county or to any person designated by the sheriff or commissioners. In addition, if the premises are being used after hours by employees or the owners or their agents, there shall be on the premises at this time a sheriff's deputy of the county sheriff's department, any licensed inspector, or any person designated by the sheriff or the commissioners. 
(Code 1994, § 6-4; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 8.0) 
Sec. 4-5. - Open containers prohibited on premises; exception. 
No bottle or other container of alcoholic beverages shall be opened or consumed by any person on the premises upon which the place of business is conducted and licensed under this chapter, whether the bottle or other container so opened or consumed was bought or obtained at the place of business or elsewhere, unless the premises is licensed for consumption on the premises under this chapter. The owner or proprietor of any store or place of business who violates these provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1994, § 6-5; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 9.0) 
Sec. 4-6. - Legal hours of sale and purchase. 
(a)	All licensees under this chapter holding licenses classified retail malt beverages: consumption on premises or retail wine for consumption on premises shall close the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. and shall not allow any person other than an owner or manager to be present on the premises between such hours. 
(b)	No person who is not an owner or manager shall be present on the premises of an establishment licensed under this chapter for consumption on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any licensee or person employed by a licensee to sell, to offer for sale, transfer, or offer to transfer to others any wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage to be consumed on the premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday and between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, receive or offer to receive from a licensee or other person employed by a licensee any wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage to be consumed on the premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday and between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. No one will sell alcoholic beverages under the provisions of this chapter on a Sunday. Sales will cease at 12:00 midnight on Saturday, and may not be resumed until 6:00 a.m. Monday. Customers must vacate the premises after sales cease at midnight by 3:00 a.m. on Sunday. 
(Code 1994, § 6-6; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 10.0) 
Sec. 4-7. - Legal hours for drinking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a place of business licensed under this chapter for consumption on the premises to permit any person to drink any wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage upon the business premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday and between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage while upon or within any vehicle upon the streets, sidewalks, parks, public places of the county or upon or within any vehicle upon the premises of any business establishment holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter in the county between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday and between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Monday through Friday. 
(Code 1994, § 6-7; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 11.0) 
Sec. 4-8. - Possession of glass container, opened bottle or other opened container of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages when prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a place of business licensed under this chapter for consumption on the premises to permit any glass containing any alcoholic beverage, any opened and unemptied bottle or other opened container of any alcoholic beverage to remain in or on the premises of the place of business at any time between the hours of 3:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday and between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. It shall be unlawful for any customer or other person to have in his possession any opened bottle containing any alcoholic beverage in any place of business licensed under this chapter at any time between the hours of 3:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday and between 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. It is the purpose and intent of this section to assist in the enforcement of the regulations against drinking beer, wine, and other alcoholic beverages between the hours set forth in this section. 
(Code 1994, § 6-8; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 12.0) 
Sec. 4-9. - Sales on election days. 
Subject to the provisions of sections 4-6 through 4-8, the sale of alcoholic beverages on any election day is authorized. 
(Code 1994, § 6-9; Res. of 5-21-1985) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-10. - Alcohol percent labels. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, custody or control any spirituous liquor for retail sale, unless the container shall have firmly affixed thereto a label on which there is stated in plain words or figures the true alcoholic content by volume of the alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1994, § 6-10; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 13.0) 
Sec. 4-11. - Minors; prohibited practices. 
(a)	Purchase. It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to buy or allow to be bought for him any alcoholic beverage from any place. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of or employed in any place of business where alcoholic beverages are kept to permit any person under 21 years of age to buy or to allow to be bought for a person under 21 years of age any alcoholic beverages in or from the place of business. It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age when on the premises of a drive-in restaurant, whether in or outside of a motor vehicle, to have in his possession or under his control any alcoholic beverage. Any attempt to commit any act made unlawful by this section shall be itself unlawful and subject to punishment in the county magistrate court or superior court. 
(b)	Misrepresentation of age. It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to falsely misrepresent his age, in any manner whatever, for the purpose of illegally obtaining any alcoholic beverages. 
(c)	Dispensing, serving, selling; exception. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or require a person in his employment under 19 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 21 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(d)	Possession in unincorporated areas. It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the age of 21 years to have in his possession, or under his control, at any place whatever in the unincorporated areas of the county, any alcoholic beverage. 
(e)	Signs required in licensee's premises. It shall be unlawful for a licensee not to post in a conspicuous place in his establishment a sign printed with letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "Sale of alcoholic beverage to persons under 21 years of age strictly prohibited." 
(f)	Violation of section. Violation of any provisions of this section shall constitute an offense under this chapter and shall be punishable in the county magistrate court or superior court, provided violation of this section by persons who have not yet reached the age of 17 years shall be handled as provided by the state juvenile court code. 
(Code 1994, § 6-11; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 14.0) 
Sec. 4-12. - Sales in proximity to school property. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale beer, malt beverages, or wine within 100 yards from school property. The distance shall be measured from the main entrance of the location where the malt beverages or wine is sold or offered for sale by way of the nearest traveled road, street or highway to the nearest school property. 
(Code 1994, § 6-12; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 21.0) 
Sec. 4-13. - Proximity of sales to churches. 
No person shall sell malt beverages or wine at any place within 400 yards of a church. 
(Code 1994, § 6-13; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 22.0) 
Sec. 4-14. - Club restaurants required to obey closing hours. 
If any club licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under the provisions of this chapter maintains restaurant facilities which would remain open after the closing hours outlined in sections 4-6 through 4-8 or on Sunday, no alcoholic beverages of any nature or description will be sold, purchased, consumed or present on the premises after hours or on Sunday. The restaurant facility may only sell food or nonalcoholic beverages during these times. Any violation of this section shall be treated as a misdemeanor committed by the licensee, club manager, or any patron buying or consuming such alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1994, § 6-14; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 23.0) 
Secs. 4-15—4-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 4-32. - License required; time limit for commencement of operation. 
(a)	No malt beverage, vinous liquors, spirituous liquors or any other alcoholic beverage shall be sold or manufactured in the county except under a license issued under this article by the county administrator at the direction of the board of commissioners. 
(b)	The requirements of this article shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code and if other provisions of this Code conflict with this article, then this article shall control. This shall apply to the unincorporated limits of the county. 
(c)	Licenses which may be issued under this article include: 
(1)	Manufacturing alcoholic beverages. 
(2)	Wholesale: 
a.	Malt beverages. 
b.	Vinous liquors. 
c.	Spirituous liquors. 
(3)	Retail: 
a.	Malt beverages. 
b.	Vinous liquors. 
c.	Spirituous liquors. 
(4)	Consumption on the premises: 
a.	Malt beverages. 
b.	Vinous liquors. 
(5)	Any combination of the licenses listed in this subsection, provided no retail or wholesale spirituous liquor licensee shall hold any consumption on the premises license for the same location. 
(d)	All businesses issued licenses under this article must, within 90 days after the issuance of a county license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute a forfeiture and cancellation of the issued licenses, and no refund of license fees or business taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make written request to the board of commissioners for an extension of time not to exceed 90 days, and they may, at their discretion, grant or deny the request. 
(Code 1994, § 6-36; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 2.0) 
Sec. 4-33. - Applications for new license. 
The provisions of this Code on general business licensing shall apply in addition to the following: 
(1)	All approved applications for new licenses under this article shall be accompanied by a payment in cash or by certified check for all the minimum fees and business taxes provided for in this Code for the classification into which the applicant falls. A schedule of license fees is on file in the county administrator's office and will be made available to all applicants. The annual license fees may be changed by majority vote of the board of commissioners. The period of time during which the license is in effect will be the calendar year between January 1 and December 31, at which time it must be renewed. 
(2)	Any new applicant requesting a license for less than one-half of the first year will only be required to pay one-half of the normal license fee. He will be required to pay the full license fee for succeeding years. 
(3)	Attached to the county application shall be a photostatic or other copy of all the appropriate state applications and forms along with a county supplemental application form attached along with the following: 
a.	A legal description of the property upon which the premises are located; 
b.	A current photograph of the applicant; 
c.	Fingerprints of the applicant to be taken by the sheriff's department; 
d.	An affidavit from the county sheriff stating that the establishment complies with the distance requirement contained in this chapter; the county will charge a fee of $75.00 for this affidavit; 
e.	A publisher's affidavit from the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements or notices are placed showing the name and address of the applicant, the location for which the license is sought, the type of license applied for and the time and place the county administrator shall act on the application. 
(4)	The application shall also contain a form of oath providing that the information disclosed in the application is true and correct, and providing further that the applicant will abide by, observe and conduct his other business according to the rules and regulations prescribed by the board of commissioners, the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.), and the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue in respect thereto. The oath shall be taken by the applicant and the agent in charge of the establishment if different from or additional to the applicant, and the oath shall be taken by the true owners. 
(5)	Any false statement or material misrepresentation in any application pursuant to this section shall be grounds for the revocation of any license granted pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1994, § 6-37; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 3.0) 
Sec. 4-34. - Residency required for applicants; exception. 
(a)	All applicants for licenses under this article shall be bona fide residents of the county for a minimum of six months prior to the time of the filing of the applications and shall remain bona fide residents of the county during all times that the licenses and renewals thereof are in effect. Applicants may be owners or managers of the business. Corporations may apply for the license to be issued in their corporate names and, in this case, residency requirements may be waived by majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(b)	All applications shall be approved or disapproved by the county sheriff or a designee thereof as a condition to action thereon and issuance of a license by the county administrator. If the sheriff determines that the application is not in order, in view of the requirements of federal or state law or this Code and any sheriff's department investigation, the county administrator shall then notify the applicant of the reasons for not issuing the license to the applicant. 
(Code 1994, § 6-38; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 4.0) 
Sec. 4-35. - Issuance of license to persons with prior convictions. 
No license under this article shall be issued, renewed or transferred to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or conviction of two or more misdemeanors of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance except traffic violations within two years. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. 
(Code 1994, § 6-39; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 5.0) 
Sec. 4-36. - Denial of license application; granting. 
The board of commissioners may deny or suspend a county license under this article on any of the following grounds: 
(1)	Failure to meet state requirements for state licenses. 
(2)	Failure to pay required fees and taxes, including garbage collection fees, within 30 days of the due date. 
(3)	Failure to provide required valid information, documents and the like. 
(4)	False information in the application or attached documents. 
(5)	Failure to pass review by the sheriff. 
(6)	Improper residency. 
(7)	Prior convictions as provided in section 4-35. 
(8)	Failure to meet any other requirements in this article for a license of the class applied for. 
(9)	The proposed premises is a trouble spot in the judgment of the board of commissioners by reason of disturbances or acts of disorderly conduct, violence or gambling having occurred in or about the premises. 
(10)	The existence of dangerous traffic conditions at the proposed premises or a determination by the board of commissioners that the granting of a license would cause dangerous traffic conditions. 
(11)	A determination by the board of commissioners that the granting of the license would adversely affect the neighborhood or cause a substantial diminution in value of the immediately adjacent and surrounding property. 
(Code 1994, § 6-40; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 6.0) 
Sec. 4-37. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)	Any license issued under this article may be suspended for a definite time or may be revoked if the licensee or any employee of licensee has been convicted of the violation of any act prohibited by this article, of failure to perform any act required by this article, or is convicted of the violation of any other ordinance of the county or any state or federal law relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. The forfeiture of bond or collateral or a plea of nolo contendere shall be considered a conviction for the purposes of this subsection. 
(b)	Any license issued under this article may be suspended for a definite time or revoked if the county magistrate court judge has determined that there is probable cause to believe that the licensee or an employee of the licensee has violated a state or federal law relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. The procedure for making such determination shall be: 
(1)	The sheriff, after obtaining reliable information that such a violation has been committed, shall cite the licensee to appear for a hearing on a day certain before the county magistrate court and shall advise the licensee of the law believed to have been violated. 
(2)	The county magistrate court judge, after hearing evidence, shall make a determination whether there is probable cause to believe the alleged violation has been committed. If the hearing results in a determination that probable cause does exist, the findings shall be reduced to writing and filed with the county administrator, who shall report such findings to the board of commissioners at the next regular meeting thereof. 
(c)	Any violation of the reasons given to deny a license under this article shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license by the county administrator or the board of commissioners. In addition, if the owner or manager of the licensed business violates any other terms and provisions of this article or knowingly allows others to violate them while in the licensed establishment or its parking lot, then this shall also be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Code 1994, § 6-41; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 15.0) 
Sec. 4-38. - Notice and hearing; appeal. 
No licenses issued under this article may be suspended or revoked unless the licensee has been afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the county administrator. The licensee shall be given at least five days' written notice delivered to the licensee in person or by certified mail of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and the grounds for suspension or revocation. At such hearing, the licensee shall have the right to appear in person and by attorney and to have witnesses appear in his behalf. All witnesses shall be sworn or shall make affirmation and shall be subject to reasonable cross examination. If a license be suspended or revoked by the county administrator, such suspension or revocation may be appealed by the licensee to the board of commissioners by filing a notice of appeal in the commissioners' office with the county administrator within a period of ten days following the date of the order of the county administrator suspending or revoking such license. The decision of the board of commissioners on any such appeal shall be final. The reasons for suspension or revocation, whether by the county administrator or the board of commissioners, shall be specifically stated in writing and delivered to the licensee. 
(Code 1994, § 6-42; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 16.0) 
Sec. 4-39. - Duration and renewal of license. 
(a)	Duration and renewal of licenses under this article shall be as for business licenses generally, and no licensee shall have any vested right to the renewal of any county license. Licenses will be renewed on January 1 or as soon thereafter as possible. No license will be renewed unless the license fee is paid by February 1 and all other regulations contained in this article are complied with by the holder of the license. 
(b)	No licenses under this article may be renewed if the licensee could be denied a new license under this article. 
(Code 1994, § 6-43; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 17.0) 
Sec. 4-40. - Transfer of licenses. 
(a)	Licenses under this article may be transferred to another person, provided that person makes application to the county as for a new license and pays as a transfer fee ten percent of the license fee and any other appropriate fees. Business or transfer taxes must be paid and that person must otherwise meet the requirements under this article for a new license. 
(b)	A transfer of location shall be allowed for any license under this article, provided the licensee files with the county administrator the following on the new location: 
(1)	A legal description of the property upon which the new premises is located. 
(2)	An affidavit from the sheriff stating that the establishment complies with any distance or location requirements contained in this article. 
(3)	A publisher's affidavit from the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements or notices are placed showing the name and address of the applicant, the location for which the license is sought, the type of license applied for and the time and place the county administrator shall act on the application. 
(c)	Any transfer allowed under this section may be denied or revoked on the same basis as for an application or license under this article. 
(Code 1994, § 6-44; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 18.0) 
Sec. 4-41. - Outstanding licenses; compliance assumed. 
(a)	All licensees holding valid licenses issued under this article as of October 1, 1989, shall be deemed to have complied with all requirements as to the application and issuance of a license under this article. Renewals and transfers of licenses at the same location shall also be deemed in compliance. Transfers to new locations must comply with all requirements as set forth in this article. 
(b)	Any new license, location, or owner transfers issued after the date given in subsection (a) of this section must comply with all requirements as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 6-45; Ord. of 10-27-1989, § 20.0) 
Secs. 4-42—4-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 4-71. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)	Violation of any provision of this article shall constitute an offense under this article with maximum punishment which shall not exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. 
(b)	Jurisdiction over violations of this article shall be in the county magistrate court, and procedures for enforcement shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(Code 1994, § 6-66; Ord. of 2-16-1993, § 3) 
Sec. 4-72. - Prohibited entertainment, attire and conduct. 
The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcohol beverages for consumption on such premises within the unincorporated area of the county: 
(1)	The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcohol beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
(2)	Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) of this section or where such person performs acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.	Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
b.	The caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
c.	The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)	The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsection (1) or (2) of this section; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theater which derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcohol beverages. 
(Code 1994, § 6-47; Ord. of 2-16-1993, § 2) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(3); livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
At large means off the premises of owner or premises the owner has permission to be on, or not under control of owner by leash, at heel or beside of, or in control of a competent person and is not obedient to that person's commands. 
Dog control officer means an individual selected by the county board, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22, to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
Domesticated means an animal raised so as to live in close proximity to man. Such animals shall include dogs and cats, as well as, varieties of poultry, livestock or reptiles. 
Hearing officer means the hearing officer designated by the county board. 
Inoculated or vaccinated means an animal that has been administered an antibiotic vaccine to provide immunity from rabies for a minimum of one year. 
Kennel means a type of pen or cage for boarding or holding animals. 
Kennel operator means a person engaged in the commercial business of buying, selling or boarding animals. 
Mail means to send by regular mail, certified mail, or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
Owner means any natural person or legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog, dangerous dog, vicious dog or other animal within this county. In the case of a dog or animal owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. A person who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises for more than five days shall be deemed an owner. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or vicious dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Public nuisance animal is any animal that unreasonably annoys humankind, endangers the life or health of people or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens' (other than their owners') enjoyment of life or property, and includes, but is not limited to, any animal that: 
(1)	Is found at large. 
(2)	Damages or abuses property other than that of the owner or keeper. 
(3)	Disturbs persons by barking, biting, or chasing vehicles or persons. 
(4)	Attacks other animals. 
(5)	Attacks pedestrians (except dogs trained for this purpose and under control of owner or keeper). 
(6)	Barks, whines, honks, brays, cries or makes excessive noises. 
(7)	Defecates upon any public place or premises not owned or controlled by the owner or keeper unless waste is promptly removed by the animal owner or keeper. 
(8)	Has been found by animal control officer to be a menace to public health, welfare, or safety. 
Records of an appropriate authority means any records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of a dog control officer, or animal control officer, as provided in this chapter and by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1994, § 10-26; Ord. of 7-16-1991, § 1; Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-1; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-1) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21. 
Sec. 6-2. - Office of animal control. 
(a)	There is hereby created the office of animal control, which the animal control officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	The animal control officer is authorized to issue citations to persons violating this chapter, for trial in the county magistrate court. 
(c)	The animal control officer, as well as employees and agents of the animal control office and persons under his control and supervision, are empowered to seize animals as required by this chapter so long as the animals are within the county. These employees and agents of the office of animal control shall have the right to go on private property within the county for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, provided it is necessary for such purpose. The animal control officer shall have the authority to issue citations and subpoenas to witnesses and require their appearance in the county magistrate court on any matter relating to the enforcement of any of the provisions contained herein. 
(d)	Citations may be issued in person or sent by mail for enforcement of any of the provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-2; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Dog control officer; appointment; compensation. 
The county board shall appoint a dog control officer who shall serve at the pleasure of the county board. The dog control officer's compensation shall be established from time to time by the county board. 
(Code 1994, § 10-29; Ord. of 7-16-1991, § 2; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-3) 
State Law reference— Dog control officer for dangerous and vicious dog purposes, O.G.G.A. § 4-8-22. 
Sec. 6-4. - Interference with officer. 
It is unlawful for any person to resist, attack, verbally threaten, interfere with or hinder any law enforcement officer, the animal control officer, the health officer, or their designees or agents in the performance of the duties imposed upon them by this code of ordinances or by state law. It is also unlawful to tamper with or remove traps set by the animal control officer or his agents in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-18; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-5) 
Sec. 6-5. - Adoption of chapter by municipalities within county boundaries. 
In accordance with state law, the county may enter into agreements with the municipalities located within its territorial limits to provide animal control services within the corporate limits of each such municipality. Pursuant to such agreement, any municipality in the county may adopt this chapter. Any municipality adopting this chapter must authorize the enforcement of the municipal ordinance by the county animal control office. The municipal ordinance must provide that the incorporated areas shall be subject to the fees charged by the office of animal control and that all fees charged by the county animal control office shall be retained by the county to defray the cost of operation of the animal control unit. The adopting municipal ordinance shall also provide that violations be tried in the county magistrate court as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-150 et seq. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-42) 
Sec. 6-6. - State license required for certain commercial animal establishments. 
(a)	Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Breeding establishment means any establishment where pets are bred and a fee or compensation is received for the breeding and maintenance of such pets, such as stud service. 
Cattery means any establishment where a cat is maintained for breeding, boarding, training, holding, or similar purposes for a fee or compensation. 
Grooming shop means any establishment, other than an animal shelter, where a person maintains a dog or cat for bathing, dipping, clipping, trimming, brushing, or similar care of the appearance for a fee or compensation. 
Kennel means any establishment, other than an animal shelter, where dogs or cats are maintained for boarding, holding, training, or similar purposes for a fee or compensation. Similar purposes include, but are not limited to, activities of a breeding establishment, cattery, or grooming shop. 
Pet breeder means a pet dealer who sells, offers to sell, exchanges, or offers for adoption only pets they have produced, except equine. This includes those produced for hobby, show purposes, breed improvement, or stock replacement. 
Pet dealer means a person who sells, offers to sell, exchanges, or offers for adoption pets they have produced, bought, or otherwise obtained, except equine. Equine dealers require a livestock dealers license from the state department of agriculture. 
(b)	License required. It is unlawful for any person to act as a pet dealer or operate an animal shelter, kennel, or stable unless such person has a valid license issued by the state commissioner of agriculture. Any person acting without a license in violation of this subsection. 
Secs. 6-7—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CARE AND CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Vaccinations and identification tag or marking required. 
(a)	The owners and keepers of all dogs, cats, and domestic wildlife, unless permitted by the wildlife resource division, are hereby required to have such vaccinated against rabies. No person shall own, keep or harbor any of these animals over six months of age unless such animal is vaccinated. Owner of each animal vaccinated shall keep a certificate of vaccination. 
(b)	The owner and keeper of all dogs and cats are hereby required to have identification on such animal. An identification tag must be on such animal at all times. Tag must contain information that will allow the animal control officer to contact the owner or keeper of such animal. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, §§ 10-3, 10-4; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-6) 
Sec. 6-32. - Confinement. 
It is unlawful for any owner of a dog or cat to allow the animals to run at large, or not be under the immediate control of the owner, on any vacant lot or private property without the consent of the property owner. All animals on public property must be under restraint, control or on a leash no longer than six feet in length. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-5; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-7) 
Sec. 6-33. - Inhumane treatment. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any owner to secure an animal by a tether less than ten feet in length and not tangle-resistant. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal not to furnish such animal adequate food, water, shelter and protection from the elements. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any owner to own any animal which is seriously sick or injured and not provide proper care for such animal. This section shall not be construed to include animals under active veterinary care. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-6; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-8) 
Sec. 6-34. - Dogs and cats that attack. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog or cat to allow said animal to bite, scratch, chase, snap or attack pedestrians, bicyclists, vehicles; or allow said animal to be a nuisance with the exception of said animal being in defense of property or person. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-7; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-9) 
Sec. 6-35. - Female dogs and cats in heat. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner of a female cat or dog, while such animal is in heat or in season, to allow her to run loose. Said animal must be confined in a kennel or in a place of confinement, in such a manner said animal cannot get in or out of said kennel or place of confinement. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-8; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-10) 
Sec. 6-36. - Disturbing the peace. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any animal in his possession or control to persistently or continuously bark, howl or make noise common to their species or otherwise to disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood. It shall likewise be unlawful to keep or maintain such animals in a manner as to produce noxious or offensive odors, or to otherwise endanger the health and welfare of surrounding inhabitants. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-9; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-11) 
Sec. 6-37. - Destruction of property. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any animal in his possession or control to destroy and/or disturb any property of another. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-10; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-12) 
Sec. 6-38. - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to abandon any dog, cat, or animal or to release it upon public or private property with the intention of abandoning said animal. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-11; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-13) 
Sec. 6-39. - Livestock at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any hogs, cattle, mules, goats, sheep, horses, poultry or any other livestock to allow the same to run loose or be at large. All livestock found loose or at large will be in violation and shall be impounded by animal control or any deputy or police officer and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law. The owner of such livestock will be responsible for any contract removal, storage, hauling, or medical care of any such livestock impounded. The office of animal control will dispose of said livestock pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, §§ 10-12, 10-13; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-14) 
Sec. 6-40. - Hoarders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect animals and fail to provide them with humane or adequate care; collect dead animals that are not properly disposed of as required by this article; or collect, house, or harbor animals in filthy, unsanitary conditions that constitute a health hazard to the animals being kept and/or to the animals or residents of adjacent property. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-15) 
Sec. 6-41. - Putting out poison. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or intentionally put out poison or otherwise distribute on any premises within the county any poison in any form or manner whatsoever which is or may likely be sufficiently lethal or of such strength as to cause death to any animal or fowl. 
(b)	Nothing in this section shall apply to poisons which are made for the sole purpose of killing and destroying insects, pest, rats and other rodents, if such poisons are not dangerous or injurious to human beings. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-14; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-16) 
Sec. 6-42. - Cruel acts. 
No person shall perform a cruel act on any animal, nor shall any person harm or maim any animal except to defend his person or property or the person or property of another from injury or damage being caused by said animal or as specifically permitted by the state department of natural resources. In addition, said animal causing injury or damage to any livestock or poultry may be euthanized. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-15; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-17) 
Sec. 6-43. - Threats involving animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to verbally threaten to kill, maim, poison or harm in anyway any animal. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-16; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-18) 
Sec. 6-44. - Duty to report accidents involving dogs and cats. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly injure a dog or cat by running over, or into same, or contacting same with an automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle. It shall also be unlawful to fail to immediately notify the owner of the dog or cat if the animal has an identification tag or tattoo. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-17; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-19) 
Sec. 6-45. - Backyard breeders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a license from the state department of agriculture pursuant to the Licensees Regulation 40-13-13-.02, as amended, to operate as an animal shelter, kennel, breeding establishment, cattery, grooming shop, pet breeder, or pet dealer. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-20) 
Sec. 6-46. - Dog fighting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, carry on, train for, attend or own any animal for the participation of any game, exhibition, contest or fight in which one or more animals are engaged for the purpose of injuring, killing, maiming or destroying themselves or any other animal with the exception of any activity permitted under state game and fish laws. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-20; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-21) 
Sec. 6-47. - Unlawful interference with animal ownership. 
No person shall, without the knowledge of, or consent of owner, hold or possess any animal which he does not own for more than 72 hours without first reporting the possession of such animal to the animal control office. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-21; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-22) 
Sec. 6-48. - Failure to surrender animal upon demand. 
No person shall fail or refuse to surrender, any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by the animal control officer or his agents. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-19; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-23) 
Sec. 6-49. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
(a)	Owners of animals picked up by the office animal control have the right to redeem the same upon payment of any and all fees which may be due and payable for the impoundment of such animals; provided, however, the payment of such impoundment fees shall not bar the imposition of any fine or punishment which may be imposed, by the magistrate court of the county. 
(b)	Impounded dogs and cats will be held at the county animal shelter or other designated shelter for a period of five days, except for animals collared and tagged with proper identification, which shall be held for ten days. Any such animal not redeemed within said time may be rescued, transferred to another agency, or disposed of in the most humane manner. The fees for these services shall be recommended by the office of animal control to be set by the county board. There may also be additional charges for feeding, boarding and caring for such animals. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-22; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-24) 
Secs. 6-50—6-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 6-72. - Report and quarantine. 
Any animal which bites or scratches a person or another animal or which otherwise gives symptoms of having rabies shall be immediately reported to the office of animal control and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the office of animal control for a period of ten days. At the discretion of the animal control officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, if the vaccinations are current, or at the county animal control facility, designated shelter, or at the veterinarian of the owner's choice and at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-23; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-25) 
Sec. 6-73. - Disposition of dead rabid animals. 
If rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or a wild animal that has bitten or scratched another, the animal's carcass shall be turned over to the state health department for testing. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-24; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-26) 
Sec. 6-74. - Area-wide quarantine. 
When the report indicates a positive diagnosis of rabies, the animal control officer may order an areawide quarantine for a period of 60 days, in which all animals in the area will be confined and no animals moved in or out of such area. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-25; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-27) 
Sec. 6-75. - Destruction and isolation of bitten animals. 
Animals bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately euthanized. If the owner is unwilling to have this done, the animal should be placed in strict isolation for six months, by a kennel designated by the health department, and vaccinated either upon entry to isolation or one month before being released. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-26; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-28) 
Sec. 6-76. - Surrender of carcass. 
The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the county health department or the office of animal control. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-27; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-29) 
Sec. 6-77. - Exceptions. 
Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this article, except where expressly stated. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-28; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-30) 
Sec. 6-78. - Magistrate jurisdiction. 
The magistrate court of the county shall have jurisdiction over all violations of any portion of this chapter, and shall have all powers granted to it which are necessary and incident to the hearing and disposition of matters brought before the court as defined by this Code and state law. The following persons have standing to file complaints for violations: 
(1)	Animal control officer or his agents. 
(2)	Dog control officer or his agents. 
(3)	Other law enforcement officers. 
(4)	Public health officials or officers. 
(5)	Individuals with personal knowledge of a violation upon filing a sworn affidavit with the magistrate court. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 10-29; Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-31) 
Secs. 6-79—6-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 6-100. - Definitions. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to this article. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)	Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; 
(2)	Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; or 
(3)	While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Local government means any county or municipality of this state. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(b)	No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement or military officer's official duties. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense of assault or battery. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-32) 
Sec. 6-101. - Enforcement officials. 
(a)	Generally. The office of animal control shall be charged with the responsibility of enforcing the state Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
(b)	Dog control officer. The county has designated the director of the office of animal control as the dog control officer to enforce this division and perform the duties and exercise the powers assigned to that position by the Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
(c)	Dangerous or vicious dog hearing officer. The county has created the office of dangerous or vicious dog hearing officer and designated the chief magistrate judge of the county magistrate court to serve as such officer, performing the functions of an authority as that term is used in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-33) 
Sec. 6-102. - Investigations and determination. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal shelter shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-14-2. 
Mail means to send by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
(b)	Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(c)	When a dog control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within 72 hours. The notice shall provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this division. If an owner cannot be located within ten days of a dog control officer's determination that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, such dog may be released to an animal shelter or humanely euthanized, as determined by the dog control officer. 
(d)	When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with this section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the chief magistrate for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the authority conducting the hearing shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the magistrate court conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
(e)	Within ten days after the hearing, the magistrate court shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(f)	Judicial review of the magistrate court's final decision may be had in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.9. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-34) 
Sec. 6-103. - Impoundment. 
A law enforcement officer or dog control officer shall immediately impound a dog if the officer believes the dog poses a threat to the public safety. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-35) 
Sec. 6-104. - Registration. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this state a classified dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)	Unless otherwise specified by this section, a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)	The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the dangerous dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dangerous dog from leaving such property; and 
(2)	Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides. 
(c)	Except as provided in subsections (e) and (f) of this section, a certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)	The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property; 
(2)	Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)	A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog; and 
(4)	The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog. 
(d)	No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this division. 
(e)	No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious dog. 
(f)	No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1)	A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)	The felony of dogfighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-40; or 
(3)	A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1; 
from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(g)	Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a vicious dog, a dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with provisions of this division. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this division. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-36) 
Sec. 6-105. - Notifications by owner of change in dog's status. 
(a)	The owner of a classified dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose or has attacked a human and shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog has died or has been euthanized. 
(b)	A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
(c)	The owner of a classified dog who moves out of the county shall notify the dog control officer. The owner of a similarly classified dog who moves into the county shall register the dog as required in this division within 30 days of becoming a resident. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-37) 
Sec. 6-106. - Limitations on dog's presence off of owner's premises; penalty for violation; defense. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be off the owner's property unless: 
(1)	The dog is restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; 
(2)	The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(3)	The dog is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be: 
(1)	Outside an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog while on the owner's property or outside a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property unless: 
a.	The dog is muzzled and restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; or 
b.	The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(2)	Unattended with minors. 
(c)	Failure to comply with subsection (b) of this section constitutes a violation of this division. An owner with a previous conviction for a violation of this division whose classified dog causes serious injury to a human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this division shall be tried in the county superior court for a felony and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than one or more than ten years, a fine of not less than $5,000.00 nor more than $10,000.00, or both. In addition, the classified dog shall be euthanized at the cost of the owner. 
(d)	Any irregularity in classification proceedings shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this division so long as the owner of the dog received actual notice of the classification and did not pursue a civil remedy for the correction of the irregularity. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-38) 
Sec. 6-107. - Confiscation by dog control officer; payment of costs for recovery; euthanasia. 
(a)	A dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by any dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation of this division. A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this division. 
(b)	The owner of any dog that has been confiscated pursuant to this division may recover such dog upon payment of all reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this division, unless such confiscation is deemed to be in error by the dog control officer or the animal control hearing officer. All fines and all charges for services performed by a law enforcement or dog control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the dog. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(c)	In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this division within 14 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be released to an animal shelter or euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. The owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-39) 
Sec. 6-108. - Governmental liability for enforcement. 
Under no circumstances shall the county or any employee or official of the county be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog as a result of a failure to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-40) 
Sec. 6-109. - Penalty for violation of this division. 
Unless otherwise specified in this division, any person violating this division may be deemed guilty of violating a county ordinance and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and by imprisonment in the common jail of the county not to exceed 60 days, six months probation, or both fine and imprisonment. Each act or omission in violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the court, as part of the sentence may prohibit the offender from owning, possessing, or having on the offender's premises in the county any animal during the term of the sentence, may order for the animal to be removed from the county or humanely euthanized, and may order restitution. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2015, § 10-41) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); statewide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Technical building and construction codes adopted. 
The following state minimum standards codes and permissive codes, as set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-20 and 8-2-21, published by the International Code Council (ICC) and the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), are adopted by the county as though fully set forth herein, as supplemented and amended by the state department of community affairs, and as may be amended by provisions of this chapter or of this Code generally: 
(1)	ICC International Residential Code, 2012 edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. 
(2)	ICC International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. 
(3)	ICC International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. 
(Code 1994, § 18-26; Ord. of 12-16-2008, art. I) 
Secs. 8-2—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-21. - Powers and duties. 
The county building inspection department is hereby created and tasked with enforcing the provisions of this article and shall be given the authority to enter upon premises covered under this article at reasonable times and after presenting proper credentials. He may also issue stop work orders and citations for violations of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2008, § 1.1) 
Sec. 8-22. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the building, electrical, plumbing or mechanical codes or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any other provision of this article shall, for each such failure or violation or noncompliance, be punished or fined in the magistrate court of the county in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 or one year in jail. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2008, § 1.2) 
Sec. 8-23. - Competence of workers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any electrical, plumbing, or mechanical installation, or construction on a new residential dwelling unless such work is done by or under the direct supervision of a person holding a license from the state licensing board. Any state licensed person who certifies under oath to the building inspector that he has supervised the installation, construction or repair of any of the aforementioned codes when in fact he has not shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2008, § 1.3) 
Sec. 8-24. - Permit. 
Prior to beginning foundation work on a new residential structure, any owner, contractor or authorized agent shall make application to the county and obtain a building permit. A set of plans or drawing to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of work to be performed shall be provided at the time of application. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2008, § 1.4) 
Sec. 8-25. - Utility connection. 
(a)	Temporary utilities shall not be connected to any manufactured home or residential structure under construction without having first obtained written authorization from the county building inspection department stating that a permit has been acquired for said manufactured home or residential structure. 
(b)	Permanent utilities shall not be connected to any manufactured home or residential structure without having first obtained written authorization from the county building inspection department stating that a final inspection certificate has been issued for said manufactured home or residential structure. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2008, § 1.5) 
Secs. 8-26—8-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING NUMBERS 

Sec. 8-54. - Display required. 
Every house, mobile home, apartment, business, or other building having a street address number assigned to it under the system of numbering in the unincorporated county shall display such number in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this article. Mobile home parks and apartment complexes, including duplex dwelling structures, shall also be required to have each individual pad, lot number or apartment number displayed in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this article. Such lot, pad or apartment numbers shall be in sequence unless directional signs are provided for numbers not in sequence. 
(Code 1994, § 18-48; Ord. of 2-2-1993, § 1) 
Sec. 8-55. - Method of display. 
(a)	Assigned street address numbers may be fixed to the house, apartment, business or other building itself, provided that such house, apartment, business or other building is not more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge, or edge travel way of the street in front of such building, and the number is readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. Street address numbers may also be placed on mailboxes or signs located on the premises in front of the house, apartment, business or other building, provided that such signs are of a durable type, and are located not more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge of travel way of the street in front of the property, and provided that the numbers on such sign shall be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. 
(b)	If the house, apartment, business or other building to be numbered is more than 50 feet from the curb, pavement edge or edge of travel way of the street in front of the property, or if for any reason a street address number affixed to the building would not be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction, then the street address number shall be displayed on a sign or mailbox on the premises in front of the structure, and complying with the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 18-49; Ord. of 2-2-1993, § 2) 
Sec. 8-56. - Size, condition of numbers. 
Street address numbers affixed to buildings or signs shall be a minimum of three inches in height. Those affixed to mailboxes in the manner specified in this article shall be a minimum of three inches in height. All such signs shall be of a color contrasting to the background so as to be clearly visible. Street address numbers and signs to which they are affixed shall be maintained at all times in good condition. 
(Code 1994, § 18-50; Ord. of 2-2-1993, § 3) 
Sec. 8-57. - Duty of owner; notification. 
The obligation of complying with the provisions of this article shall be upon the owner of the property. Failure to comply shall constitute a violation of this article. Upon such violation, notice shall be given the owner of the property, or his agent, specifying the nature of such violation, and requiring that such violation be remedied and brought into compliance within ten days after receipt of such notice. Failure to comply within the ten days shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 18-51; Ord. of 2-2-1993, § 4) 
Secs. 8-58—8-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOT SIZING 

Sec. 8-88. - Requirements. 
(a)	To provide for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems, minimum lot sizes have been established. Larger lot sizes may be required depending on the proposed development of the property. County health and zoning authorities may require larger minimum lot sizes in which event the larger minimum lot sizes will take precedence. 
(b)	Table MT-1 provides lot size requirements for single-family dwellings, including, but not limited to, manufactured or mobile homes, stick built homes, modular homes, etc., and individual lots in subdivisions or mobile home lots located in areas other than commercial mobile home parks. Area requirements for multiple dwellings on a single recorded lot, where not prohibited by zoning regulations, must be provided in multiples of the minimum lot sizes shown in the table for each dwelling to be constructed on the recorded lot. 
Table MT-1 

 
* In this context, "non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
** gpad = gallons per acre per day=gal/acre/day. 
(c)	The above minimum lot sizes are for the typical size home (three- or four-bedroom) with basic appurtenances such as: driveway, minimum number of trees, and water supply line. If larger homes, swimming pools, tennis courts or cut-buildings, etc. are proposed to be constructed or if trees would interfere with installation of an on-site sewage management system, the county board of health will require larger lots to assure useable soil area. 
(d)	The county board of health may also require larger lot sizes when physical factors indicate the need to do so. These factors include, but are not limited to, the availability of sufficient unobstructed land areas for an approved on-site sewage management system and approved replacement system, slope greater than five percent, percolation rates higher than 45 minutes per inch, need for subsurface drainage or adverse topographic features. 
(e)	Lots shall be a minimum width of 100 feet or 150 feet measured within the area where an approved on-site sewage management system and replacement system are to be located when served by a public water supply system or non-public water supply system, respectively. 
(f)	The following land areas are not considered as a part of a lot when calculating the required minimum lot size: rights-of-way of roads, easements (such as power line or pipe line) that exclude installation of an on-site sewage management system, bodies of water, land within 50 feet of a lake, river, stream, wetland or other bodies of water and similar limiting factors. 
(g)	There must be an unobstructed area on each lot for installation of an approved on-site sewage management system and an area equal in size for a conventional system or larger area, as appropriate, for an approved replacement system; this will include sufficient area for necessary site modifications for installation of both the initial system and a replacement system. All pertinent county zoning set-backs and other space requirements must also be met. 
(h)	The maximum daily sewage flow for each lot or parcel of land shall not exceed 600 gpad when served by non-public or individual water supply system or 1,200 gpad when served by public water supply system. When sewage flows exceed these quantities (600 or 1,200 gpad as indicated) for a given dwelling structure, the minimum lot size or parcel of land shall be increased proportionally. 
Example: Assume a public water supply exists (so 1,200 gpad maximum sewage flow allowed per minimum required land area of 21,780 square feet), and there is a proposed sewage flow of 5,000 gpd. To determine X= the square footage of the lot needed, use the following formula: 
= 4.17 acres 
= 4.17 acres x 43,560 ft 2 /acre 
= 181,500 ft 2 area of land needed. 
Likewise, for a non-public (individual) water supply, to determine Y= the square footage of the lot needed for a proposed sewage flow of 5,000 gpd, use the following formula: 
Y=8.33 acres 
Y=8.33 acres x 43560 ft 2 /acre 
Y= 363,000 ft 2 area of land needed. 
(i)	Subsections (c) through (h) of this section shall also apply to multifamily residential dwellings, all other non-single-family dwellings and commercial structures, and mobile homes located in commercial mobile home parks, in addition to the lot size requirements shown in Table MT-2. 
Table MT-2 

 
* In this context, "non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
** gpad=gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day 
(j)	In groundwater recharge areas, the rules of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, in Ga. Admin. Code ch. 391-3-16-.02 require the following minimum lot sizes: 
(1)	Subdivisions and individual lots . New homes served by septic tank and absorption field systems shall be on lots having the following minimum size limitations as identified in Table MT-1. 
a.	150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table MT-1 if lot is within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.	125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table MT-1 if lot is within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
c.	110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table MT-1 if lot is within a low susceptibility area. 
(2)	Mobile home parks . New mobile home parks served by septic tanks and absorption field systems shall be on lots having the following size limitations as identified in Table MT-2. 
a.	150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table MT-2 if lot is within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.	125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table MT-2 if lot is within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
c.	110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table MT-2 if lot is within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(3)	If county health or zoning regulations require a larger lot size than that required in this section for mobile homes, the larger lot size shall be used. 
(4)	The county may exempt from the requirements of this subsection any lot of record in existence prior to the date of adoption of the Ga. Admin. Code ch. 391-3-16-.02. 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County's authority to levy, assess and collect business and occupational license taxes and license fees, exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120; junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gold, silver and other precious metal buyer means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of purchasing tangible personal property made up of gold, silver, or other precious metals or tangible property containing gold, silver, or other precious metals from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers. 
(Code 1994, § 22-71; Res. of 1-20-1981, § 1) 
Sec. 10-20. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who buys gold, silver or other precious metals who shall: 
(1)	Fail to make an entry of any item purchased in his permanent record book; 
(2)	Make any false entries therein; 
(3)	Falsify, obliterate, destroy or remove from his place of business his permanent record book; 
(4)	Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such permanent record book or any goods in his possession during the ordinary business hours; 
(5)	Fail to maintain a record of each purchase for at least two years; 
(6)	Fail to hold the gold, silver, or precious metal item that he has purchased for a period of ten days; or 
(7)	Fail to provide the daily records as required in this article; 
shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1994, § 22-72; Res. of 1-20-1981, § 5) 
Sec. 10-21. - Record of transactions. 
(a)	Any purchaser of gold, silver or other precious metals shall maintain a book in permanent form in which the following shall be entered: 
(1)	The date of the purchase transaction; 
(2)	The name of the person with whom the transaction is conducted; 
(3)	The name, age and address of the customer; 
(4)	A description of the general appearance of the customer, the distinctive number from the customer's driver's license or other similar identification cards, and the full name, weight, height, sex and race of the person of whom property is purchased; 
(5)	An identification and description of the purchased goods including, if available, the distinguishing markings, number, monogram, and all identification markings found on the item purchased; 
(6)	The price paid for the items, the number of the check, if payment is made by check; 
(7)	The signature of the customer from whom the items are purchased. 
(b)	The book shall be opened to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at a reasonable time. 
(c)	The record of each purchase transaction as provided in this section shall be maintained for a period of not less than two years. 
(Code 1994, § 22-73; Res. of 1-20-1981, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 10-22. - Holding period; list for county sheriff. 
The buyer of gold, silver, or other precious metals in the unincorporated areas of the county shall be required to keep all merchandise purchased in his possession for a period of at least ten days from the date of purchase and submit a list of the items along with the information requested by this article to the county sheriff or his designee. 
(Code 1994, § 22-74; Res. of 1-20-1981, § 4) 
Sec. 10-23. - License fee. 
The license fee for a gold, silver and precious metal buyer shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1994, § 22-75; Res. of 1-20-1981, § 6) 
Secs. 10-24—10-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOGGING 

Sec. 10-46. - Permit required. 
No person shall begin logging a tract of land in the county without first obtaining a permit from the board of county commissioners in the manner specified in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 10-47. - General standards for issuance of temporary access permit. 
The county shall issue a permit hereunder when it finds: 
(1)	That the work shall be done in accordance with the standard specifications of county public works department; 
(2)	That the health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired; and 
(3)	That the roadways will not be damaged and proper water drainage will not be adversely affected. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2003, § 2) 
Sec. 10-48. - Construction and supervision. 
All work for which a permit is granted hereunder shall be constructed according to the specifications established by the county so that the drainage, access, compaction, materials, dimensions, slope, width, and other aspects shall not unreasonably interfere with traffic flow and drainage considerations. All ramp or access construction granted hereunder shall be at least 48 feet in width and under the direction and supervision of the road superintendent of each district, or his designee, who shall have the authority to order the applicant to immediately cease all logging when applicant does not construct and maintain access ramps to county standards. The logging operator will be responsible for all cost associated with ramp construction. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2003, § 3) 
Sec. 10-49. - Permit information. 
Every person required to procure a logging permit under the provisions of this article shall submit a written application for such permit to the county board of commissioners. The written application shall state the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the operator. 
(2)	The name and address of the property owner. 
(3)	The purpose for which the application is submitted. 
(4)	A map showing the location of the tract to be logged. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2003, § 4) 
Sec. 10-50. - Issuance of permit. 
After a review of the application, the county shall either issue or deny the request for a permit in writing. If the permit is approved, the permit shall be valid for the permitted site until released or terminated pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2003, § 5) 
Sec. 10-51. - Display of permit. 
It shall be the duty of any operator hereunder to display the permit issued to him in a conspicuous place at the site of the driveway. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such permit at or about any location not covered thereby, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2003, § 6) 
Sec. 10-52. - Bond. 
(a)	Prior to receiving the permit, all operators hereunder shall file with the county a cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit from a lending institution in the amount of $5,000.00 and shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the county board of commissioners from all damages and cost of repairs to any county road, county rights-of-way, ditches, and bridges. 
(b)	Within 30 days after completion of the project, operator shall remove the driveway and restore the right-of-way to its original condition. The bond may be released provided all corrections, repairs, and improvements have been made by the operator within the time limits stated herein. 
(c)	In the event the operator fails to correct any damages within 30 days after completion of the project or within 30 days from written notice from county, whichever first occurs, the county may correct all damages. All costs and charges to the county for the corrective work shall be the responsibility of the operator, who shall reimburse the county within 30 days after he is presented with a written bill for corrective work. The county shall use the bond as an offset to the costs, and if the costs of the corrective work exceed the value of said bond, the applicant shall be responsible for the deficit balance. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2003, § 7) 
Sec. 10-53. - Warning signs. 
Any firm, company, or person operating on county rights-of-way shall be required to post warning signs at least 500 feet on both sides of the temporary driveway adequately warning oncoming traffic of persons, vehicles, equipment or machinery entering roadway. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2003, § 8) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70; authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT; ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the President of the United States. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation: 
(1)	Firefighting services; 
(2)	Police services (public safety); 
(3)	Medical and health services; 
(4)	Rescue; 
(5)	Engineering; 
(6)	Warning services; 
(7)	Communications; 
(8)	Defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons; 
(9)	Evacuation of persons from stricken areas; 
(10)	Emergency welfare services; 
(11)	Emergency transportation; 
(12)	(Nuclear power) plant protection; 
(13)	Temporary restoration of public service utility services; and 
(14)	Other functions related to civilian protection; 
together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the governor to head the state emergency management agency. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, § I) 
Sec. 12-20. - Local organization for emergency management. 
In agreement with the governing officials of the cities within the county, there is hereby established the county emergency management agency. The chairperson of the county commissioners, with the concurrence of officials of the cities within the county, shall nominate, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of the county emergency management agency. Upon appointment, the local emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the executive officer or governing body and shall serve at the pleasure of such executive officer or governing body. When appointed, the local emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)	Represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)	Assist local officials in organizing county departments for emergency operations. 
(3)	Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the county emergency operations plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities within the county for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)	Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)	Submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activities, etc. 
(6)	Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center. 
(7)	Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, § II) 
Sec. 12-21. - County emergency management agency. 
(a)	The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing county and city departments. The emergency support functions (ESFs) and department/agency assignments are as follows. Department/agency assignments listed below are examples only. It is the responsibility of local governments to make assignments based upon local capabilities. 

 
* As appropriate to the local organization, these functions can be assigned to existing departments or may be separate. Functions should be assigned consistent with the local emergency operations plan. 
(b)	Heads of county departments listed above are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to the emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes and/or SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, § III) 
Sec. 12-22. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster or any other emergency which may effect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairperson of the county commissioners separately, or jointly with the mayors of Cadwell, Dexter, Dublin, Dudley, East Dublin, Montrose, and Rentz, or in their absence their legally appointed successors may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
(1)	To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes; 
(2)	To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies; 
(3)	To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; 
(4)	To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster; 
(5)	Subject to the order of the governor or the chief executive of the political subdivision, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the subdivision relating to firefighting, engineering, rescue, heath, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the subdivision; 
(6)	In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims; and to enter into whatever arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payment of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units. (O.C.G.A., Georgia Emergency Management Act 1981, as amended, chapter 3, article 2, 38-3-27.) 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, § IV) 
Sec. 12-23. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, § V) 
Sec. 12-24. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, § VI) 
Sec. 12-25. - Liberality of construction. 
This article shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, § VII) 
Secs. 12-26—12-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL EMERGENCY AGENCY 

Sec. 12-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Locally declared emergency or declaration of local emergency means a declaration by the chair of the board of commissioners enacting some or all of the local emergency powers addressed in this article. 
State declared emergency or state of emergency means a declaration by the governor of an actual or impending emergency or disaster of natural or human origin, or pandemic influenza emergency, or impending or actual enemy attack, or a public health emergency, within or affecting the state or against the United States. A declaration of emergency by the governor may enact some or all of the emergency powers, local or otherwise, addressed in this article. 
Sec. 12-57. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)	Declaration of local emergency . 
(1)	Grant of authority . In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the county and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the chair of the board of commissioners may declare a local emergency for the county. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)	Request for state assistance . Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the chair may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the county to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)	Continuance . The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the chair finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the chair shall execute and file with the clerk of the board of commissioners a document marking the end of the emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the chair. The board of commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)	Effect of declaration of emergency . 
a.	Activation of emergency operations plan . A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the chair shall automatically activate the county emergency operations plan and shall be the authority for deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.	The county emergency management agency (EMA) director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the emergency management agency, including the implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
2.	In responding to the emergency and conducting necessary and appropriate survey of the damages caused by the emergency, the director or his designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the public's health, safety or welfare. 
3.	The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the county; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the board of commissioners. 
4.	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for purposes of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the public's health, safety, or welfare, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
b.	Emergency powers . Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the chair is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. 
1.	State declared state of emergency . If the governor declares a state of emergency for the county, the chair may cause the following provisions of this article to become effective: 
(i)	Section 12-59, Authority to waive procedures and fee structures; 
(ii)	Section 12-60, Registration of building and repair services; and/or 
(iii)	Section 12-61, Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
2.	Locally declared state of emergency . If the chair declares a local emergency for the county, the chair may cause the following provisions of this article to become effective: 
(i)	Section 12-59, Authority to waive procedures and fee structures; and 
(ii)	Section 12-61, Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.	Authority to waive procedures and fees . Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the board of commissioners is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 12-59 as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
d.	Additional emergency powers . The chair of the board of commissioners shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.	Direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.	Prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.	Make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
4.	Transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any county departments for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
5.	Utilize all available resources of the county and subordinate agencies over which the county has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
6.	Utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health, and welfare, and/or the property of citizens; 
7.	Suspend any ordinance, resolution, order, rules or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any county department, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
8.	Provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
9.	Perform and exercise such other functions, powers, and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)	Form of declaration of local emergency . Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official declaration of local emergency, in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the county clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter that shall be in effect: 
"DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, Laurens County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [description of event] on [date]; 
WHEREAS, the Governor has/has not declared a state of emergency for Laurens County; 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Chair of the Laurens County Board of Commissioners, with advice from the Laurens County Emergency Management Agency, there exist emergency circumstances located in [describe geographic location] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Laurens County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event, certain actions are required. 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
a.	That the county emergency management agency activates the emergency operations plan; 
b.	That the following sections of the Laurens County Code be implemented [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following]: 
____________ Section 4: Authority to waive procedures and fee structures 
____________ Section 5: Registration of building and repair services (to be effective only if the governor declares a state of emergency) 
____________ Section 6: Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency 
____________ Section ____________ : (Any other emergency management ordinances, such as an emergency purchasing ordinance, etc.) 
c.	That the following measures also be implemented: 
_____
_____
_____
(If deemed appropriate, select items from section 12-57(a)(4)c or d or such other measures as appropriate.) 
ENTERED at ____________ [time] on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ [date]. 
____________ 
Chair, Laurens County Board of Commissioners 
(c)	Contracts with municipalities . In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the county's emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the board of commissioners may contract with any municipality for the administration of an emergency response program. 
Sec. 12-58. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)	Law enforcement . In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the county sheriff's office shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this article and/or implemented by the chair or board of commissioners during a declared emergency. 
(b)	Penalties . Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this article, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the chair or board of commissioners upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. Any person who violates any provision in this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)	Injunctive relief . In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations that are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this article, and/or are implemented by the board of commissioners during a declared emergency. 
(d)	Enforcement . Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this article may be enforced by the sheriff's office and the EMA director. 
Sec. 12-59. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)	County business . Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the board of commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings maybe called by the presiding officer or any two-members of the board of commissioners without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)	Public works contracts . Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health; safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). Any E-verify or systematic alien verification for entitlements (SAVE) affidavit shall be obtained from any contractor if otherwise required by law. 
(c)	Purchasing . Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the purchasing ordinances, regulations, or policies may be suspended. county officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)	Code enforcement . Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the county, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)	Fees . Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" includes fees or rates charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean-up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the county on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the county pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)	Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners or its designees may issue temporary permits for mobile homes, trailers, recreational vehicles or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and development services. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of a continuing hardship, and in the discretion of the board of commissioners or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of up to an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
Sec. 12-60. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the county and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this article constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)	The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster shall be the annual rate provided in the county fee schedule. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)	When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)	Name of applicant; 
(2)	Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)	Applicant's social security number or federal employer identification number; 
(4)	If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)	Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)	List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)	State sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)	State business license number, if required; 
(9)	Copy of license from the Secretary of State, if required; 
(10)	A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's legal presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1; 
(11)	At least one secure and verifiable document as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-36-2. 
(d)	Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon a declaration of emergency by the governor and a local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the board of commissioners, the provisions of this section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
Sec. 12-61. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)	To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the chair until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)	To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the chair shall have discretion to impose re-entry restrictions on certain areas. The chair shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the county emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)	Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)	Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)	Authorized and essential personnel of the county; 
(4)	Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)	Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)	Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)	Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the county emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)	Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)	Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)	Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by EMA and/or the sheriff of the county. 
(d)	Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)	Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
Sec. 12-62. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions, and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief that are not in conflict with this chapter are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Department means the department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the Central Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan or plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 14-20(a)(5). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Central Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing, long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(2), § II) 
Sec. 14-20. - Exemptions. 
(a)	This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72; 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this section; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 14-21. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 14-21 and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include: 
a.	Raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; 
b.	Feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; 
c.	Producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chicken, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; 
d.	The production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; 
e.	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting and farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 14-21(c)(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving one and one-tenth acres or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves 1 1/10 acres or less, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (a)(1) through (9) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 14-21; provided further that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb five or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; and 
(10)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, provided that any such land-disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 14-21(b) and (c). 
(b)	Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in section 14-21(b) and (c), issuing authorities shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(2), § III) 
Sec. 14-21. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)	Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this subsection, the terms "proper designs" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(2)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. 
(3)	Failure to property design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(c)	The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this section, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)	Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this section. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed; 
b.	Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetation as long as a protective cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetation cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(16)	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specification and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed; and 
b.	Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(d)	Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)	The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(2), § IV) 
Sec. 14-22. - Application/permit process. 
(a)	General . The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party that can obtain a permit. 
(b)	Application requirement . 
(1)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the county administrator to perform such activity. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the county administrator and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of subsection (b) and (c) of this section. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)	A fee, in the amount of provided in the county fee schedule shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 14-21(c)(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(5)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)	The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. It the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)	Plan requirements . 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 14-21(b) and (c). Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current Issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures, including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)	Data required for site plan. 
a.	Narrative or notes, and other information; notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.	Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.	Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
d.	Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.	Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.	Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement, in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
g.	Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.	Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.	Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.	Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed If deemed necessary by on-site inspection." 
(3)	Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.	Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.	Vicinity maps showing location of project. 
c.	Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
d.	Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
e.	Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
f.	Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
g.	Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
h.	Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
i.	Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia Chapter 6. 
(4)	Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)	Permits . 
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, that any variances required by section 14-21(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, that bonding requirements, if necessary per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met, that all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect regarding existing streets and boundary line survey within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)	No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the county tax commissioner certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(2), § V) 
Sec. 14-23. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)	The county administrator will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)	The county administrator shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)	The districts or the commission, or both, shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission, or both, may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)	The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinances and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary coffective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary correction action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as an issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(2), § VI) 
Sec. 14-24. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity . If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)	Stop-work orders . 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)	All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture . If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity falls to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 14-22(b)(6). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties . 
(1)	Except as provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section, any person who violates any provisions of this article, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to imposed penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(2)	The following penalties shall apply to land-disturbing activities performed in violation of any provision of this article, any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article: 
a.	There shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy; and 
b.	There shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each violation involving land-disturbing activities other than as provided in subsection (d)(2)a of this section. 
(3)	Any person who violates any provisions of this article, the rules and regulations adopted or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order issued as provided in this article, may be held liable for a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in jail or monetary penalty of $2,500.00 per day, or both. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(2), § VII) 
Sec. 14-25. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)	Administrative remedies . The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the board of commissioners within 15 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review . Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(2), § VIII) 
Secs. 14-26—14-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOODS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-54. - Authorization. 
Article IX, section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the county does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 14-55. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 14-56. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 14-57. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)	Protect human life and health; 
(2)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)	Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 14-58. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the county manager or his designee's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 14-60. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before April 1, 2010. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before November 5, 1996. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced on or after November 5, 1996, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after November 5, 1996. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction. 
(1)	The term "start of construction" means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. 
(2)	Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements. 
(3)	For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement . 
(1)	The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. 
(2)	The market value of the structure should be: 
a.	The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
b.	In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
(3)	The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
(4)	For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include: 
a.	Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
b.	Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 6) 
Sec. 14-59. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 14-60. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)	The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
(b)	For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)	Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(d)	The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Laurens County Administrator, 117 E. Jackson Street, Dublin, Georgia, 31021. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 14-61. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 14-62. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 14-63. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 14-64. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 14-65. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 14-66. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 14-67—14-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 14-91. - Designation of administrator. 
The county manager or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 14-92. - Permit procedures. 
(a)	Application for a development permit shall be made to the county 911 center on forms furnished by the county prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(b)	Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage . 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 14-116(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage . For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(c)	Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
(d)	The county manager or his designee shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 14-93. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the county manager or his designee shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-60, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 14-92(b)(2). 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 14-92(b). 
(7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 14-92(b)(1)c and section 14-116(2) or 14-118(2). 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)	Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this article in the office and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 14-94—14-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 14-115. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater: 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction; 
b.	So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 14-116. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements . 
a.	Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-115(4), elevated buildings. 
b.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction . New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 14-93(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles . Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.	Individual lots or parcels; 
2.	In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.	In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.	On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (refer to section 14-115(6)). 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of this subsection (3); 
(4)	Floodway . Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-60 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 14-117. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-60 where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-60, then the county manager or his designee shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this division. Only if data are not available from these sources, then subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-115(4). 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
b.	The county manager or his designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 14-118. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-60 may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-115(4). The county manager or his designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 14-92. 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 14-119. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 14-120. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 4, § F) 
Secs. 14-121—14-138. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 14-139. - Procedures generally. 
(a)	The board of appeals as established by the county shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the county manager or his designee in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)	Conditions for variances: 
(1)	A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.	A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)	The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The county manager or his designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-4-1996(1), art. 5) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION, PROTECTION AND CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(1); statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-2 et seq.; authority to enact ordinances or fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-2 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; electronic security systems installed and serviced by counties or municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RURAL FIRE DEFENSE GROUP EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 

Sec. 16-19. - Established. 
The board of commissioners has established an executive committee of the volunteers of the county rural fire defense group. 
(Code 1994, § 38-26; Res. of 2-17-1981) 
Sec. 16-20. - Composition; terms. 
(a)	The committee will be composed of seven members whose terms will be staggered as follows: 
(1)	Two members will be appointed for one-year terms. 
(2)	Three members will be appointed for two-year terms. 
(b)	When the terms of the committee members expire, they may be reappointed by a majority vote of the executive committee, or a new member may be appointed by a majority vote of the committee. 
(Code 1994, § 38-27; Res. of 2-17-1981) 
Sec. 16-21. - Election of officers; reports; duties. 
(a)	Members shall elect officers and shall decide by majority vote which of them shall have one-year terms and which shall be appointed for two-year terms. 
(b)	The executive committee will report directly to the county fire chief at regular intervals concerning the overall operations of the rural fire defense group. 
(c)	The committee will be responsible for planning and recommending to the fire chief future expense, purchasing equipment for the rural fire services, and furnishing guidelines for day-to-day operations of the rural fire volunteers. 
(Code 1994, § 38-28; Res. of 2-17-1981) 
Chapter 18 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 20 - HISTORIC SITE AND STRUCTURE PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq.; buildings presenting special hazards to persons or property, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13; grants to municipal corporations for repairs on facilities of historical value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1; Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORICAL SOCIETY 

Sec. 20-19. - Objectives. 
The Laurens County Historical Society, Inc., is hereby designated as the official agency of the county to act on its behalf in the discovery, procurement, and preservation of historical sites, structures and buildings relating to the history of the United States, in general, and the county, in particular. 
(Code 1994, § 50-26; Res. of 7-2-1968, § (1)) 
Sec. 20-20. - Funding. 
The Laurens County Historical Society, Inc., is authorized to receive on behalf of the county such grants of federal and state funds as are available, needful and proper to accomplish the objectives set forth in section 20-19, on such terms and conditions as are prescribed by the particular authorized federal or state agency. 
(Code 1994, § 50-27; Res. of 7-2-1968, § (2)) 
Sec. 20-21. - Liability. 
The Laurens County Historical Society, Inc., acting as the official agency of the county for the purposes and objectives set forth in this article, shall not be authorized to incur any indebtedness, liability or obligation against the county. 
(Code 1994, § 50-28; Res. of 7-2-1968, § (3)) 
Chapter 22 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. 7, sec. 1, par. 3; The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas, conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-38; removal of transportable housing from lands subject to writ of possession, O.C.G.A. § 44-7-59; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Decal required. 
(a)	All persons owning a mobile home based in the county on January 1 of each year shall obtain from the tax commissioner a decal before May 1 as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. This requirement pertains to all mobile homes, including those exempt from taxation by homestead exemption or other provisions of state law. 
(b)	Such decals shall be affixed to the mobile homes in such a manner as to cause them to be easily visible for inspection. 
(c)	Owners of mobile homes located in the county after January 1 of any year shall be required to report their mobile homes to the office of the tax commissioner within ten working days. 
(d)	Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to be summoned to the magistrate court by any employee of the tax commissioner's office or any deputy sheriff and, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00, except that upon receipt of proof of purchase of a decal prior to the issuance of a summons, the fine shall be in the maximum amount permitted by state law. In addition, any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject to payment of all collection costs, including, but not limited to, court costs. 
(Code 1994, §§ 54-26, 54-27; Ord. of 3-20-1990, §§ 1, 3) 
Secs. 22-2—22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-21. - Purpose. 
The public health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, morals and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within the county. In keeping with the general intent of this article, it is the specific intent of this article to encourage the development of safe, sound, and stable mobile home parks within the county. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 1.2) 
Sec. 22-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable on its own chassis, permanently equipped to travel on the public highways, that is used either temporarily or permanently as a residence or living quarters. Such unit shall be considered a mobile home whether or not the wheels have been removed and whether it is set on jacks, skirts, masonry blocks, or other foundation. 
Mobile home lot means that portion of a mobile home park reserved for occupancy by a single mobile home unit and its accessory building, structures and uses. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land owned by an individual, partnership, or corporation which is used for or set apart for the purpose of supplying rental of three or more mobile home spaces or actual mobile homes. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), §§ 2.1—2.3) 
Sec. 22-23. - Administration. 
The county administrator is appointed by the board of commissioners to administer this article, approve or disapprove of preliminary plats and construction plans. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 1.3) 
Sec. 22-24. - Liability. 
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the county any liability or responsibility for damages to any person or property caused by defect in any piping or appliance or installation of any products, nor shall the county or any official employee be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by means of the inspection authorized under this article. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 1.4) 
Sec. 22-25. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)	The lawful use of land existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, although such use does not conform to the provisions herein, may be continued. However, if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 90 days, the existing mobile home park must then meet the provisions of this article. 
(b)	This article does not require anyone to relocate a mobile home due to lot line requirements. 
(c)	This article does not prevent anyone from replacing an existing mobile home with another mobile home in the same location as long as the replacement conforms with subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 1.5) 
Sec. 22-26. - Variance. 
When due to a particular reason experienced by a developer it is impractical to comply with the interpretations of this article, the commissioners shall have the authority to vary such requirements provided the intent and purposes of this article are not violated. Such variances and reason for granting them must be entered into the minutes of the commissioner's meeting in which the variance was granted. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 8.1) 
Sec. 22-27. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by law. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 9.1) 
Sec. 22-28. - Court of jurisdiction. 
The county board of commissioners may bring violations of this article before the magistrate of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 9.2) 
Sec. 22-29. - Reports by mobile home park operators. 
(a)	Inventory of mobile homes. Every owner and operator of a mobile home park is required to give to the tax commissioner an inventory of all mobile homes based in the park as of January 1 of each year. This shall be done no later than January 20 of each year. The tax commissioner will make available an inventory of records as of January 1. 
(b)	Removal of homes. Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home park is required to report any mobile home removal from the park prior to the home being removed, if known to the park manager, operator or owner. 
(c)	Map of mobile home park. Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home park shall furnish to the tax commissioner an updated lot map of each park, and any changes shall be reported by January 1 of each year. 
(d)	Notice of change in park ownership. Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home park is required to notify the county of any change of ownership or of the name of any mobile home park within 30 days of such change. 
(Code 1994, § 54-28; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 2) 
Secs. 22-30—22-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT PLAN 

Sec. 22-47. - Plan approval. 
In order to construct, alter, or expand a mobile home park, a developer must secure approval of a development plan from the county board of commissioners. Such plans must be submitted at least 30 days prior to the time construction is to begin. the board of commissioners will then have 30 days to approve, disapprove, or request additional information on the development plan. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 3.1) 
Sec. 22-48. - Plan requirements. 
The mobile home park development plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Name and address of applicant. 
(2)	Name and address of proposed mobile home park, location, and legal description of the property. 
(3)	A copy of the plan that is legible and showing the following: 
a.	The total park area including the shape and dimensions of the site. 
b.	All existing and/or proposed structures, facilities and lots. 
c.	Location, size, and number of existing and proposed mobile home lots. 
d.	Location and width of all existing and proposed roads, including entrances, exits and walkways. 
e.	Provisions for providing water and sewer. 
f.	Other information as may be required by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 3.2) 
Secs. 22-49—22-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 22-70. - Setbacks. 
To allow for adequate lanes for fire protection, all mobile homes and all buildings and structures within a mobile park shall have a front setback of at least 25 feet from the right-of-way of any public street or highway and a minimum setback of ten feet from any road within the park area. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 4.1) 
Sec. 22-71. - Drainage. 
The ground surface in all parts of the mobile home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water or stormwater in a safe and efficient manner. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 4.2) 
Sec. 22-72. - Erosion control. 
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be protected with a cover that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating objectionable dust. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 4.3) 
Sec. 22-73. - Numbering. 
Every mobile home within the park shall be numbered by a means to provide ready visibility from an interior roadway. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 4.4) 
Sec. 22-74. - Entrances and exits. 
The mobile home park community entrance and exit streets shall be designed to provide safe access between the public street and the park. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 4.5) 
Sec. 22-75. - Roads. 
All roads, including private roads, within mobile home parks, excluding a private driveway, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with county road specifications and shall have a minimum right-of-way of at least 60 feet with a paved road bed of not less than 20 feet. All rights-of-way must be cleared of all obstructions, structures, and timbers and be grassed. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 4.6) 
Sec. 22-76. - Cul-de-sac. 
A cul-de-sac with a diameter of not less than 50 feet shall be constructed at the end of all deadend streets within the mobile home park. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 4.7) 
Sec. 22-77. - Sanitary conditions. 
The owner of the mobile home park shall ensure the mobile home park, its facilities, equipment, grounds, roads, buffers, fences, and mobile home lots are maintained in a clean, orderly, safe, and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 4.9) 
Sec. 22-78. - Health, safety, and welfare. 
In approving a mobile home park, the county board of commissioners may attach additional conditions to protect the health, safety and welfare of both the occupants of the mobile home parks and the occupants of surrounding property. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 4.10) 
Sec. 22-79. - Green space/buffer zone. 
The perimeter boundaries of all mobile home parks shall provide for a 50-foot green space or buffer zone between the exterior property lines of the park and the adjoining lot, tract, or parcel of land; provided, however, that such green space or buffer zone shall not be required where a state/county road or highway is the division line between the mobile home park and the adjoining property, or where the mobile home park road is the division line. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 4.11) 
Sec. 22-80. - Green space/buffer zone restrictions. 
There shall be no manmade improvements allowed in the green space or buffer zone. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 4.12) 
Sec. 22-81. - Lot size. 
Mobile home lot/sites shall have an area not less than that required by the county health department. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 5.1) 
Sec. 22-82. - Floodplain area. 
No lots shall be located in an area designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as a floodplain. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 5.2) 
Sec. 22-83. - Lot location. 
All mobile home lots must abut an interior road which has direct access to a public road. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 5.7) 
Sec. 22-84. - Tie downs. 
Each mobile home shall have tie downs or other services securing the stability of the mobile home. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 6.1) 
Sec. 22-85. - Skirting. 
Each mobile home shall be skirted on all sides. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 6.2) 
Sec. 22-86. - Steps. 
Steps and/or landings are required for mobile homes at all doors. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 6.3) 
Sec. 22-87. - Water supply. 
An adequate, safe, potable supply of water shall be provided for each mobile home. The source of the supply shall be through a public water system with each mobile home connecting to the water lines or, when such a system is not available, the mobile home community must be serviced by a supply approved by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division or the health inspector. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 7.1) 
Sec. 22-88. - Sewage. 
An adequate and safe sewage disposal system shall be provided for each mobile home in accordance with county on-site sewage management regulations. Collection systems, sewage treatment facilities, or individual septic tanks shall be approved by the health inspector prior to installation. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(1), § 7.2) 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES AND NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 24-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)	Any person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if he: 
(1)	Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in fear of safety for his life, limb or health; 
(2)	Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)	Endangers lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct; 
(4)	Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property; 
(5)	Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(6)	Jostles or roughly crowds or pushes any person in any public place; 
(7)	Collects in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes; 
(8)	Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(9)	Frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device; 
(10)	Assembles with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the county, or aids or abets therein; 
(11)	Utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets; 
(12)	Frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated; 
(13)	Acts in a dangerous manner toward others; 
(14)	Uses fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil; 
(15)	Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another; 
(16)	By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(17)	Congregates with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority; 
(18)	Makes any unreasonably loud and unnecessary noise; 
(19)	Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition; 
(20)	Consumes alcoholic beverages on any public street, sidewalk, or any other public property within the corporate limits of the county. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption; 
(21)	Consumes alcoholic beverages in a vehicle or not on any public or private parking lot within the corporate limits of the county, except those maintained at establishments holding a valid on-premises license for the retail sale of beer or wine. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption. 
(b)	Any person convicted of disorderly conduct, as defined in this section, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or up to 60 days imprisonment, or both. 
(Code 1994, § 62-1) 
Sec. 24-2. - Public drunkenness. 
(a)	Definitions . A person commits the offense of public drunkenness when such person commits any of the following: A person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	Enforcement . It is hereby made the duty of the county sheriff's department to see that provisions of this section relating to disorderly conduct are carried out, and to summon all violators of same to appear before the magistrate court of the county, and it is further made the duty of the county sheriff's department and the county sheriff to inspect all violations of this section. 
(c)	Penalties . Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both, as provided in section 1-11. 
Chapter 26 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to a resolution dated April 6, 1993, the board of commissioners adopted the Heart of Georgia Solid Waste Regional Management Plan as developed by the Heart of Georgia Regional Development Center. A copy of such plan is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined herein. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or water course; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlines, or forests. 
Residential dwelling unit means a building or mobile home, or modular home, or portion of either, providing facilities for one family, and shall include both owner-occupied residential dwelling units and renter-occupied dwelling units, irrespective of whether said residential dwelling unit is actually occupied for the entire calendar year. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted under O.C.G.A. § 391-3-4-19(5.G) for the purpose of removal to scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires as defined in O.C.G.A. § 391-3-4-19(2-1) of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management. 
Scrap tires means all tires which are no longer suitable for their original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Waste means all discarded substances and material or any such substance, biomedical waste, hazardous waste, or material dumped for commercial purposes with the exception of animal byproducts. The term "waste" includes, without limitation, bottles, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, tires, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicles parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or governmental operations, including household, commercial, construction and demolition waste, or industrial solid waste which is not hazardous, nonmedical, and in a form classified as solid waste by the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2002, § 3; Ord. of 9-11-2007, § I) 
Sec. 26-2. - Waste disposal; general. 
(a)	The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposition of garbage, litter, waste, scrap tires, and refuse on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving litter, waste or scrap tires at any place in this county, including, without limitation, any public or private property in this county or any waters in this county unless: 
(1)	Such litter or waste originates in this county; 
(2)	The property is designated and permitted by the state and/or by the county board of commissioners or its duly designated agent for disposal of litter and waste, and the person is authorized to use such property; and 
(3)	The litter or waste is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; however, any litter or waste places into such a receptacle or container installed on such property must not be allowed to accumulate for an unreasonable period of time, and in no event shall it be allowed to accumulate to the point of overflowing the container or receptacle. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place waste unless authorized to do so by law or by a duly issued permit: 
(1)	In or on any public highways, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping. 
(2)	In or on any fresh water lake, river, canal, stream or creek. 
(3)	In or on any public or private property unless such dumping will not adversely affect the public health and is not in violation of any other local, state or federal law, rule, or regulation. 
(d)	All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, and tire retailers shall be subject to rules as defined in O.C.G.A. § 391-3-4-19 and the rules for solid waste management, O.C.G.A. § 391-3-4-19, applicable to solid waste. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § II) 
Sec. 26-3. - Transportation litter and waste. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle in the county hauling wet or moist litter or waste which leaks, flows freely or spills from such vehicle. 
(b)	Any litter or waste hauled on a moving vehicle in the county shall be covered or secured in such a manner that the litter or waste will not blow or escape from said vehicle while moving or parked on public streets or roadways in the county. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to transport litter or waste on any public streets, or roadways, in the county without suitable coverings or other restraint devices securely fastening such litter or waste to the vehicle so as to prevent any materials from being deposited on the roads or adjoining areas of the county. However, this section shall not prohibit the necessary spreading of any substances in public road maintenance or public road construction operations. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § III) 
Sec. 26-4. - Regulation of garbage or litter containers or receptacles. 
(a)	All garbage or litter containers or receptacles shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is responsibly possible consistent with its use for garbage and litter disposal. 
(b)	Persons using garbage or litter container or receptacles shall deposit all authorized garbage and refuse in the container or receptacle. 
(c)	No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in any such container and receptacle. 
(d)	No person shall set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle. 
(e)	No dead animals shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle. 
(f)	No person shall deposit large non-compactable articles in such containers or receptacles such as stoves, refrigerators, bedsprings, mattresses, tires, large tree limbs, air conditioning units, or similar items that are not household garbage. 
(g)	No one shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such containers or receptacles. 
(h)	No person shall place or scatter litter or waste in or around such containers or receptacles. 
(i)	No one shall scavenge or collect items form in or around such containers or receptacles. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § IV) 
Sec. 26-5. - Accumulation. 
(a)	No owner or occupant of any premises in the unincorporated areas of the county shall allow litter or waste to accumulate thereon. No owner or occupant of any such property shall bury litter or waste without prior authorization and permission from the applicable regulatory agency, including, but not limited to, the environmental protection agency, state environmental protection division and/or the state forestry service. Nothing in the provision shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law. 
(b)	No owner or occupant of any property shall allow the accumulation, on his premises, of garbage or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any containers used fort the storage or dumping of litter or waste. 
(d)	The conduct described in subsections (a) through (c) of this section shall constitute a separate violation of this article from each day the garbage or waste material remains on such premises. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § V) 
Sec. 26-6. - Yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § X) 
Sec. 26-7. - Recycling. 
The county board of commissioners hereby finds that it is in the best interest of the citizens of the county, in order to promote the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of the county, to recycle as many waste materials as possible in order to reduce the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste material within the county and to reduce the overall solid waste materials which must be properly disposed of. Therefore, it is the policy of the county board of commissioners to encourage recycling whenever practicable. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § XI) 
Sec. 26-8. - Unlawful use of dumpster. 
(a)	Any person shall be guilty of unlawful use of dumpster if he places unauthorized waste in, or about, a county dumpster. The term "unauthorized waste" is defined as any waste other than the usual household garbage, including, but not limited to: 
(1)	Dead animals; 
(2)	Any and all household appliances or furnishings; 
(3)	Building materials, including waste scrap building materials; 
(4)	Limbs or any yard waste; and 
(5)	Tires and/or batteries. 
(b)	Whenever any waste which is dumped in violation of this section is discovered to contain any article, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publication, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon, addressed to such person or in any other manner indicating that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this part. 
(c)	Nothing in this part shall limit the authority of any state agency to enforce any other laws, rules, or regulations relating to waste. 
(d)	Any person convicted of unlawful use of dumpster, as defined in this section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1994, § 82-2; Ord. of 10-18-1994) 
Secs. 26-9—26-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USER FEES 

Sec. 26-35. - Obligation. 
It is hereby declared that on January 1 of each year, every residential dwelling unit located within the unincorporated areas of the county is hereby assessed an annual user fee in the amount of $50.00 per year. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 26-36. - Liability for payment. 
The owner of each residential dwelling unit shall be liable for payment of the applicable annual user fee, and if said residential dwelling unit is permanently affixed to the real estate, both said owner and said real estate shall be liable for payment of said user fee. If the residential dwelling unit is not permanently affixed to the real estate, or if said owner of the real estate is not the owner of the residential dwelling unit, then the real estate where located shall not be liable for payment of said user fee. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2002, § 4) 
Sec. 26-37. - Due dates. 
The annual user fee assessed against each residential dwelling unit shall be due and payable in conjunction with the applicable property tax due date each year with a penalty for late payment in the amount of $10.00 if not paid on or before May 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2002, § 5) 
Sec. 26-38. - Administration. 
(a)	The county tax assessor's office shall provide the county tax commissioner a list of names and addresses and property tax identification numbers of each residential dwelling unit which is liable for payment of said user fee. 
(b)	The county tax commissioner shall collect and receive payment of the applicable user fees, which user fee shall be reflected upon and included upon the annual tax bill issued for ad valorem taxes. 
(c)	The county tax commissioner shall enforce collection of delinquent user fees, penalties and interest by any remedy or right allowed by law for the enforcement of the collection and payment of state property taxes, either by the revenue commissioner, tax commissioner or tax collector, to include, but not be limited to, the issuance of an execution fi. fa., which shall be entered upon the general execution docket of the clerk of superior court of the county levied and sold according to law. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2002, § 6) 
Sec. 26-39. - Exemptions. 
There is hereby provided an exemption to the sanitation user fee as to any residential dwelling unit which is not or will not in the future be occupied, if the owner shall execute and file with the commissioner's office an affidavit stating that said unit is vacant with no intent to occupy or rent the same. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2002, § 7) 
Secs. 26-40—26-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 26-67. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	Any person violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in this magistrate court of the county shall be punished by fine of not more than, $1,000.00, or up to 60 days' imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the county from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the county to have both the civil and criminal rights or prosecution in this area. 
(b)	In the sound discretion of the magistrate court, the violator may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way any litter the person had deposited and any and all litter thereon by anyone else. 
(c)	In the sound discretion of the magistrate court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any litter from any public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person had deposited litter thereon, and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(d)	The court may order the publication of the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § VI) 
Sec. 26-68. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the county code enforcement officer or his designee. Any person authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable cause, at reasonable times in order to inspect the property for violations of this article, subject to the condition that to allow entry on private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this article must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon such officer having received a complaint by a resident of the county alleging a violation of this article, the magistrate court of the county shall be authorized to issue summons for hearing on alleged violation of this article upon written accusation of any person sui juris alleging such violation. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § VII) 
Sec. 26-69. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
In the event that any person violates any provision of this article, the county attorney or other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful act or to correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § VIII) 
Sec. 26-70. - Evidence of violations. 
(a)	Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped, from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)	Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name or a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § IX) 
Secs. 26-71—26-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WASTE DISPOSAL RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 26-99. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes, but is not limited to, landfilling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations. The term "industrial waste" includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: 
(1)	Electric power generation; 
(2)	Fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; 
(3)	Food and related products and byproducts; 
(4)	Inorganic chemicals; 
(5)	Iron and steel products; 
(6)	Leather and leather products; 
(7)	Nonferrous metal and foundry products; 
(8)	Organic chemicals; 
(9)	Plastics and resins; 
(10)	Pulp and paper; 
(11)	Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; 
(12)	Stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; 
(13)	Textiles; 
(14)	Transportation equipment; and 
(15)	Water treatment. 
The term "industrial waste" does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Inert waste means wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. The term "inert waste" excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed. 
Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in this article, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Open dump means a disposal facility at which solid waste from one or more sources is left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment, as defined in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-3-4-.01. 
Person means this state or any other state or agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in this state or any other state. The term "person" also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in this state or any other state. The term "person" also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government, as defined in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-3-4-.01. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. The term "recovered materials processing facility" shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires, as defined in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-3-4-.19(2). 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect, as defined in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-3-4-.19(2). 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility, as defined in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-3-4-.19(2). 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments, as defined in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-3-4-.19(2). 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the environmental protection division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing, as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires, as defined in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-3-4-.19(2). 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources, subject to permit under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material, as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923), as defined in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-3-4-.01. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste, or any combination of such activities, as defined in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-3-4-.01. 
Waste means all discarded substances and materials whatsoever exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance in any weight or volume if biomedical waste, hazardous waste, a hazardous substance, or any such substance or material dumped for commercial purposes. With the exception of non-hazardous, low-impact animal byproducts classified by the state department of natural resources, the term "waste" includes, without limitation, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, bottles, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, tires, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, sludge from a wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, air contaminants from any source or facility, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or governmental operations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § I, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-100. - Waste disposal; general. 
(a)	The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all litter, waste, scrap tires, and municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to dump, open dump, or permit the dumping of litter, waste, scrap tires, municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or recyclables at any place in the county, including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any public or private property in the county or any waters in the county unless such litter or waste originates in the county or other areas authorized by the county board of commissioners and: 
(1)	The property is designated by the board of commissioners or its duly designated agent for the disposal of litter, waste, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, scrap tires or recovered materials and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)	The litter, waste, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, recyclables or scrap tires are placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and 
(3)	The property has a valid solid waste handling permit issued by the state environmental protection division (EPD) when required. 
(c)	All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in chapter 391-3-4 et seq., of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, chapter 391-3-4 et seq., applicable to solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § II, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-101. - Transporting solid waste and litter. 
(a)	All vehicles, driving or stationary, within the county shall be so constructed, loaded, covered, or securely fastened so as to prevent municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or any load, contents, litter, or other such waste or materials from flowing freely, being blown, scattered, leaked, spilt, or in any manner deposited in or upon any highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, sidewalk, other motor vehicles, pedestrians, or other public place, or upon private property within the county. However, this section shall not prohibit the necessary and permitted spreading of any substance in public road maintenance or public road construction operations. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for a business or private person engaged in waste hauling or transportation for hire from businesses or private residences to dispose of materials as solid waste that have been intentionally sorted as recyclables by the business or private residence to a lawfully permitted disposal facility rather than placing the materials in the location designated by the county or appropriate authority for said recyclables. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move any vehicle within the county, the wheels or tires of which carry unto or deposit in or upon any highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property within the county, mud, dirt, sticky substance, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(d)	Anyone who engages in the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste in the county for a fee shall be required to obtain a solid waste handling permit as required by the state environmental protection division and dispose of all solid waste at a state-approved landfill. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § III, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-102. - Regulation of all solid waste or litter containers and receptacles. 
(a)	All solid waste or litter containers or receptacles and their surrounding area shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for solid waste and litter disposal. 
(b)	Persons using solid waste and litter containers or receptacles shall deposit only authorized solid waste and refuse in the appropriate container or receptacle. 
(c)	No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any container or receptacle unless authorized by the owner of the receptacle or the county board of commissioners or their designee. 
(d)	No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in such container or receptacle, or set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle. 
(e)	No person shall deposit large non-compatible articles in containers or receptacles, such as, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, bedsprings, automobile parts, boat parts, large tree limbs or air conditioning units, except containers or receptacles designated for that purpose only. 
(f)	No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacle. 
(g)	No dead animals shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle, except containers or receptacles designed for such purpose and so designated by the county board of commissioners. 
(h)	No person shall willfully damage or alter the location of any such container or receptacle without the written consent of the county board of commissioners. 
(i)	No salvage or scavenging operations shall be conducted in or around such containers or receptacles except by written consent of the county board of commissioners. 
(j)	No person shall indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of any containers or receptacles. 
(k)	No person shall deposit any solid waste at a county solid waste collection and recycling center unless such solid waste is contained in a manner that it can be handled by the attendant and shall be deposited only during the official hours of operation unless express written permission is given by the county board of commissioners or designee. 
(l)	No person shall deposit solid waste, litter or liquid of any kind at any county solid waste collection and recycling center into county owned receptacles or containers designated for the collection of recovered materials. Only authorized materials such as glass, aluminum, newspaper, cardboard, plastic, and tin or other accepted material may be deposited in the appropriate container designated for said material. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § IV, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-103. - Solid waste, inert and, construction and demolition landfills; collection and recycling centers. 
(a)	No landfill shall be operated in the county other than a landfill designated by the county board of commissioners as the county landfill, and no private municipal solid waste landfill shall be operated in the county without a solid waste handling permit issued by the state environmental protection division. 
(b)	No person shall deposit solid waste of any kind outside the gate of a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(c)	No scavenging operation of any kind shall be allowed at a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(d)	No person shall move, remove, or cross any fence, gate, barrier, or sign at a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(e)	Price on solid waste brought to said center will be set to defray total cost of solid waste and recycling operations. 
(f)	Hours of operation of said centers will be set to maximize convenience to residents of that area. 
(g)	All recovered materials (recyclables) brought to collection centers will be accepted free of charge, provided it is separated under current market specifications and likewise uncontaminated. 
(h)	All collection centers will be manned during hours of operation to ensure compliance with this article and all applicable state and/or federal laws. 
(i)	Attendant on duty will have full authority of said center consistent with this article. 
(j)	All rules listed above shall apply to all public and/or private property in said county, all waters and/or waterways of said county, and all county solid waste collection and recycling centers. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § V, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-104. - Recovered materials. 
Recovered materials and recovered materials processing facilities are subject to rules as defined in chapter 391-3-4 et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § VI, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-105. - Accumulation. 
(a)	No owner or occupant of any such property shall bury or burn litter or waste without prior authorization and written consent from the applicable regulatory agency, including, but not limited to, the federal environmental protection agency, state environmental protection division or the state forestry commission. Nothing in this provision shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state and/or federal law. 
(b)	No owner or occupant of any property shall cause, suffer or allow the accumulation, on his premises, of garbage, litter or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. 
(c)	The conduct described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall constitute a separate violation of this article for each day the garbage, litter or waste material remains or continues to unlawfully pollute, contaminate or burn on such premises. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § VII, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-106. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	Any person violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the magistrate court of the county, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)	For the first offense: By a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b.1), or up to 30 days' imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the county from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the county to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area; 
(2)	For the second or more offenses: The violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature punishable by a fine of not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or up to 60 days' imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the person may also be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway and/or other public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b.2). 
(c)	In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b.3). 
(d)	The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(e)	The court may order the person to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-53(d). 
(f)	In case of an open dump or improper solid waste, litter or waste disposal site, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this article. The county shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation. 
(g)	The expenses incurred by the county for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to, court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this article. 
(h)	In addition to actions filed by the county for violations of this article, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § VIII, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-107. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the county board of commissioners, the environmental education and enforcement officer or his designee, and/or the county marshal's office or the county sheriff's office. 
(b)	Any person authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this article, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this article must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon said person having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this article, or by a judge's order upon said person having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(c)	Appeals for the violation of this article may be made to the magistrate court of the county, or higher court if the person so chooses. The person always has the right to consult his attorney at any time before the hearing is scheduled for court. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § IX, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-108. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(a)	In the event that any person violates any provision of this article, the county or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation, as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-52 and 16-7-53. In addition, the county may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other county-issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(b)	Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court as defined in section 26-106(a)(2). 
(c)	If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this article, the court and/or the board of commissioners may cause written notice to be given, or incorporate into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this article for which said violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and in the event the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(d)	Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within 20 days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the board of commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of, including, but not limited to, any litter, or any type of waste as defined in this article, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article on behalf of the county. The expenses incurred by the county shall be chargeable to the violator and the board of commissioners and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. 
(e)	When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the board of commissioners shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the county, the dates of county action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(f)	This section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § X, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-109. - Evidence of violations. 
(a)	Whenever litter, or any type of waste as defined in this article, is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped by any person or from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that said person or the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)	Whenever any litter, or any type of waste as defined in this article, which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XI, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-110. - Yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any solid waste disposal facility having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion within the county. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. Any yard trimmings to be collected by any entity other than the property owner shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XII, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-111. - Recycling. 
The county board of commissioners hereby finds that it is in the best interest of citizens of the county, in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county, to recycle as many waste materials as possible in order to reduce the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste materials which must be properly disposed of; therefore, it is the policy of the county board of commissioners to encourage recycling whenever practicable. 
(Ord. No. 82-3, § XIII, 10-15-2002) 
Chapter 28 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Administration. 
The county administrator is appointed by the board of commissioners to administer this policy and approve or disapprove of preliminary plats and construction plans. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 1.3) 
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Subdivision . 
(1)	Definition . The term "subdivision" means a tract or parcel of land divided into three or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, transferring, conveying or building development for residential purposes; whether immediate or future. 
(2)	Exclusions . Excluded from this definition are the following: 
a.	The division of land into parcels where no new road is constructed and all parcels abut a county road. 
b.	The division of land into parcels of 25 acres or more. 
c.	The division of land into parcels for the purpose of conveying the land directly to an immediate family member. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 2.1) 
Sec. 28-3. - Violations. 
Any person violating, neglecting or refusing to comply with any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and or imprisonment for not more than 60 days. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 7.1) 
Sec. 28-4. - Court of jurisdiction. 
The board of commissioners may bring violations of this chapter before the magistrate court of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 7.2) 
Secs. 28-5—28-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT PLAN 

Sec. 28-27. - Plan approval. 
Prior to construction, a development plan shall be submitted to the commissioners for approval with the following information: 
(1)	Name of development and address of owners. 
(2)	Site plan of the community showing road and utility information and lot sizes. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 3.1) 
Sec. 28-28. - Plat filing. 
No subdivision plat shall be filed without prior stamped approval of the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 3.2) 
Secs. 28-29—28-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROAD DESIGN AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 28-60. - Entrances and exits. 
The subdivision entrance and exit streets shall be designed to provide safe access to the public street and intersect at a 90-degree angle. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 4.1) 
Sec. 28-61. - Roads. 
All roads, including private roads, within a subdivision, excluding a driveway leading to a residence, shall be constructed and paved in accordance with the following county road specifications: 
(1)	60 feet of unobstructed right-of-way with a 20-foot, or greater, paved roadbed. 
(2)	The sub-grade shall consist of top soil compacted according to the department of transportation or county specifications. 
(3)	The base shall be six inches of sand clay or chert base compacted according to the department of transportation or county specifications. If the county is not present to inspect compaction rates, documentation from a registered engineer shall be submitted to the county to confirm compaction requirements. It is the responsibility of the developer to coordinate with public works for the compaction inspection with a reasonable notice. 
(4)	Surface area shall be triple surface treatment using stone size number 5, 7, or 89, and group 1 or 2; or asphalt paving of a minimum 1½ inches of E or F mix asphalt may be utilized. A typical section showing base and surface dimensions is attached. 
(5)	All roads shall be paved and completed prior to the selling of lots within the development unless the developer submits a letter of credit or bond to the county in the amount of 110 percent of the completion cost. The developer will then have no more than 180 days to complete the final construction and paving of the road. 
(6)	The county shall not accept the road until one year after its completion. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 4.2) 
Sec. 28-62. - Cul-de-sac. 
A cul-de-sac with a right-of-way radius from the center of not less than 50 feet shall be constructed at the closed end of all dead end streets within a subdivision. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 4.3) 
Sec. 28-63. - Drainage. 
All roads must be brought up to an elevation which prevents flooding, be equipped with proper drainage pipes, including driveway and ramp pipes, and have drainage easements and out-fall ditches. All cross drains shall contain at least 32 feet of approved pipe of a size sufficient to provide for proper drainage and shall be installed with proper sub-grade compaction. All drainage pipes must be concrete or approved coated metal. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 4.4) 
Secs. 28-64—28-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOT SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 28-85. - Lot size. 
All subdivision lots shall abut a road by a minimum of 75 feet, with the exception of a cul-de-sac, which shall have a minimum abutment of 50 feet and have an area not less than the minimum square footage required by the county health department. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 5.1) 
Sec. 28-86. - Lot size with public water and individual septic tank. 
Subdivision lots served by community or public water and individual septic tanks shall contain not less than one-half acre unless the health officer determines that a larger lot size will be needed. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 5.12) 
Sec. 28-87. - Lot size with public water and public sewer. 
Subdivision lots served by community or public water and sewer shall contain the minimum lot area of 5,400 square feet unless the health officer determines that a larger lot size will be needed. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 5.13) 
Sec. 28-88. - Lot size with private water and individual septic tank. 
Subdivision lots served both by an individual well and an individual septic tank shall contain a minimum lot area of at least one acre unless the health officer determines that a larger lot size will be needed. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 5.14) 
Secs. 28-89—28-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 28-105. - Granting. 
When, due to a particular reason experienced by the developer, it is impractical to comply with the interpretations of this chapter, the commissioners shall have the authority to vary such requirements, provided the intent and purposes of this chapter are not violated. Such variances and reasons for granting them must be entered into the minutes of the commissioner's meeting in which the variance was granted. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007(2), § 6.1) 
Chapter 30 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupational license taxes and fees, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-22; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Freeport exemption. 
(a)	There shall be a Freeport exemption of manufacturers' inventories on the following tangible personal property: 
(1)	Class 1: Manufacturers' raw materials and goods-in-process. 
(2)	Class 2: Finished goods held by the original manufacturer. 
(3)	Class 3: Finished goods held by distributors, wholesalers, and manufacturers destined for out-of-state shipment. 
(b)	The county board of tax assessors is authorized to exempt 40 percent of taxable inventories as identified in subsection (a) of this section held by manufacturers, distributors, and wholesalers in the county. 
(Code 1994, § 90-71; Res. of 12-6-1988) 
Editor's note— Exemption from ad valorem taxation of the tangible personal property described in this section was approved by referendum held on November 8, 1988. 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-48.2. 
Sec. 30-2. - Gross premiums tax on insurers. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is levied for each year an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated areas of the county, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). Gross direct premiums shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Code 1994, § 90-51; Res. of 9-6-1983, § 1) 
State Law reference— Taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1(c); county and municipal corporation tax on other than life insurance companies based on gross direct premiums, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Secs. 30-3—30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to levy and collect a business license tax from depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 30-21. - Levy of tax. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied for each year an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of the depository financial institutions. The term "gross receipts" means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The term "depository financial institutions" means state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Code 1994, § 90-26; Res. of 12-6-1983(2), § 1) 
Sec. 30-22. - Minimum tax due. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 30-21 shall be $1,000.00. 
(Code 1994, § 90-27; Res. of 12-6-1983(2), § 2) 
Sec. 30-23. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Code 1994, § 90-28; Res. of 12-6-1983(2), § 3) 
Sec. 30-24. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after the filing of the return prescribed by section 30-23, unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1994, § 90-29; Res. of 12-6-1983(2), § 4) 
Sec. 30-25. - Copies of article to all financial institutions. 
The county clerk is hereby directed to forward a copy of this article to each depository financial institution in the county and to the home office of each such depository financial institution, if located outside the county. 
(Code 1994, § 90-30; Res. of 12-6-1983(2), § 5) 
Chapter 32 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 32-1. - Purpose and legislative intent. 
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the county's authority concerning the placement, construction and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities. The county finds that wireless telecommunications facilities may pose significant concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character and environment of the county and its inhabitants. The county also recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless service technology can be an economic development asset to the county and of significant benefit to the county and its residents. In order to ensure that the placement, construction or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities is consistent with the county's land use policies, the county is adopting a single, comprehensive, wireless telecommunications facilities application and permit process. The intent of this chapter is to minimize impact of wireless telecommunications facilities, establish a fair and efficient process for review and approval of applications, assure an integrated, comprehensive review of environmental impacts of such facilities, and protect the health, safety and welfare of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 32-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory facility or structure means an accessory facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with wireless telecommunications facilities, and located on the same property or lot as the wireless telecommunications facilities, including, but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets. 
Applicant means any wireless service provider submitting an application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
Application means all necessary and appropriate documentation that an applicant submits in order to receive a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
Antenna means a system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals. 
Co-location means the use of an existing tower or structure to support antennae for the provision of wireless services. As regards public hearing requirements, a replacement tower that is constructed on the same site as an existing tower will be considered a co-location as long as the new tower is no taller than the old tower and that the old tower is removed in a reasonable short time frame after the new tower is constructed. 
Commercial impracticability or commercially impracticable means the inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce, the cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen, and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment or profit, standing alone, shall not deem a situation to be commercial impracticable and shall not render an act or the terms of an agreement commercially impracticable. 
Completed application means an application that contains all information and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an application. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
Height means, when referring to a tower or structure, the distance measured from the pre-existing grade level to the highest point on the tower or structure, even if said highest point is an antenna or lightening protection device. 
Modification or modify means the addition, removal or change of any of the physical and visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility, such as antennas, cabling, equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing, utility feeds, changing the color or materials of any visually discernable components, vehicular access, parking and/or an upgrade or changeout of equipment for better or more modern equipment. Adding a new wireless carrier or service provider to a telecommunications tower or telecommunications site as a co-location is a modification. A modification shall not include the replacement of any components of a wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without adding, removing or changing anything. 
NIER means non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation. 
Personal wireless facility. See Wireless telecommunications facilities . 
Personal wireless services (PWS) or personal telecommunications service (PCS) shall have the same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act. 
Repairs and maintenance means the replacement of any components of a wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without the addition, removal or change of any of the physical or visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility that will add to the visible appearance of the facility as originally permitted. 
Special use permit means the official document or permit by which an applicant is allowed to file for a building permit to construct and use wireless telecommunications facilities as granted or issued by the county. 
Stealth or stealth technology means to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances. 
Telecommunications means the transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems. 
Telecommunications site. See Wireless telecommunications facilities . 
Telecommunications structure means a structure used in the provision of services described in the definition of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
Temporary means temporary in relation to all aspects and components of this chapter, something intended to, or that does not exist for more than 90 days. 
Tower means any structure designed primarily to support an antenna for receiving and/or transmitting a wireless signal. 
Wireless telecommunications facilities means and includes a telecommunications site and personal wireless facility. It means a structure, facility or location designed, or intended to be used as, or used to support antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices. This includes, without limit, towers of all types and kinds and structures, including, but not limited to, buildings, church steeples, silos, water towers, signs or other structures that can be used as a support structure for antennas or the functional equivalent of such. It further includes all related facilities and equipment such as cabling, equipment shelters and other structures associated with the site. It is a structure and facility intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, SMR, paging, 911, personal communications services (PCS), commercial satellite services, microwave services and any commercial wireless telecommunication service not licensed by the FCC. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 4) 
Sec. 32-3. - Overall policy and desired goals for special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities protects the county's health, safety, public welfare, environmental features, the nature and character of the community and neighborhood and other aspects of the quality of life specifically listed elsewhere in this chapter, the county hereby adopts an overall policy with respect to a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities for the express purpose of achieving the following goals: 
(1)	Requiring a special use permit for any new, co-location or modification of a wireless telecommunications facility. 
(2)	Implementing an application process for persons seeking a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities; 
(3)	Establishing a policy for examining an application for and issuing a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities that is both fair and consistent. 
(4)	Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or co-location of wireless telecommunications facilities among service providers. 
(5)	Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement, height and quantity of wireless telecommunications facilities in such a manner, including, but not limited to, the use of stealth technology, to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances. 
(6)	That in granting a special use permit, the county has found that the facility shall be the most appropriate site as regards being the least visually intrusive among those available in the county. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 5) 
Sec. 32-4. - Exceptions from a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no person shall be permitted to site, place, build, construct, modify or prepare any site for the placement or use of, wireless telecommunications facilities as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived without having first obtained a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, no special use permit shall be required for those non-commercial exceptions noted in section 32-5. 
(b)	All legally permitted wireless telecommunications facilities, constructed as permitted, existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be allowed to continue as they presently exist; provided, however, that any visible modification of an existing wireless telecommunications facility will require the complete facility and any new installation to comply with this chapter. 
(c)	Any repair and maintenance of a wireless facility does not require an application for a special use permit. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 6) 
Sec. 32-5. - Exclusions. 
The following uses shall be exempt from special use permit requirements: 
(1)	The county's fire, police, department of transportation or other public service facilities owned and operated by the local government. 
(2)	Any facilities expressly exempt from the county's siting, building and permitting authority. 
(3)	Over-the-air reception devices including the reception antennas for direct broadcast satellites (DBS), multi channel multipoint distribution (wireless cable) providers (MMDS), television broadcast stations (TVBS) and other customer-end antennas that receive and transmit fixed wireless signals that are primarily used for reception. 
(4)	Facilities exclusively for private, non-commercial radio and television reception and private citizen's bands, licensed amateur radio and other similar non-commercial telecommunications. 
(5)	Facilities exclusively for providing unlicensed spread spectrum technologies (such as IEEE 802.11a, b, g (Wi-Fi) and Bluetooth) where the facility does not require a new tower. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 7) 
Sec. 32-6. - Special use permit application and other requirements. 
(a)	All applicants for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities or any modification of such facility shall comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter. The county board of commissioners is the officially designated agency or body of the county to whom applications for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities must be made, and that is authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to granting or not granting or revoking special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. The county may at its discretion delegate or designate other official agencies or officials of the county to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make recommendations to the county board of commissioners with respect to the granting or not granting or revoking special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(b)	The county may reject applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which are otherwise incomplete. 
(c)	No wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed, constructed or modified until the application is reviewed and approved by the county, and the special use permit has been issued. 
(d)	Any and all representations made by the applicant to the county on the record during the application process, whether written or verbal, shall be deemed a part of the application and may be relied upon in good faith by the county. 
(e)	An application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and representations made therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the information. 
(f)	The applicant must provide documentation to verify it has the right to proceed as proposed on the site. This would require an executed copy of the lease with the landowner or landlord or a signed letter acknowledging authorization. If the applicant owns the site, a copy of the ownership record is required. 
(g)	The applicant shall include a statement in writing: 
(1)	That the applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the special use permit, without exception, unless specifically granted relief by the county in writing, as well as all applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all applicable county, state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; 
(2)	That the construction of the wireless telecommunications facilities is legally permissible, including, but not limited to, the fact that the applicant is authorized to do business in the state. 
(h)	Where a certification is called for in this chapter, such certification shall bear the signature and seal of a registered professional licensed in the state. 
(i)	In addition to all other required information as stated in this chapter, all applications for the construction or installation of new wireless telecommunications facilities or modification of an existing facility shall contain the information hereinafter set forth: 
(1)	A descriptive statement of the objective for the new facility or modification including and expanding on a need such as coverage and/or capacity requirements; 
(2)	Documentation that demonstrates and proves the need for the wireless telecommunications facility to provide service primarily and essentially within the county. Such documentation shall include propagation studies of the proposed site and all adjoining planned, proposed, in-service or existing sites that demonstrate a significant gap in coverage and/or if a capacity need, including an analysis of current and projected usage; 
(3)	The name, address and phone number of the person preparing the report; 
(4)	The name, address, and phone number of the property owner and applicant, and to include the legal name of the applicant. If the site is a tower and the owner is different that the applicant, provide name and address of the tower owner; 
(5)	The postal address and tax map parcel number of the property; 
(6)	The land use district or designation in which the property is situated; 
(7)	Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a survey showing the location of all lot lines; 
(8)	The location of nearest residential structure; 
(9)	The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures on the property which is the subject of the application; 
(10)	The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing landscaping, and fencing; 
(11)	The azimuth, size and centerline height location of all proposed and existing antennae on the supporting structure; 
(12)	The number, type and model of the antenna proposed with a copy of the specification sheet; 
(13)	The make, model, type and manufacturer of the tower and design plan stating the tower's capacity to accommodate multiple users; 
(14)	A site plan describing the proposed tower and antenna and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above pre-existing grade, materials, color and lighting; 
(15)	The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other transmitting equipment; 
(16)	The actual intended transmission power stated as the maximum effective radiated power (ERP) in watts; 
(17)	Signed documentation such as the "Checklist to Determine Whether a Facility is Categorically Excluded" to verify that the wireless telecommunication facility with the proposed installation will be in full compliance with the current FCC RF Emissions guidelines (NIER). If not categorically excluded, a complete RF emissions study is required to provide verification; 
(18)	A signed statement that the proposed installation will not cause physical or RF interference with other telecommunications devices; 
(19)	A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the wireless telecommunications facilities; 
(20)	A copy of the geotechnical sub-surface soils investigation, evaluation report and foundation recommendation for a proposed or existing tower site and, if existing tower or water tank site, a copy of the installed foundation design. 
(j)	The applicant will provide a written copy of an analysis, completed by a qualified individual or organization, to determine if the proposed new tower or existing structure intended to support wireless facilities is in compliance with Federal Aviation Administration Regulation Part 77 and if it requires lighting. This requirement shall also be for any existing structure or building where the application increases the height of the structure or building. If this analysis determines, that an FAA determination is required, then all filings with the FAA, all responses from the FAA and any related correspondence shall be provided with the application. 
(k)	Application for new tower. 
(1)	In the case of a new tower, the applicant shall be required to submit a written report demonstrating its meaningful efforts to secure shared use of existing towers or the use of alternative buildings or other structures within the county. Copies of written requests and responses for shared use shall be provided to the county in the application, along with any letters of rejection stating the reason for rejection. 
(2)	In order to better inform the public, in the case of a new telecommunication tower, the applicant shall, prior to the public hearing on the application, hold a "balloon test." The applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a minimum of a three foot in diameter brightly colored balloon at the maximum height of the proposed new tower. The dates (including a second date, in case of poor visibility on the initial date), times and location of this balloon test shall be advertised by the applicant seven and 14 days in advance of the first test date in a newspaper with a general circulation in the county. The applicant shall inform the county, in writing, of the dates and times of the test, at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least four consecutive hours sometime between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary date shall be on a weekend, but in case of poor weather on the initial date, the secondary date may be on a weekday. A report with pictures from various locations of the balloon shall be provided with the application. 
(3)	The applicant shall examine the feasibility of designing the proposed tower to accommodate future demand for at least four additional commercial applications, for example, future co-locations. The tower shall be structurally designed to accommodate at least four additional antenna arrays equal to those of the applicant, and located as close to the applicant's antenna as possible without causing interference. This requirement may be waived, provided that the applicant, in writing, demonstrates that the provisions of future shared usage of the tower is not technologically feasible, is commercially impracticable or creates an unnecessary and unreasonable burden, based upon: 
a.	The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the area; 
b.	The kind of wireless telecommunications facilities site and structure proposed; 
c.	The number of existing and potential licenses without wireless telecommunications facilities spaces/sites; 
d.	Available space on existing and approved towers. 
(4)	The owner of a proposed new tower, and his successors in interest, shall negotiate in good faith for the shared use of the proposed tower by other wireless service providers in the future, and shall: 
a.	Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a potential shared-use applicant; 
b.	Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use of the new tower by other telecommunications providers; 
c.	Allow shared use of the new tower if another telecommunications provider agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges. The charges may include, but are not limited to, a pro rata share of the cost of site selection, planning, project administration, land costs, site design, construction and maintenance financing, return on equity, less depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing electromagnetic interference; 
d.	Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be grounds for revocation of the special use permit. 
(l)	The applicant shall provide certification with documentation (structural analysis), including calculations that the telecommunication facility tower and foundation and attachments, rooftop support structure, water tank structure, and any other supporting structure as proposed to be utilized are designed and will be constructed to meet all local, county, state and federal structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads. 
(m)	If proposal is for a co-location or modification on an existing tower, the applicant is to provide signed documentation of the tower condition such as an ANSI report as per Annex E, Tower Maintenance and Inspection Procedures, ANSI/TIA/EIA-222F or most recent version. The inspection report must be performed every three years for a guyed tower and five years for monopoles and self-supporting towers. 
(n)	All proposed wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a demonstration that the facility will be sited so as to minimize visual intrusion as much as possible, given the facts and circumstances involved and will thereby have the least adverse visual effect on the environment and its character and on the residences in the area of the wireless telecommunications facility. 
(o)	If a new tower, proposal for a new antenna attachment to an existing structure, or modification adding to a visual impact, the applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment, which shall include: 
(1)	If a new tower or increasing the height of an existing structure is proposed, a computer generated zone of visibility map at a minimum of a one-mile radius from the proposed structure, with and without foliage shall be provided to illustrate locations from which the proposed installation may be seen. 
(2)	Pictorial representations of before and after (photo simulations) views from key viewpoints both inside and outside of the county as may be appropriate, including, but not limited to: 
a.	State highways and other major roads; 
b.	State and local parks; 
c.	Other public lands; 
d.	Historic districts; 
e.	Preserves and historic sites normally open to the public; and 
f.	Any other location where the site is visible to a large number of visitors, travelers or residents. 
Guidance will be provided concerning the appropriate key sites at the pre-application meeting. The applicant shall provide a map showing the locations of where the pictures were taken and distance from the proposed structure. 
(3)	A written description of the visual impact of the proposed facility, including and, as applicable, the tower base, guy wires, fencing and accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent properties and streets as relates to the need or appropriateness of screening. 
(p)	The applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all related equipment and structures of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility. 
(q)	The wireless telecommunications facility and any and all accessory or associated facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings, this shall include the utilization of stealth or concealment technology as may be required by the county. 
(r)	All utilities at a wireless telecommunications facilities site shall be installed underground whenever possible and in compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the county, including specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, where appropriate. 
(s)	At a telecommunications site, an access road, turn-around space and parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion. 
(t)	All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, provided for removal of, modified or restored in strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes adopted by the county, state, or United States, including, but not limited to, the most recent editions of the ANSI Code, National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as well as accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices and recommended practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are codes that include, but are not limited to, construction, building, electrical, fire, safety, health, and land use codes. In the event of a conflict between or among any of the preceding the more stringent shall apply. 
(u)	A holder of a special use permit granted under this chapter shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by applicable law, rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the county or other governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction over the applicant. 
(v)	There shall be a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the pre-application meeting will be to address issues that will help to expedite the review and permitting process. A pre-application meeting shall also include a site visit if there has not been a prior site visit for the requested site. 
(w)	An applicant shall submit to the county the number of completed applications determined to be needed at the pre-application meeting. Written notification of the application shall be provided to the legislative body of all adjacent municipalities as applicable and/or requested. 
(x)	The holder of a special use permit shall notify the county of any intended modification of a wireless telecommunication facility and shall apply to the county to modify, relocate or rebuild a wireless telecommunications facility. 
(y)	With respect to this application process, the board of commissioners will normally seek to have lead agency status pursuant to SEQRA. The board of commissioners shall conduct an environmental review of the proposed project pursuant to SEQRA in combination with its review of the application. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 8) 
Sec. 32-7. - Location of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)	Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall locate, site and erect said wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with the following priorities, one being the highest priority and seven being the lowest priority: 
(1)	On existing towers or other structures on city owned properties. 
(2)	On existing towers or other structures on other property in the county. 
(3)	A new tower on county-owned properties. 
(4)	A new tower on properties in areas designated for heavy industrial use. 
(5)	A new tower on properties in areas designated for commercial use. 
(6)	A new tower on properties in areas designated for agricultural use. 
(7)	A new tower on properties in areas designated for residential use. 
(b)	If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed in subsection (a) of this section, then a detailed explanation must be provided as to why a site of a higher priority was not selected. The person seeking such an exception must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why such a permit should be granted for the proposed site, and the hardship that would be incurred by the applicant if the permit were not granted for the proposed site. 
(c)	An applicant may not bypass sites of higher priority by stating the site proposed is the only site leased or selected. An application shall address co-location as an option. If such option is not proposed, the applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the county why co-location is commercially or otherwise impracticable. Agreements between providers limiting or prohibiting co-location shall not be a valid basis for any claim of commercial impracticability or hardship. 
(d)	Notwithstanding the above, the county may approve any site located within an area in the list of priorities in subsection (a) of this section, provided that the county finds that the proposed site is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the county and its inhabitants and will not have a deleterious effect on the nature and character of the community and neighborhood. 
(e)	The applicant shall submit a written report demonstrating the applicant's review of the above locations in order of priority, demonstrating the technological reason for the site selection. If appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed written explanation as to why sites of a higher priority were not selected shall be included with the application. 
(f)	Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of highest priority or highest available priority, the county may disapprove an application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)	Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements; 
(2)	Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or historical district; 
(3)	The use or construction of wireless telecommunications facilities which is contrary to an already stated purpose of a specific land use or land use designation; 
(4)	The placement and location of wireless telecommunications facilities which would create an unacceptable risk, or the reasonable probability of such, to residents, the public, employees and agents of the county, or employees of the service provider or other service providers; 
(5)	Conflicts with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 9) 
Sec. 32-8. - Shared use of wireless telecommunications facilities and other structures. 
(a)	The county, as opposed to the construction of a new tower, shall prefer locating on existing towers or others structures without increasing the height. The applicant shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying existing towers and other suitable structures within two miles of the location of any proposed new tower, unless the applicant can show that some other distance is more reasonable and demonstrate conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable structure cannot be used. 
(b)	An applicant intending to locate on an existing tower or other suitable structure shall be required to document the intent of the existing owner to permit its use by the applicant. 
(c)	Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum antenna array technologically required to provide service primarily and essentially within the county, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 10) 
Sec. 32-9. - Height of telecommunications towers. 
(a)	The applicant shall submit documentation justifying the total height of any tower, facility and/or antenna requested and the basis therefor. Documentation in the form of propagation studies must include all backup data used to perform at requested height and a minimum of ten feet lower height to allow verification of this height need. Such documentation will be analyzed in the context of the justification of the height needed to provide service primarily and essentially within the county, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
(b)	No tower constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, including allowing for all attachments, shall exceed that height which shall permit operation without required artificial lighting of any kind in accordance with county, state, and/or any federal statute, law, local law, county ordinance, code, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 11) 
Sec. 32-10. - Visibility of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)	Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially lighted or marked, except as required by law. 
(b)	Towers shall be galvanized and/or painted with a rust-preventive paint of an appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings and shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)	If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a plan for sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 12) 
Sec. 32-11. - Security of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be located, fenced or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access. Specifically: 
(1)	All antennas, towers and other supporting structures, including guy anchor points and wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in such a manner that they cannot be climbed or collided with; and 
(2)	Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be installed in such a manner that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized to operate or service them. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 13) 
Sec. 32-12. - Signage. 
Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign no larger than four square feet in order to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of the presence of RF radiation or to control exposure to RF radiation within a given area. A sign of the same size is also to be installed to contain the name of the owner and operator of the antenna as well as emergency phone number. The sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the applicant and be visible from the access point of the site and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter or cabinet. On tower sites, an FCC registration site as applicable is also to be present. The signs shall not be lighted, unless applicable law, rule or regulation requires lighting. No other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 14) 
Sec. 32-13. - Lot size and setbacks. 
All proposed towers and any other proposed wireless telecommunications facility structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way and road and street lines by the greater of the following distances: A distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or wireless telecommunications facility structure plus ten percent of the height of the tower or structure, or the existing setback requirement of the underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. Any accessory structure shall be located so as to comply with the applicable minimum setback requirements for the property on which it is situated. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 15) 
Sec. 32-14. - Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by applicant. 
(a)	The county may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the county in reviewing and evaluating the application, including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and any site inspections. 
(b)	An applicant shall deposit with the county funds sufficient to reimburse the county for all reasonable costs of consultant and expert evaluation and consultation to the county in connection with the review of any application including where applicable, the lease negotiation, the pre -approval evaluation, and the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. The initial deposit shall be $8,500.00. The placement of the $6,500.00 with the county shall precede the pre-application meeting. The county will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The county's consultants/experts shall invoice the county for its services related to the application. If at any time during the process this escrow account has a balance less than $2,500.00, the applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the county, replenish said escrow account so that it has a balance of at least $5,000.00. Such additional escrow funds shall be deposited with the county before any further action or consideration is taken on the application. In the event that the amount held in escrow by the county is more than the amount of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall, upon request of the applicant, be promptly refunded to the applicant. 
(c)	The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in subsection (b) of this section may vary with the scope (lease negotiations and/or review) and complexity of the project, the completeness of the application and other information as may be needed to complete the necessary review, analysis and inspection of any construction or modification. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 16) 
Sec. 32-15. - Public hearing and notification requirements. 
(a)	Prior to the approval of any commissioners, notice of which shall be published in the newspaper general circulation in of the application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities involving a new tower, a public hearing shall be held by the county board of county no less than ten calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing. In order that the county may notify nearby landowners, the application shall contain the names and address of all landowners whose property is located within 1,500 feet of any property line of the lot or parcel on which the new wireless telecommunications facilities are proposed to be located. 
(b)	There shall be no public hearing required for an application to co-locate on an existing tower or other structure or a modification at an existing site, as long as there is no proposed increase in the height of the tower or structure, including attachments thereto. 
(c)	The county shall schedule the public hearing referred to in subsection (a) of this section once it finds the application is complete, the county, at any stage prior to issuing a special use permit, may require such additional information as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 17) 
Sec. 32-16. - Action on an application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)	The county will undertake a review of an application pursuant to this chapter in a timely fashion, consistent with its responsibilities, and shall act within a reasonable period of time given the relative complexity of the application and the circumstances, with due regard for the public's interest and need to be involved, and the applicant's desire for a timely resolution. 
(b)	The county may refer any application or part thereof to any advisory, other committee or commission for a non-binding recommendation. 
(c)	After the public hearing and after formally considering the application, the county may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a special use permit. Its decision shall be in writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The burden of proof for the granting of the permit shall always be upon the applicant. 
(d)	If the county approves the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of such approval in writing within ten calendar days of the county's action, and the special use permit shall be issued within 30 days after such approval. Except for necessary building permits, and subsequent certificates of compliance, once a special use permit has been granted hereunder, no additional permits or approvals from the county, such as site plan or land use approvals, shall be required by the county for the wireless telecommunications facilities covered by the special use permit. 
(e)	If the county denies the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of such denial in writing within ten calendar days of the county's action. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 18) 
Sec. 32-17. - Extent and parameters of special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
The extent and parameters of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall be as follows: 
(1)	Such special use permit shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed without the express prior written notification to the county. 
(2)	Such special use permit may, following a hearing upon due prior notice to the applicant, be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a violation of the conditions and provisions of the special use permit, or for a material violation of this chapter after prior written notice to the holder of the special use permit. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 19) 
Sec. 32-18. - Application fee. 
At the time that a person submits an application for a special use permit for a new tower, such person shall pay a non-refundable application fee of $500.00 to the county. If the application is for a special use permit for co-locating on an existing tower or other suitable structure, where no increase in height of the tower or structure is required, the non-refundable fee shall be $500.00. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 20) 
Sec. 32-19. - Performance security. 
The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed wireless telecommunications facilities property site shall, at its cost and expense, be jointly required to execute and file with the county a bond, or other form of security acceptable to the county as to type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $75,000.00 for a tower facility and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the county to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this chapter and conditions of any special use permit issued pursuant to this chapter. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term of the special use permit and/or until any necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that, which existed prior to the issuance of the original special use permit. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 21) 
Sec. 32-20. - Reservation of authority to inspect wireless telecommunications facilities. 
In order to verify that the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities and any and all lessees, renters, and/or licensees of wireless telecommunications facilities, place and construct such facilities, including towers and antennas, in accordance with all applicable technical, safety, fire, building, and zoning and land use codes, laws, ordinances and regulations and other applicable requirements, the county may inspect all facets of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's or licensee's placement, construction, modification and maintenance of such facilities, including, but not limited to, towers, antennas and buildings or other structures constructed or located on the permitted site. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 22) 
Sec. 32-21. - Liability insurance. 
(a)	A holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance for personal injuries, death and property damage, and umbrella insurance coverage, for the duration of the special use permit in amounts as set forth below: 
(1)	Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death and property damage: $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/$2,000,000.00 aggregate; 
(2)	Automobile coverage: $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/$2,000,000.00 aggregate; and 
(3)	Workers compensation and disability: statutory amounts. 
(b)	For a wireless telecommunications facility on county property, the commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically include the county and its officers, councils, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents and consultants as additional insureds. 
(c)	The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and with a Best's rating of at least A. 
(d)	The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the county with at least 30 days' prior written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance. 
(e)	Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the county at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance that such policies are to renew or replace. 
(f)	Before construction of a permitted wireless telecommunications facilities is initiated, but in no case later than 15 days after the granting of the special use permit, the holder of the special use permit shall deliver to the county a copy of each of the policies or certificates representing the insurance in the required amounts. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 23) 
Sec. 32-22. - Indemnification. 
(a)	Any application for wireless telecommunication facilities that is proposed for county property, pursuant to this chapter, shall contain a provision with respect to indemnification. Such provision shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted by the law, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the county, and its officers, councils, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents, and consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection, modification, location, products performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of said facility, excepting, however, any portion of such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of damages as may be attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the county, or its servants or agents. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included in those costs that are recoverable by the county. 
(b)	Notwithstanding the requirements noted in subsection (a) of this section, an indemnification provision will not be required in those instances where the county itself applies for and secures a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 24) 
Sec. 32-23. - Fines. 
(a)	In the event of a violation of this chapter or any special use permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the county may impose and collect, and the holder of the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall pay to the county, fines or penalties as set forth below. 
(b)	The failure of a holder of a special use permit to comply with provisions of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the applicant to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in this Code. 
(c)	Notwithstanding anything in this chapter, the holder of the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities may not use the payment of fines, liquidated damages or other penalties, to evade or avoid compliance with this chapter or any section of this chapter. An attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the special use permit to termination and revocation of the special use permit. The county may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this chapter, without limiting other remedies available to the county. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 25) 
Sec. 32-24. - Default and/or revocation. 
If a wireless telecommunications facility is repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved, re-located, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or of the special use permit, then the county shall notify the holder of the special use permit in writing of such violation. A permit holder in violation may be considered in default and subject to fines as in section 32-23 and if a violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the county in a reasonable period of time the special use permit is subject to revocation. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 26) 
Sec. 32-25. - Removal of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)	Under the following circumstances, the county may determine that the health, safety, and welfare interests of the county warrant and require the removal of wireless telecommunications facilities: 
(1)	Wireless telecommunications facilities with a permit have been abandoned (i.e. not used as wireless telecommunications facilities) for a period exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of 180 days in any 365-day period, except for periods caused by force majeure or acts of God, in which case, repair or removal shall commence within 90 days; 
(2)	Permitted wireless telecommunications facilities fall into such a state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard; 
(3)	Wireless telecommunications facilities have been located, constructed, or modified without first obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by, the required special use permit, or any other necessary authorization and the special permit may be revoked. 
(b)	If the county makes such a determination as noted in subsection (a) of this section, then the county shall notify the holder of the special use permit for the wireless telecommunications facilities within 48 hours that said wireless telecommunications facilities are to be removed, the county may approve an interim temporary use agreement/permit, such as to enable the sale of the wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(c)	The holder of the special use permit, or its successors or assigns, shall dismantle and remove such wireless telecommunications facilities, and all associated structures and facilities, from the site and restore the site to as close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being limited only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the county. However, if the owner of the property upon which the wireless telecommunications facilities are located wishes to retain any access roadway to the wireless telecommunications facilities, the owner may do so with the approval of the county. 
(d)	If wireless telecommunications facilities are not removed or substantial progress has not been made to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities within 90 days after the permit holder has received notice, then the county may order officials or representatives of the county to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities at the sole expense of the owner or special use permit holder. 
(e)	If the county removes, or causes to be removed, wireless telecommunications facilities, and the owner of the wireless telecommunications facilities does not claim and remove it from the site to a lawful location within ten days, then the county may take steps to declare the wireless telecommunications facilities abandoned and sell them and their components. 
(f)	Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the county may approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the wireless telecommunications facilities, for no more 90 days, during which time a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or re-location of the affected wireless telecommunications facilities shall be developed by the holder of the special use permit, subject to the approval of the county, and an agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of the special use permit and the county. If such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the 90-day time period, then the county may take possession of and dispose of the affected wireless telecommunications facilities in the manner provided in this section. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 27) 
Sec. 32-26. - Relief. 
Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or requirement of this chapter may request such at the pre-application meeting, provided that the relief or exemption is contained in the submitted application for either a special use permit, or in the case of an existing or previously granted special use permit, a request for modification of its tower and/or facilities. Such relief may be temporary or permanent, partial or complete. However, the burden of proving the need for the requested relief, waiver or exemption is solely on the applicant to prove. The applicant shall bear all costs of the county in considering the request and the relief, waiver or exemption. No such relief or exemption shall be approved unless the applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted the relief, waiver or exemption will have no significant affect on the health, safety and welfare of the county, its residents and other service providers. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 28) 
Sec. 32-27. - Periodic regulatory review by the county. 
(a)	The county may at any time conduct a review and examination of this entire chapter. 
(b)	If, after such a periodic review and examination of this chapter, the county determines that one or more provisions of this chapter should be amended, repealed, revised, clarified, or deleted, then the county may take whatever measures are necessary in accordance with applicable law in order to accomplish the same. It is noted that, where warranted, and in the best interests of the county, the county may repeal this entire chapter at any time. 
(c)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the county may at any time and in any manner (to the extent permitted by federal, state, or local law), amend, add, repeal, and/or delete one or more provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 29) 
Sec. 32-28. - Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations. 
(a)	To the extent that the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such a special use permit shall adhere to, and comply with, all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards. 
(b)	To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed and/or are modified during the duration of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the holder of such a special use permit shall conform the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities to the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing entity. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 30) 
Sec. 32-29. - Conflict with other laws. 
Where this chapter differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and regulations, unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the county, state or federal government, this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 31) 
Chapter 34 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 36 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1—36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSTALLATION AND LOCATION 

Sec. 36-19. - Permit required. 
Prior to the construction of any house or building, alteration or addition from which sewage must be disposed of by means of a septic tank or alternative system in the county and/or prior to the location or relocation of any mobile home in the county, an on-site sewage management permit must be obtained from the county health department. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 36-20. - Information required. 
The application for the permit shall be filed with the health department and disclose the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)	The address of the location of the building that is to be constructed or the address of the building being repaired or the location and address of the mobile home being located or relocated upon the land in the county. 
(3)	The number of bathrooms in residential structures or the anticipated water usage for commercial structures. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1990, § 2) 
Sec. 36-21. - Compliance with board of health. 
It shall be the duty of the county health department environmental health officer to evaluate and issue an on-site sewage management permit for those sites that comply with the county board of health's rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems. Any cost of said permit shall be set by the county board of health. It shall be the duty of the sewage disposal system contractor, or property owner if no contractor is used, prior to the commencement of construction, to request evaluation by the environmental health officer to determine if the septic tank system complies with the rules and regulations for on-site sewage management system as promulgated by the county health department. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1990, § 3) 
Sec. 36-22. - Decal—Required. 
It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to issue a decal for the location or relocation of a mobile home. Renewal of the decals for mobile homes shall be issued each year thereafter upon timely application by the mobile home owner to the tax commissioner. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1990, § 4) 
Sec. 36-23. - Same—Placement. 
All decals issued pursuant to this article relative to mobile homes shall be affixed to the mobile home in such a manner as to be clearly visible from the front and from the street or roadway. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1990, § 5) 
Sec. 36-24. - Relocation requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for any mobile home dealer or mover to locate or relocate a mobile home on any land in the unincorporated areas of the county until the owner of said home has received a permit for an on-site sewage management system and obtained a decal from the tax commissioner and have the same affixed thereto. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1990, § 6) 
Sec. 36-25. - Violation. 
(a)	Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article by erecting, constructing, or repairing a building, or by moving, locating, or relocating a mobile home in the county without first having applied and been granted a permit for an on-site sewage management permit for the proposed location by environmental health officer of the county, and in the case of locating or relocating a mobile home, without obtaining a mobile home decal, shall be punished by fine or imprisonment or both not exceeding a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both (O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20). 
(b)	Violators of this section shall be prosecuted by county environmental health officer or the county tax commissioner in the magistrate court of the county without a jury. The magistrate court may suspend any fine or sentence upon statement by the person signing affidavit that satisfactory compliance with the requirements of this section have been met. Review of convictions shall be by certiorari to the superior court. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1990, § 7) 
Sec. 36-26. - Permit required before sale. 
Any person or firm that desires to sell property that is less than three acres, and is advertised or stated in any manner to potential buyer to be a lot suitable for construction or a residential unit, must obtain an on-site sewage management permit or subdivision approval from the county health department prior to the sale. Violators of this section shall be punished by fine or imprisonment for 60 days, or both (O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20). Violators of this section shall be prosecuted by the county board of health upon the sworn affidavit of the county environmental health officer in the magistrate court of the county without a jury. The magistrate court may suspend any fine or sentence upon statement from person signing affidavit or from the county board of health that satisfactory compliance with this section has been obtained. Review of convictions shall be by certiorari. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1990, § 8) 
Sec. 36-27. - Penalty. 
Any person or firm who shall violate any provision of the county department of health's rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems and has not fully corrected such violation after 30 days notice by the environmental health officer shall be punished by fine or imprisonment or both not exceeding a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both (O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20). Violators of this section shall be prosecuted by the county board of health upon the sworn affidavit of county environmental health officer in the magistrate court of the county without a jury. The magistrate court may suspend any fine or sentence upon statement from person signing affidavit or from the county board of health that satisfactory compliance with this section has been obtained. Review of convictions shall be by certiorari. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1990, § 9) 
Sec. 36-28. - Separability. 
(a)	If any paragraph or section of this article is found to be unconstitutional, all other provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(b)	Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be subject to payment of all collection cost, including, but not limited to, court cost. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1990, § 10) 
Sec. 36-29. - Environmental health officer designated. 
The county environmental health officer as used in this article shall be the person appointed by the county board of health as the board's employee or agent responsible for the environmental health duties of the county board of health. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1990, § 11) 
Secs. 36-30—36-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION AND ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 36-48. - Purpose. 
It is the intent and policy of the county board of commissioners to promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the county and its residents; to protect the natural resources, the environment, and the public health of the county; to facilitate the adequate provision of on-site sewage management for all development in the local jurisdiction; to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections, and other development; to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas, and wildlife habitat areas; to establish measures to preserve an adequate supply of safe drinking water and a quality for state waters which is necessary to protect the health and welfare of the public as well as to provide for future growth; to protect the environment, including the soils, air quality, and water resources, from pollution and inappropriate development; to assist in the orderly, efficient, and integrated development of the county; and to require permits for new development or location within the county. 
(Ord. of 6-25-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 36-49. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations, promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 CFR 261, and as amended. 
Lot means the contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by any public highway or alley, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose other than a public highway or alley, but excluding any part thereof severed from another lot where the severance creates any nonconformity of size or use. 
Perennial river/stream means a river/stream or section of a river/stream that normally flows continuously throughout the whole year. 
Protected river corridor means all land, inclusive of islands, in areas of a protected river within a distance of 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river measured from the uppermost part of the river bank; the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the water is included in the protected area. 
River/stream bank means the rising ground bordering a river or a stream which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, or building development, whether immediate or future. This shall include all divisions or re-subdivisions of land involving a new road or change in existing roads. Excluded from this definition is the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. of 6-25-1999, § 3) 
Sec. 36-50. - General provisions. 
(a)	Permit required . No building, mobile home, structure, or land within the jurisdiction of the county board of commissioners shall hereafter be erected, constructed, located, moved, used, subdivided, altered or disturbed except in conformity with the regulations herein and without first obtaining a permit from the county board of commissioners. This provision does and shall apply to the location of all manufactured housing and industrialized buildings in the county. 
(b)	Minimum lot size . All lots intended for residential or other use within the county shall be of such size as is specified by the county health department according to the Rules of Georgia Department of Human Resources Public Health for On-Site Sewage Management Systems and/or this article, whichever is stricter. 
(c)	On-site sewage management permit required . No person or business shall construct an on-site sewage management system on any lot within the county until site approval and an on-site sewage management construction permit has been obtained from and issued by the county health department. 
(d)	Permit coordination . The required permit under subsection (a) of this section shall not be issued until the county health department issues an on-site site sewage management construction permit or a site approval letter, whichever is appropriate, so that all lots proposed to be used or subdivided would satisfy the requirements of this article, including the Rules of Georgia Department of Human Resources for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. If the county health department is delegated the responsibility for administering this article, the permit or letter under this subsection shall suffice as the permit required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)	Requirements are minimum . The regulations and requirements set by this article shall be the minimum requirements. 
(f)	Compliance with state and federal regulations . All developments, structures, and uses within the county shall also meet the requirements of all other local, federal and state regulations in effect, including, but not limited to, department of transportation regulations, state fire marshal regulations, state uniform construction codes, and state department of natural resources and state environmental protection division environmental rules and regulations. Issuance of a permit under this article does not constitute certification of compliance with such codes or regulations, and does not abrogate responsibility of the owner to so comply. 
(g)	Map interpretation . If there is any uncertainty as to whether a lot, portion of lot, or a proposed construction or location impacts an environmental resource regulated by this article because of interpretation of the applicable map, the decision of the county board of commissioners, or the county health department if it is delegated the responsibility for administering this article shall take precedent and be considered correct and final, but may be appealed as set forth in subsection (h) of this section. 
(h)	Map appeal . Any person who feels aggrieved by a decision of the county board of commissioners or the county health department, as appropriate, regarding map interpretation may at their own expense request reconsideration. Such reconsideration shall include submission of scientific evidence for reversal of the alleged error in map interpretation, and such evidence must be documented by a state registered engineer, geologist, or soils scientist. To obtain a reversal of the decision of map interpretation, the evidence must be acceptable to the state department of natural resources' environmental protection division, and the county board of commissioners, or and the county health department if the county health department is delegated responsibility for administering this article. Any costs for submission of evidence to the state department of natural resources' environmental protection division shall be borne by the person requesting reconsideration. 
(i)	Coordination with zoning and other regulation . This article shall be coordinated with any zoning or other regulations adopted by the county board of commissioners, and if there is any conflict with those zoning or other regulations, the stricter provisions shall apply. If zoning is or has been adopted, the provisions of this article shall be considered an overlay, or additional requirements to the requirements of underlying zoning regulations and district. 
(j)	Fees . Any fees for applications, inspections, and the issuance of permits or certificates required or issued under the provisions of this article shall be paid by the person seeking such permit at the time of application in advance of the issuance of such permits or certificates. The amount of such fees, if any, shall be those established by the county board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Ord. of 6-25-1999, § 4) 
Sec. 36-51. - Delegation of administration. 
The county board of commissioners because of the need for coordination hereby charges the county health department with responsibility for administering this article and ensuring compliance with its provisions. 
(Ord. of 6-25-1999, § 5) 
Sec. 36-52. - Wetlands protection regulations. 
(a)	Findings of fact . The wetlands within the county are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; open space; and recreational opportunities. 
(b)	Reference map . The official maps to be used as the determinant for location of wetlands in the county and to be regulated areas under this article will be the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's National Wetlands Inventory Maps for the county. 
(c)	Wetlands development permit requirements . No activity or use except those identified in subsection (d) of this section shall be allowed within wetlands areas without a permit under this article. If there appear to be wetlands on any site under consideration for a permit which any proposed development may disturb and which appears to be under the jurisdiction of section 404 of the U.S. Clean Water Act, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' determination shall be required. No local permit will be issued until the person requesting the permit at their own expense obtains a section 404 permit or letter of permission from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(d)	Permitted uses not requiring a permit . The following uses are permitted without permit within the wetlands of the county to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein: 
(1)	Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission. (Section 404 does not require permits for normal, ongoing silvicultural activities. However, section 404 does list some required road construction best management practices that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption.) 
(2)	Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, or other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(3)	Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(4)	Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(5)	Normal agriculture activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(e)	Prohibited uses . In compliance with the state rules for environmental planning criteria, the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them: 
(1)	Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)	Hazardous sanitary landfills. 
(Ord. of 6-25-1999, § 6) 
Sec. 36-53. - Groundwater recharge areas protection regulations. 
(a)	Findings of fact . Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Pesticides and herbicides sprayed on crops and animal waste, like septic tank affluents, contribute to a deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. 
(b)	Reference map . The official map for delineation of significant groundwater recharge areas in the county to be regulated areas under this article is the state department of natural resources' significant recharge areas, hydrological atlas 18 (1989 edition). 
(c)	Groundwater recharge areas development permit requirements . All uses except those identified in subsection (d) of this section and those subject to further restriction by any underlying zoning district are allowed. The following are additional requirements for specific uses: 
(1)	All above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall meet the requirements of U.S. EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 112.1. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(2)	All single-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings or other uses located within a groundwater recharge area and not served by both public water and sewer systems shall be required to have a minimum lot size at least 150 percent of normal requirements of the state department of human resources according to its manual for on-site sewage management systems for the particular location and soil characteristics involved, but said minimum lot size shall not be in any case less than the minimum lot size specified by any underlying zoning district. The regulations specifying the largest minimum lot size shall apply. 
(3)	All lots shall have a minimum width of 150 feet, or as specified in any underlying zoning district if stricter (larger), in the area where an approved on-site sewage management system is to be located. 
(4)	All new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner except for the construction of mining settling basins. 
(5)	All agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compact clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
(d)	Prohibited uses . The following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them. 
(1)	All hazardous waste storage, treatment and disposal facilities, and those facilities handling 10,000 pounds or more of hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, excluding underground storage tanks, on any one day. 
(2)	Permanent stormwater infiltration basins. 
(Ord. of 6-25-1999, § 7) 
Sec. 36-54. - Major river corridor protection district regulations. 
(a)	Findings of fact . Perennial river or water courses with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second are of vital importance to the state in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable for habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. These river corridors also allow the free movement of wildlife from area to area within the state, help control erosion and river sedimentation, and help absorb floodwaters. 
(b)	District delineation . Protected rivers as defined under the rules for environmental planning criteria, adopted by state department of natural resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, include any perennial river or water courses with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second. The Oconee River through the county meets this criteria. A protective 100-foot vegetation buffer is hereby established along this river. The buffer area is measured horizontally from each river bank within the county jurisdiction. Under the method prescribed by the rules for environmental planning criteria, no development or other land disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within a 100-foot buffer of the river bank except for the following permitted uses. 
(c)	Permitted uses . No development, or construction, or other land disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within the 100-foot buffer from the protected river except for the following uses, and the natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity or construction permitted within the river corridor for these acceptable uses: 
(1)	Single-family dwellings, if any underlying zoning district so permits, provided each dwelling is located on a lot with a minimum size as specified by the county health department or the underlying zoning district regulations, but shall be the greater of these requirements; however, in any case, the lot for each dwelling shall not be less than two acres, not including any area between the river banks; and provided the septic tank drainfield is located outside of the 100-foot buffer area. 
(2)	Any industrial or commercial uses existing prior to the adoption of these local protection ordinances, providing they do not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and meet all other federal and state environmental regulations. 
(3)	Road and utility crossings, providing the construction of these crossings meets the requirements of the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or any local requirements, if stricter. 
(4)	Timber production and harvesting, providing it is consistent with the best management practices established by the state forestry commission, and does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(5)	Agricultural production and management, provided it is consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation commission, and all other state and federal regulations, and does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(6)	Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
(7)	Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(8)	Wastewater treatment. 
(9)	Recreational usage consistent with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river dependent recreation. 
(d)	Prohibited uses . In compliance with the state rules for environmental planning criteria, the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them: 
(1)	Facilities or areas used for the handling, receiving, storing, or disposal of hazardous wastes. 
(2)	Hazardous or solid waste landfills. 
(3)	Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields within the 100-foot buffer, except as related to permitted single-family dwellings. 
(Ord. of 6-25-1999, § 8) 
Sec. 36-55. - Variances. 
When, due to a particular hardship or extraordinary circumstance of the property involved which is not easily corrected, it is impractical for an owner or developer to comply with all of the requirements of this article, the county board of commissioners shall be authorized to vary such requirements (under its jurisdiction) only to such extent as to provide fairness to the owner or developer and as to not violate the intent and purposes of this article. Such variances shall only be granted in an official public meeting, and the reasons for granting them shall be entered into the minutes of the public meeting. 
(Ord. of 6-25-1999, § 9) 
Sec. 36-56. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	Violation of these provisions, prohibitions, and installation restrictions by any private individual, land owner, builder, remodeler, contractor, licensed electrician, licensed plumber, septic tank dealer or installer, mobile or manufactured home dealer or mover, or developer; or installation and delivery of any utility services by a public or private utility to any property which holds a septic tank system installed against these prohibitions and restrictions, shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)	Any person violating, neglecting, or refusing to comply with any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by law. The county board of commissioners may take other actions or remedies as available at law to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-25-1999, § 10) 
Sec. 36-57. - Court of jurisdiction. 
The county board of commissioners or the county board of health, as appropriate, may bring complaints of violation of any provision of this article before the magistrate court of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-25-1999, § 11) 
Sec. 36-58. - Legal status provisions. 
Should any section or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, for any reason, such declaration shall not affect the article as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 6-25-1999, § 12) 
Sec. 36-59. - Conflicting ordinances. 
Whenever the provision of this article and those of some other ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, that ordinance requiring the highest, or more strict, standard shall govern. All other ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, to the extent of such conflict and not further, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 6-25-1999, § 13) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1994 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1994 Code, as supplemented through September 3, 1996, included herein. Sections of the 1994 Code, as supplemented, not listed have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of ordinances included. Ordinances not listed have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Local Acts and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia statutes. 

 