THE CODE OF BANKS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted March 12, 2002 
____________ 
Published in 2002 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
OF 
BANKS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Kenneth Brady 
Chairman 
____________ 
Ernest Rogers 
James P. Westmoreland 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
J. Randall Frost 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Avis Lewallen 
Clerk, Board of Commissioners 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF 
BANKS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Jimmy T. Hooper 
Chairman 
____________ 
Charles Turk—Post 4 
Vice Chairman 
____________ 
Danny Maxwell—Post 1 
Sammy Reece—Post 3 
David Duckett—Post 2 
Commissioners 
____________ 
J. Randall Frost 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Jenni Gailey 
County Clerk, Board of Commissioners 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Banks County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Senior Code Attorney, and William B. Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Kenneth Brady, Chairman, Board of Commissioners, and Mr. J. Randall Frost, County Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Banks, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Banks, Georgia. 
© ;hg;Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Banks, Georgia. 2002. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE  ORDINANCE NO. 2002-05 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for Banks County, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and this Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Banks County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 90 and Appendix A, Zoning, each inclusive, is republished, ratified, restated, adopted and readopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 20, 2001, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein or herein, are repealed, except the Mobile Home Ordinances of Banks County. (Ordinance 99-11 and 2000-10) 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the county to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after July 20, 2001, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. Notwithstanding section 1-5 of the Code of Banks County, Georgia, the provisions appearing in the Code so far as they are the same as ordinances or resolutions adopted prior to the Code and included in the Code shall be continuations thereof and as republished, ratified, restated ordinances and resolutions adopted and readopted by the Board of Commissioners. 
Section 8. Any provisions, articles, chapters or sections or parts thereof, of the Code that is in conflict with the terms and provisions of this Ordinance adopting and enacting the Code of Banks County, Georgia, are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict, but it is hereby provided that any resolution, ordinance or law, which may be applicable hereto and aid in carrying out and making effective the intent, purpose and provisions hereof and of the Code, which shall be liberally construed to be in favor of Banks County, is hereby adopted as part hereof. 
Section 9. If any paragraph, sub-paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or any portion of this Ordinance shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or if the provisions of any part of this Ordinance as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this Ordinance not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Commissioners to provide for separable and divisible parts, and it does hereby adopt any and all parts hereof as may not be held invalid for any reason. 
Section 10. This ordinance shall become effective on adoption by the Board of Commissioners. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Board of Commissioners, after advertisement, public hearings, and recommendation of the Banks County Planning Commission in an open regularly scheduled public meeting, this day 12th of March, 2002. 
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS  BANKS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
By: ;sigl; Kenneth Brady\Chairman    Ernest Rogers  Commissioner    Pat Westmorland  Commissioner 
ATTEST: 

Certificate Of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the Ordinance passed at the regular public meeting of the Board of Commissioners of Banks County, Georgia, held on the 12th day of March, 2002. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1916 Ga. Laws, page 349 which created the board of commissioners of the county. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Counties a body corporate and polic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; matters over which governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1 et seq. 

Section 1. - Created. 
The board of commissioners of Banks County is hereby created. Until January 1, 2010, the board shall consist of a chairperson and two other members who shall be qualified voters and bona fide residents of Banks County for a period of not less than six months preceding the date of their election. On and after January 1, 2010, the board shall consist of a chairperson and four other members who shall be qualified voters and bona fide residents of Banks County for a period of not less than six months preceding the date of their election. 
(1955 Ga. Laws, page 2474; 1960 Ga. Laws, page 3035; 1970 Ga. Laws, page 3297; Ga. Laws 2008, S.B. No. 558) 
Section 2. - Residency. 
(a)  Until January 1, 2010, the chairperson and other members of the board may reside anywhere in Banks County and shall be nominated and elected by the qualified voters of the entire county. For the purpose of electing the chairperson and other members of such board, there shall be three commissioner posts to be designated Commissioner Post 1, Commissioner Post 2, and Commissioner Post 3. The chairperson shall be elected from Commissioner Post 1 and all candidates for chairperson shall offer for Commissioner Post 1. Candidates for Commissioner Posts 2 and 3 shall designate the post for which they are offering. The chairperson and each member of the board of commissioners in office on the effective date of this Act shall serve until the expiration of his or her respective term of office and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. 
(b)  (1)  On and after January 1, 2010, the chairperson may reside anywhere in Banks County and shall be nominated and elected by the qualified voters of the entire county. For the purpose of electing the remaining members of the board of commissioners, Banks County is divided into four commissioner districts. One member of the board shall be elected from each such district. Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4 shall be and correspond to those four numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan Name: bankscc08p2 Plan Type: Local User: staff Administrator: Banks Co. 
(2)  When used in such attachment, the terms 'Tract' and 'BG' (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a 'BG' heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Banks County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Banks County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any commissioner district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)  On and after January 1, 2010, the commissioners holding Commissioner Post 2 and Commissioner Post 3 shall represent Commissioner District 1 and Commissioner District 3, respectively. Such commissioners shall serve out the terms to which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. Successors to such commissioners shall be elected by the electors of the entire county at the 2010 state-wide general election and shall take office on January 1, 2011, for a term of four years. Thereafter, successors shall be elected by the electors of the entire county at the November general election immediately preceding the end of their terms of office to take office on January 1 immediately following such election for four-year terms of office and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(4)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2009, commissioners shall be elected from Commissioner Districts 2 and 4 by the electors of the entire county in special elections conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. Those persons elected in such special elections shall take office on January 1, 2010, for a term of office to end on December 31, 2012, and until their successors are elected and qualified. At the 2012 state-wide November general election, successors to such commissioners shall be elected by the electors of the entire county and shall take office on January 1, 2013, for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be elected by the electors of the entire county at the November general election immediately preceding the end of their terms of office to take office on January 1 immediately following such election for four-year terms of office and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(5)  On and after January 1, 2010, the chairperson shall serve out the term to which he or she was elected and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. A successor to such chairperson shall be elected by the electors of the entire county at the 2012 state-wide general election and shall take office on January 1, 2013, for a term of four years. Thereafter, a successor shall be elected by the electors of the entire county at the November general election immediately preceding the end of the chairperson's term of office to take office on January 1 immediately following such election for a four-year term of office and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. 
(6)  The chairperson may reside anywhere in Banks County. Except for the chairperson, each district commissioner shall be a resident of the geographic area encompassed by the respective commissioner district which he or she represents. Each commissioner shall be elected by a majority of the electors voting in the entire county. A candidate seeking election to the board of commissioners shall identify the seat to which such candidate seeks election at the time of qualifying for election to the office. If the chairperson ceases to be a resident of Banks County or if any district commissioner ceases to be a resident of the commissioner district from which such district commissioner was elected during his or her term of office, such person shall thereby vacate his or her seat on the commission. All members of the commission shall be nominated and elected pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Election Code,' as now or hereafter amended." 
(c)  At the general election in 1988, the other members of the board representing Commissioner Posts 2 and 3 shall be elected and shall serve for an initial term of office of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January following their election. Thereafter, the successors to such members shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of their terms of office and shall serve for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 3035; 1970 Ga. Laws, page 3297; 1988 Ga. Laws, page 3999; Ga. Laws 2008, S.B. No. 558) 
Section 3. - Compensation of county road foreman; housing of road equipment. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of Banks County shall be authorized to employ and fix the compensation of a county road foreman. It shall be the duty of the county road foreman to maintain all equipment of the county and oversee the construction and maintenance of county roads and he shall have such other duties as the Board may prescribe. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall made provision for housing and maintaining all county road equipment at a location to be selected by said board which shall be as near as possible to the center of Banks County. 
(1955 Ga. Laws, page 2474; 1960 Ga. Laws, page 3035; 1970 Ga. Laws, page 3297) 
Section 4. - Oath. 
Before said commissioners shall enter upon the discharge of their duties, they shall, in addition to the oath prescribed for county officers, take and subscribe the following oath: "I, ____________ , do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform any and all duties required of me as a commissioner in and for the County of Banks; that I will make a just and true accounting of any and all moneys, properties and effects coming into my hands by virtue of my office; that I am duly qualified under the laws of this State to hold this office and I am not the holder of any public funds unaccounted for." 
Section 5. - Bond. 
Before the said commissioners shall enter upon their duties, they shall give a sufficient bond payable to the judge of the probate court of said county in the sum of one thousand dollars each, said bonds to be approved by the judge of the probate court of said county and recorded in the county officers' bond record book in the probate court's office. 
Section 6. - Reserved. 
(Ga. Laws, 2008, S.B. No. 558) 
Section 7. - Records. 
The board of commissioners of said county shall have the authority to hire a clerk for the board of commissioners and the duty of such clerk shall be to keep in a well-bound book a complete record of all the acts and doings of said board of commissioners, said records to be opened to inspection of any citizen of said county at all times, provided the same does not interfere with the meetings of the board. The board shall have the authority to establish and set the compensation to be paid such clerk and the board may further define, increase or decrease the duties of the clerk. 
(1941 Ga. Laws, page 738; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 909; 1959 Ga. Laws, page 2566; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3017) 
Section 8. - Compensation. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2009, the chairperson of the board of commissioners shall be compensated by an annual salary of $60,000.00. 
(b)  Effective January 1, 2009, each other member of the board of commissioners shall be compenstaed by an annual salary of $15,000.00. 
(c)  The salaries of the chairman and other members of the board of commissioners shall be paid in equal monthly installments from county funds. 
(d)  The chairman and other members of the board shall receive no other or further compensation or expenses for their services as members of the board; but, upon a motion duly made and adopted by the board, the chairman or other members may be compensated for actual expenses reasonably incurred in the performance of their duties or for any work performed for the county not in their capacity as chairman or as a member of the board, and the amount of such compensation shall be the same as the regular rate paid to county employees for such work. 
(1920 Ga. Laws, page 440; 1941 Ga. Laws, page 738; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 909; 1955 Ga. Laws, page 2474; 1965 Ga. Laws, page 3058; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3017; 1967 Ga. Laws, page 2543; 1970 Ga. Laws, page 3297; 1971 Ga. Laws, page 4081; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 3901; 1985 Ga. Laws, page 4532; 1997 Ga. Laws, page 4166; 2007 Ga. Laws, H.B. # 473) 
Section 9(a). - Purchasing of supplies and materials. 
In addition to the other duties of the board of commissioners for Banks County, the board shall also establish a procedure for purchasing all county supplies, materials, equipment and other needs where the same exceeds $15.00 in cost. Such procedure shall provide that all departments requesting the purchase of necessary supplies and materials shall submit a purchase order to the purchasing agent for the county, who shall by competitive methods purchase such supplies and materials. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners shall act as purchasing agent for the county and, in addition to his other compensation, shall be compensated an additional one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars per year for expenses. 
All county supplies, materials, equipment and other necessary items exceeding $15.00 in cost shall be required to be purchased in accordance with this section and through the use of the county purchasing agent. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 3017) 
Section 9(b). - Alternate purchasing agent. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners shall be empowered to designate an alternate purchasing agent and such agent shall be empowered to exercise the same duties, powers and functions as the purchasing agent, when so directed by the chairman. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 3017) 
Section 10. - Meetings. 
The structure at 150 Hudson Ridge, Homer, Georgia, 30547 is designated a Banks County Court House in said County or at the Court House Annex in said County on the second Tuesday in each month and may adjourn from day to day and may hold called sessions whenever in their opinion public necessity requires it. 
(1962 Ga. Laws, page 2242; Resolution No. 2008-22, § 1, 8-26-2008) 
Section 11. - [Duties.] 
(a)  The chairperson shall preside at all meetings. It shall be the duty of the chairperson or vice chairperson to sign all orders and warrants for the payment of any money out of the county treasury, the same to be countersigned by the clerk or assistant clerk to the board of commissioners. 
(b)  At the first meeting of each year, the board of commissioners shall elect one of their number to serve as vice chairperson. The vice chairperson shall preside in the absence of the chairperson or in case the chairperson is disqualified for cause. A majority of the board shall be a quorum to transact business. 
(1965 Ga. Laws page 3058; Ga. Laws, S.B. No. 558; Resolution No. 2011-09, § 1, 7-12-2011) 
Section 12. - Members not to contract for furnishing of supplies. 
Said board shall not have the right to contract with any member of said board for any supplies nor with any one related to any member of said board for any work to be done, or for any supplies to be furnished said county. 
Section 13. - Filling of vacancy. 
In the event a vacancy occurs on the board for any reason whatsoever, other than the expiration of a member's term of office, such vacancy shall be filled as follows: 
(a)  In the event a vacancy occurs and the unexpired term shall be for one year or less, the remaining members of the board shall select a person who shall be a qualified voter and resident of the county to serve for the unexpired term. 
(b)  In the event a vacancy occurs and the unexpired term shall be for more than one year, the judge of the probate court of Banks County, within ten days after said vacancy occurs, shall call a special election for the purpose of filling such vacancy. At such election, all of the qualified voters of Banks County shall be eligible to vote. Such election shall be held on a day not less than thirty nor more than forty-five days from the issuance of call. The ordinary shall conduct such election and the person so elected shall serve for the unexpired term. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall apply to the filling of any vacancies that may occur in the membership of the board of commissioners of Banks County holding office at the time this Act becomes effective. The provisions of this section shall also apply to the filling of vacancies that may occur in the chairmanship of said board. 
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 3035; 1970 Ga. Laws, page 3297) 
Section 14. - Superintendent of roads; compensation. 
Said board shall superintend the workings of the convicts of said county, and for such purpose they shall have the authority to hire a competent superintendent of roads whose duty shall be to see that all roads are properly laid out, and said superintendent shall have supervision of all the public roads in said county; provided, said superintendent is not paid more than four hundred dollars per annum for his services; that said board shall repair all bridges either with the convicts or with free labor when it can be done according to law. 
Section 15. - Voter approval. 
This Act shall not become effective in Banks County until it shall have been submitted to the qualified voters of said County of Banks and shall have received a majority of the votes cast in an election for the adoption or rejection of commissioners for said county, and to be submitted to the qualified voters of said county on the 12th day of September, 1916, and if adopted on said date three commissioners shall be elected at the regular election to be held on the 7th day of November, 1916, when the commissioners so elected shall hold their office for four years beginning with the first day of January, 1917. The successors to the first board of commissioners shall be elected at the regular election for county officers and under the same rules and regulations that other county officers are elected under the rules hereinbefore provided. The form of the ballot shall be "For county commissioners" or "Against county commissioners." 
Section 16. - Conflicts. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Approved August 19, 1916. 
ARTICLE II. - INDUSTRIAL BUILDING AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1962 Ga. Laws, page 939 which created the Banks County Industrial Building Authority as an amendment to the state constitution. An act set forth in 1987 Ga. Laws, page 5277 provided that such amendment would continue in force and effect after July 1, 1987. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Authority created. 
Article V, Section IX of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof a new paragraph which shall read as follows: 
A.  There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in Banks County to be known as the Banks County Industrial Building Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of Banks County and a public corporation and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the "Authority"; 
B.  The Authority shall consist of five members. The Mayor of the City of Homer and the Chairman of the Banks County Board of Commissioners shall be ex-officio members of the Authority. In addition the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenue of Banks County shall appoint three members and shall be eligible for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re-appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the said board of county commissioners. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum and a majority may act for the Authority in any matter. No vacancy shall impair the power of the Authority to act. 
C.  The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the Authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations and interest on the obligations of Banks County. 
D.  The powers of the Authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power: 
(1)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and donations and to administer trusts; 
(2)  To borrow money, to issue notes, bonds and revenue certificates, to execute trust agreements or indentures, and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor; 
(3)  To contract with political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name; 
(4)  To have and exercise usual powers of private corporation except such as are inconsistent with this amendment, including the power to appoint and hire officers, agents and employees and to provide their compensation and duties, which officers and agents may or may not be members of the Authority, and the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and by-laws and regulations for the conduct and management of the Authority; 
(5)  To encourage and promote the expansion and development of industrial and commercial facilities in Banks County so as to relieve insofar as possible unemployment within its boundaries, and to that end to acquire by purchase or gift any building or structure within the limits of Banks County, suitable for and intended for use as a factory, mill, shop, processing plant, including all necessary and appurtenant land and appurtenances thereto, and all necessary or useful furnishings, machinery and equipment. Such acquisition may be through the acquisition of land and the construction thereon of a building, including the demolition of existing structures, or through the acquisition of an existing building and the remodeling, renovating, reconstructing, furnishing and equipping of such building; 
(6)  No building acquired hereunder shall be operated by the Authority but shall be leased or sold to one or more persons, firms or corporations. If sold, the purchase price may be paid at one time or in installments falling due in not more than thirty (30) years from the date of transfer of possession. The lessee or purchaser shall be required to pay all costs of operating and maintaining the building or buildings and to pay rentals or installments sufficient, together with other revenues which may be pledged for the purpose, to retire all bonds, both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which may be pledged for the purpose, to retire all bonds, both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which the Authority may have incurred in connection with the undertaking. 
(7)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
(8)  To designate officers to sign and act for the Authority generally or in any specific matter; 
(9)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the Authority as herein stated. 
E.  The Authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the State of Georgia or Banks County. 
F.  The members of the Authority shall receive no compensation for their services to the Authority. 
G.  In order to finance any undertaking within the scope if its power or to refund any bonds then outstanding, the Authority is hereby authorized to issue bonds bearing rate or rates of interest and maturing at the procedure of validation, issuance and delivery shall be in all respects in accordance with the Revenue Bond Law (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), as amended, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., as if said obligations had been originally authorized to be issued thereunder; provided, however, that any property, real or personal of the Authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered as security for any lawful debt of the Authority. The Authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture not in conflict with the provisions of this amendment to provide security for any bonds issued as provided herein, and such trust agreement or indenture may provide herein, and such trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the Authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or under any term or condition under which such bonds are issued. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to create a right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of Banks County to pay any such bonds or the interest thereon nor to enforce payment thereof against any property of Banks County. 
H.  The Authority may authorize additional bonds, for extensions and permanent improvements to any industrial building acquired hereunder, to be placed in escrow and to be negotiated from time to time as proceeds for that purpose may become necessary. Bonds so placed in escrow shall, when sold and delivered, have such standing with the bonds of the same issue as may be provided in the authorizing proceedings. 
I.  No bonds except refunding bonds shall be issued hereunder unless the Authority shall have found and declared that: 
(1)  The undertaking for which the bonds are to be issued will increase employment in Banks County. 
(2)  The lessee or purchaser of the building or buildings involved will not by virtue of establishing operations in said county reduce the number of employees employed by said lessee or purchaser elsewhere in the State of Georgia. 
J.  No moneys derived by the Authority from any source other than gifts and contributions from private individuals, firms or corporations shall at any time be used for entertainment, or other promotional expenses. 
K.  Should said Authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the Authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Banks County subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
L.  This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare industry and trade within Banks County and reducing unemployment to the greatest extent possible, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the Authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. 
M.  This amendment shall be effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the Governor and the first members of the Authority shall be appointed within thirty (30) days after such proclamation. 
N.  The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the Authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the Authority. The Authority shall be an instrumentality of Banks County and the scope of its operations shall be limited to the territory embraced within said county. The General Assembly shall not extend the jurisdiction of the Authority nor the scope of its operations beyond such limits. 
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESS LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1979 Ga. Laws, page 1843 which amended the state constitution to provide the board of commissioners with the right and power to assess and collect license fees and taxes from entities doing business in the county. An act set forth in 1986 Ga. Laws, page 5365 continued the amendment in force and effect after July 1, 1987, as part of the state constitution. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Power to collect license fees and taxes. 
Article IX, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: 
The Board of Commissioners of Banks County shall have the right and power to assess and collect license fees and taxes from all persons, firms, and corporations maintaining a place or places of business in any area of Banks County, including any incorporated municipalities in said county; and the right and power to classify businesses and business enterprises, and to assess different fees and taxes against different classes of business, excepting from the application of these provisions only those businesses which are subject to regulation by the State Public Service Commission and those corporations organized under Title 34 B. The Board of Commissioners of Banks County shall also have the right and power to license all businesses and business enterprises (which are not subject to regulation by the State Public Service Commission) in any area of Banks County, including any incorporated municipalities in said county, in the interest of the welfare of the citizens of Banks County, and to prescribe rules and regulations concerning the same, and to provide that violation of any license regulation adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Banks County or the failure to pay any license fee or tax prescribed for any business shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction thereof as prescribed by the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR SENIOR CITIZENS OR THE DISABLED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1997 Ga. Laws, page 4091 which provided a homestead exemption for senior citizens or the disabled. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for county purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for county purposes levied by, for or on behalf of Banks County, including, but not limited to, taxes to retire county bond indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
(3)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 65 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under this Act is made. 
Section 2. - Grant of exemption; qualifications; filing of affidavit. 
(a)  Each resident of Banks County who is a senior citizen or who is disabled is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Banks County ad valorem taxes for county purposes in the amount of $20,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(b)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided for in subsection (a) of this section as being disabled, the person claiming such exemption shall be required to obtain a certificate from not more than three physicians licensed to practice medicine under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the O.C.G.A., relative to medical practitioners, as now or hereafter amended, certifying that in the opinion of such physician or physicians such person is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (a) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an affidavit with the tax commissioner of Banks County giving the person's age, or, if disabled, the certificate or certificates required by subsection (b) of this section, and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such person is entitled to such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the applicant for the exemption. 
(2000 Ga. Laws, page 4486; 2003 Ga. Laws, H.B. 853) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the exemption granted by H.B. 853 shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2005. 
Section 3. - Claim and return of exemption; renewal; eligibility. 
The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the applicant occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper affidavit as provided in subsection (b) of Section 2 of this Act, it shall not be necessary to make application and file such affidavit thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act to notify the tax commissioner of Banks County or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. Any person who, as of January 1, 1997, has applied for and is eligible for the $8,000.00 homestead exemption from Banks County ad valorem taxes for county purposes pursuant to a local constitutional amendment (1978 Ga. Laws, page 2438) shall be eligible for the exemption granted by this Act without further application if that person has applied for and been eligible for the immediately preceding year for such exemption. 
Section 4. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, municipal taxes, or county school district taxes for educational purposes. 
(b)  The exemption granted by this Act shall be in lieu of any other homestead exemption from Banks County ad valorem taxes for county purposes. 
Section 5. - Term. 
The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2001. 
(2000 Ga. Laws, page 4486) 
DIVISION 2. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR AGED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1978 Ga. Laws, page 2438 which amended the state constitution to provide a homestead exemption for residents 65 years of age or older in the amount of $8,000.00. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Grant of exemption; administration; filing of affidavit. 
Article VII, Section I, Paragraph IV of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
Each resident of Banks County who is 65 years of age or over is hereby granted an exemption from all Banks County ad valorem taxes, including taxes for education, in the amount of $8,000.00 on a homestead owned and occupied by him as a residence. The value of the residence in excess of the above exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. Any such owner shall not receive the benefits of such homestead exemption unless he, or through his agent, files an affidavit with the Tax Commissioner of Banks County, giving his age and such additional information relative to receiving the benefits of such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. Such applications shall be processed in the same manner as other applications for homestead exemption, and the provisions of law applicable to the processing of homestead exemptions, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall apply thereto. Provided, that after any such owner has filed the proper affidavit, as provided above, and has been allowed the exemption provided herein, it shall not be necessary that he make application and file the said affidavit thereafter for any year and the said exemption shall continue to be allowed to such owner. It shall be the duty of any such owner, however, to notify the tax commissioner in the event he becomes ineligible for any reason for the exemption provided in this paragraph. The General Assembly may provide by law for the proper administration of this exemption, including penalties necessary therefor. The increased exemption provided for herein shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1978. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Act No. 44, H.B. 223, which created the board of elections and registration for the county. Amendments to the Act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - [Created.] 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40(b), there is created the Board of Elections and Registration of Banks County, hereinafter referred to as "the board." The board shall have the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the superintendent of elections of Banks County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, which are currently being exercised by the judge of the Probate Court of Banks County, and the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Board of Registrars of Banks County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 1, 4-24-2013) 
Section 2. - [Definitions.] 
The terms "election," "elector," "primary," and "public office" shall have the same meanings as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act; the term "commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of Banks County; and the term "county" means Banks County. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 2, 4-24-2013) 
Section 3. - [Composition; terms.] 
(a)  The board shall be composed of a chairperson and four members who shall be appointed as provided in this section. 
(b)  The initial members of the board shall be the current members of the Board of Registrars of Banks County. Transition to the board shall be facilitated by the current chief registrar serving as initial chairperson of the board and the current clerk of the registrars serving as the interim supervisor of elections. 
(c)  The initial chairperson of the board shall serve a term of four years and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. 
(d)  The current clerk of the registrars shall serve a term of two years on the board and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. 
(e)  The third current member of the board of registrars shall serve a term of three years on the board and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. 
(f)  Terms of office for the two new appointments to the initial board shall be designated with three-year and two-year terms thereby creating staggered terms for the board. 
(g)  Every two years the board shall appoint or re-appoint one of its members to serve as chairperson for a two-year term. 
(h)  After the terms of the initial members as set forth in this section, all terms of the board shall be four years. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 3, 4-24-2013) 
Section 4. - [Eligibility.] 
(a)  No person who holds elective public office or any member of his or her immediate family shall be eligible to serve as a member of the board during the term of such elective office. The position of any member of the board shall be deemed vacant upon such member's, or a member of such member's immediate family, qualifying as a candidate for elective public office. Further, there shall be no members of the same immediate family serving on the board or on the staff of the board at the same time. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, immediate family members shall be defined as a spouse, mother, father, stepmother, stepfather, grandmother, grandfather, child, stepchild, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, and sister-in-law. 
(c)  Board members must be residents of Banks County and must have been registered to vote in Banks County for a period of at least two years prior to the date of appointment. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 4, 4-24-2013) 
Section 5. - [Appointments.] 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in Section 4 of this Act regarding the initial board, appointments to the board shall be made by the chief judge of the Superior Court of Banks County. The board shall submit to the commissioners the names of a number of qualified electors, equal to twice the number of persons to be considered for appointment, no later than 30 days prior to the expiration of such members' term of office. The commissioners may add to or delete names from the list submitted by the board. If the commissioners add to the list of names for the appointment, the new names shall be certified as qualified electors by the board. If an individual is not a qualified elector, his or her name shall be removed from the list. Appointments from the names on the list by the chief judge are for four-year terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(b)  The chief judge of the Superior Court of Banks County shall certify each appointment to the clerk of the superior court no later than 15 days preceding the date upon which each member is to take office, stating the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifying such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. 
(c)  The clerk of the superior court shall record each of such certifications on the minutes of the superior court and shall certify the name of each such appointed member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to members within the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for registrars. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 5, 4-24-2013) 
Section 6. - [Successive terms.] 
Each member of the board shall have the right to serve successive terms and to resign at any time by giving written notice of such resignation to the board and to the clerk of the superior court and shall be subject to removal from the board by the chief judge of the Superior Court of Banks County at any time for cause, after notice and hearing. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 6, 4-24-2013) 
Section 7. - [Vacancies.] 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any appointed member before the expiration of his or her term, by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the chief judge of the Superior Court of Banks County shall appoint a successor from the prior list of names submitted under Section 5 of this Act to serve the remainder of the unexpired term as provided for in Section 5 of this Act. The clerk of the superior court shall be notified of such interim appointments and record and certify such appointments in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. If there are not at least two qualified electors on the list last submitted to the chief judge, the process of furnishing the names of qualified electors to the chief judge as set forth in Section 5 of this Act shall be followed, and a new set of names shall be furnished to the chief judge to fill the vacancy on the board. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 7, 4-24-2013) 
Section 8. - [Oath.] 
Before entering upon the member's duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 8, 4-24-2013) 
Section 9. - [Management of affairs; directives governing the execution of matters.] 
(a)  The board shall be authorized to organize itself, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate for the management of the affairs committed to its supervision; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with state law. Decisions by the board shall be by a majority of the members of the board. 
(b)  The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall hold a minimum of quarterly meetings at times, dates, and places as determined by the board. Any specially called meeting shall be called by the chairperson or any two members of the board. The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions amended to include additions or deletions. Such written records shall be made available for the public to review. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 9, 4-24-2013) 
Section 10. - [Authority to contract.] 
The board shall have the authority to contract with any municipality located within the county for the holding by the board of any primary or election to be conducted within such municipality. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 10, 4-24-2013) 
Section 11. - [Appointment of elections supervisor.] 
(a)  The board shall be authorized to appoint an elections supervisor to generally supervise, direct, and facilitate the administration of the affairs of the board pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board. The elections supervisor shall not be a member of the board or an election official. The elections supervisor shall be considered an employee and a department head of Banks County and shall be entitled to the same benefits as other employees of Banks County. 
(b)  The board and the elections supervisor, subject to funding by the governing authority of the county, shall be authorized to employ such full-time and part-time employees as deemed necessary for the efficient conduct of elections, primaries, and registration of electors for the county. All such employees shall be considered to be employees of Banks County and shall be entitled to the same benefits as other employees of Banks County. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 11, 4-24-2013) 
Section 12. - [Compensation.] 
Compensation for the members of the board, elections supervisor, clerical assistants, and other employees shall be fixed by the governing authority of the county, provided that the members of the board shall receive compensation in at least the amount provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-212(d). Such compensation shall be paid wholly from county funds. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 12, 4-24-2013) 
Section 13. - [Supplies and materials.] 
The governing authority of Banks County shall provide the board with such proper and suitable offices, equipment, materials, and supplies as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 13, 4-24-2013) 
Section 14. - [Training.] 
The local election officials of Banks County shall attend the training as required by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-100, and the governing authority of Banks County shall pay the cost of such training. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 14, 4-24-2013) 
Section 15. - [Submission for preclearance.] 
The board of commissioners of Banks County shall through its legal counsel cause this Act to be submitted for preclearance under Section 5 of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, and such submission shall be made to the United States Department of Justice or filed with the appropriate court no later than 45 days after the date on which this Act is approved by the Governor or otherwise becomes law without such approval. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 15, 4-24-2013) 
Section 16. - [Effective date.] 
This Act shall become effective on the first day of the month following the month in which it is approved by the Governor or becomes law without such approval. Upon this Act becoming effective, the judge of the Probate Court of Banks County and the Board of Registrars of Banks County shall be relieved of all powers and duties to which the board succeeds by the provisions of this Act and shall deliver to the board all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities pertaining to such powers and duties. On such date, the Board of Registrars of Banks County shall be abolished, but the members of the board of registrars shall become the initial members of the board of Banks County as provided in this Act. 
(Act No. 44 (H.B. 223), § 16, 4-24-2013) 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the Georgia Laws cited in the Related Laws. 

 
_____
  ;rn0;;adv=1p;This table shows the location of the sections of amendments to the Related Laws adopted by ordinance/resolution. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances, resolutions and other enactments embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Banks County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the county, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Board of commissioners, board, commissioners, commission, county commission, governing authority, governing body. Each such term shall mean the board of commissioners of Banks County, Georgia. 
Chairman, officers and officials. Whenever the term "chairman" is used it shall mean the chairman of the board of commissioners of Banks County. Whenever titles of various officers or officials are used, they shall refer to the persons holding such positions with Banks County. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean "The Code of Banks County, Georgia," as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The terms "the county" and "this county" shall mean Banks County, Georgia. 
County administrator. The term "county administrator" means the county administrator of Banks County, Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males or any other legal entity when applicable under federal or state law. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as described in this section. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively, 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Seal. The term "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff' shall mean the sheriff of Banks County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The signature or subscription of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The terms "state" and "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the county. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week, of seven days. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeat or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Board of Commissioners of Banks County, as follows:" 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of Banks County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Banks County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections to " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners, which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In every case in which any superior court, state court, probate court, magistrate court, municipal court or other court in the county in which this section has been placed in effect as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-21-92 shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include cost, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any ordinance of a political subdivision thereof, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(Ord. No. 90-1, 2-13-1990) 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; maximum punishment which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-6(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-6(3); the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(13); administrative procedures for buildings and building regulations, § 18-61 et seq.; administrative fee structure for occupational taxes and regulatory fees, § 22-33; civil emergencies, ch. 26; courts, ch. 30; administration of flood damage prevention regulations, § 42-61 et seq.; planning, ch. 58; taxation, ch. 78; administration of hotel-motel excise tax, § 78-97; zoning, app. A; administration, interpretation, enforcement, penalties and remedies of zoning regulations, app. A, § 1201 et seq. 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; county government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the county shall commence on July 1 and conclude on June 30. 
State Law reference— Establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2. - Departments created. 
The following departments of the county are created and established: 
(1)  Road department. 
(2)  Water and sewer department. 
(3)  Recreation department. 
(4)  Planning and zoning department. 
(5)  Fire/EMS department. 
(6)  Emergency 911 services department. 
(7)  Senior center. 
Sec. 2-3. - Records management. 
The board of commissioners is responsible for records management activities and the designation of the county clerk to act for and in behalf of the board of commissioners in directing and coordinating all records management matters. No record shall be destroyed except in accordance with approved retention schedules. 
(Res. No. 83-8, 12-13-1983) 
State Law reference— Records as public property, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102; offenses involving public records, documents and other items, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-6; records management plans for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90; records management plan required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(c). 
Sec. 2-4. - Workers' compensation. 
Certain elected officials of the county shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their elected duties the board of commissioners, sheriff, probate judge, clerk of court, tax commissioner, magistrate judge, coroner and volunteer firefighters shall be covered under the workers' compensation law of the state. 
(Res. No. 82-2, 2-2-1982; Res. No. 83-4, 10-4-1983; Res. No. 87-10, § 1, 12-8-1987) 
Secs. 2-5—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; county government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); authority to control property of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(1); county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.; counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § 1, ¶ I; county officers; election; term; compensation, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; matters over which governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-31. - Meetings. 
(a)  The Board of Commissioners of Banks County shall hold regular meetings on the second Tuesday of each month, and may adjourn from day to day, and may hold called sessions whenever in their opinion public necessity requires it. The time of the regular meetings and of the called sessions shall be determined by the board of commissioners. If a public hearing is required, the date, time and place of the public hearing shall be determined by the board of commissioners. Notice of the date, time and place of all regular meetings, called sessions and public hearings shall be as required by Georgia Law. 
(b)  The structure at 150 Hudson Ridge, Homer, Georgia, 30547 is hereby designated a Banks County Court House Annex and the board of commissioners shall hold regular meetings at the Court House in said county or at the Court House Annex in said county on the second Tuesday in each month and may adjourn from day to day and may hold called sessions whenever in their opinion public necessity requires it. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, § 1, 4-12-2005; Res. No. 2008-22, § 1, 8-26-2008) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2008-22, adopted August 26, 2008, amended Article I, § 10 of the Related Laws. Subsection (b) of this section was amended to read the same as the Related Laws at the editor's discretion. 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-32. - Agenda. 
There shall be a written agenda prepared prior to each meeting of the board of commissioners. Persons who desire to address the board of commissioners shall notify the clerk of the board of commissioners by no later than noon on the Friday preceding the next meeting. The board of commissioners may by majority vote allow a person not otherwise on the agenda to address the board of commissioners. 
Secs. 2-33—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The county compiles and publishes separately additional administrative regulations in its manual of personnel policies and procedures. The manual incorporates the retirement plan for county employees and includes regulations pertaining to purchasing policies and operation of the fire departments. An official copy of the manual and associated documentation are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-6(4); dog control officer, § 14-32; business inspector, § 22-49. 
State Law reference— Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14); Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; authority to establish retirement systems for municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(4); authority of municipality to provide insurance, retirement and pension benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; Georgia municipal employees benefit system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-61. - Appointment of officers and department heads. 
(a)  The board of commissioners may at its June meeting each fiscal year appoint the county clerk, road foreman, EMT director, EMA director, zoning officer, recreation director, clean and beautification director and county attorney for the next fiscal year of the county. Any department head or officer not appointed at the June meeting shall continue until removed by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall have the right to fill any vacancy in any position at any regularly scheduled or called meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  A position shall remain vacant until the board of commissioners appoint a person to the position, if the board of commissioners do not appoint a person to a position at its June meeting. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prevent, limit or otherwise interfere with the right of the board of commissioners to terminate the services of any employee at any time. 
(Res. No. 93-4, 6-8-1993) 
Sec. 2-62. - Exclusion of poll workers from social security. 
(a)  Findings. Officials of the county did enter into a plan and agreement with the employees retirement system of the state for extending to its employees the insurance system established by Title II of the Social Security Act. The original agreement did include the services of election officials and election workers. It is, at this time, the desire of the board of commissioners to exclude the services performed by election officials or election workers for each calendar year prior to the year 2000 in which the remuneration paid for such services is less than $1,000.00, and for each year after 1999 in which the remuneration paid is less than the adjusted amount, as described in this section, beginning with services performed in the year that this modification was mailed or delivered by other means to the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Adjustment of excludable amount. The $1,000.00 limit on the excludable amount of remuneration paid in a calendar year for the services specified in this modification will be subject to adjustment for calendar years after 1999 to reflect changes in wages in the economy without any further modification of the agreement, with respect to such services performed during such calendar years, in accordance with Section 218(c)(8)(B) of the Social Security Act. 
(c)  Contract amendment. The contract approved and accepted by the employees retirement system of the state is hereby amended to exclude the services referenced in subsection (a) of this section effective January 1, 1996. 
(Res. No. 96-9, 9-10-1996) 
Secs. 2-63—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Construction board of adjustment and appeals, § 18-83; board of appeals for subdivisions, § 74-451 et seq. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-91—2-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BANKS/HABERSHAM/RABUN COUNTIES JOINT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2007-01, adopted Jan. 9, 2007, stated: "Now, therefore, be it resolved, that upon adoption of this joint and concurrent resolution by the governing bodies of each of the Participating Counties, the Original Resolutions are amended and restated to read as follows and the Articles of Organization are repealed and replaced by this joint and concurrent resolution." At the editor's discretion, §§ 1, 2, of Res. No. 2007-01, have been included herein as superseding the former div. 2, §§ 2-106—2-120, which pertained to Banks/Habersham Counties Joint Development Authority and derived from Res. No. 2001-30, §§ 1—14, adopted Oct. 26, 2001. 

Sec. 2-106. - Continuation of joint authority, addition of additional participating counties and change in name. 
It is hereby found and determined that there is a need for the authority to operate as a joint development in Rabun County, in addition to operating in Banks and Habersham Counties. Rabun County is hereby added as a participating county of the authority and the authority is continued as a joint development authority under the name the "Joint Development Authority of Banks, Habersham and Rabun Counties." This joint and concurrent resolution, when adopted by the governing bodies of each of the participating counties, shall be deemed to continue the authority, with Rabun County being added as a participating county, rather than creating a new joint development authority. The authority shall transact business pursuant to, and exercise the powers provided by the provisions of, the Development Authorities Law, codified in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated Title 36, Chapter 62, as the same now exists and as it may be hereafter amended. 
(Res. No. 2007-01, § 1, 1-9-2007) 
Sec. 2-107. - Members and officers. 
(a)  The number of members of the authority shall be nine. Three members shall be appointed by the governing body of each participating county and each such member shall be a resident and taxpayer of such county. Except as provided below, the term of office of each member shall be three calendar years. 
(b)  The persons appointed by the governing bodies of Banks and Habersham Counties, respectively, who currently hold office as members of the authority, shall continue to serve as members of the authority for the balance of their current terms of office. 
(c)  One of the members initially appointed by the governing body of Rabun County shall serve a term ending December 31, 2007, one shall serve a term ending December 31, 2008, and one shall serve a term ending December 31, 2009. Such initial members shall be appointed by separate resolution of the governing body of Rabun County. 
(d)  After expiration of the term of each member, the terms of office of their respective successors shall be terms of three calendar years. If, at the end of any term of any member, a successor to such member has not been appointed, the member whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until his successor is appointed, and such successor's term shall commence on the date of his or her appointment and shall end on the December 31, that is, three years after the scheduled end of the immediately preceding term. 
(e)  The members of the authority shall constitute its board of directors. A majority of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, but no action may be taken by the authority without the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the authority. 
(f)  The members shall receive no compensation for their services as members or directors of the authority, but shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(g)  The current officers of the authority shall continue to hold office for their current terms or until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Res. No. 2007-01, § 2, 1-9-2007) 
Secs. 2-108—2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-126. - Purpose. 
There is determined and declared to be an existing and future need for a development authority (as more fully described and defined in the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.) to function in the county for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in the county, thereby promoting the general welfare of its citizens. 
(Res. No. 86-5, 2-24-1986) 
Sec. 2-127. - Authority activated. 
There is hereby activated in the county, under the provisions of the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., a public body corporate and politic known as the "Development Authority of Banks County." 
(Res. No. 86-5, 2-24-1986) 
Sec. 2-128. - Terms of members. 
(a)  The terms of the members of the Development Authority of Banks County whose terms begin March 1, 2008, shall be for a period of three years. 
(b)  The terms of the members of the Development Authority of Banks County whose terms begin after March 1, 2008, shall be for a period of four years. 
(Res. No. 86-5, 2-24-1986; Res. No. 2008-03, 2-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-129. - Responsibility of directors. 
The board of directors elected shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Res. No. 86-5, 2-24-1986) 
Sec. 2-130. - Limitation of action. 
The action taken by the board of commissioners, including the activation of the development authority of the county under the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., is not intended to, and shall in no way or to any extent, impair or otherwise affect the existence, purpose, organization, powers or function of any other industrial development or other authority heretofore created by constitutional amendment or act of the general assembly, including without limitation the county industrial building authority created pursuant to an amendment to the Georgia Constitution (1962 Ga. Laws 1962, page 939) ratified by the voters of the county at the election held on November 6, 1962. 
(Res. No. 86-5, 2-24-1986) 
Secs. 2-131—2-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL BUILDING AUTHORITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Related laws reference— Industrial building authority, art. II. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-146. - Findings. 
There is hereby determined and declared to be a pressing, existing and future need for the industrial building authority (as more fully described and defined in 1962 Ga. Laws, page 939) to function in the county for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and welfare trade, industry and employment opportunities in the county thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry. 
(Res. of 11-13-1973) 
Sec. 2-147. - Authority activated. 
There is hereby activated in the county the public body corporate and politic known as the Banks County Industrial Building Authority which was created by ratification of 1962 Ga. Laws, page 939. 
(Res. of 11-14-1973) 
Sec. 2-148. - Membership. 
The initial members of the authority shall serve terms of five years and thereafter for terms of five years. Each member shall be a taxpayer of the county and not an officer or employee of the county. If at the end of any term of office of any member, a successor thereto shall not have been elected by the board of commissioners then the member whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until his successor shall be so elected. 
(Res. of 11-14-1973; Res. No. 83-1, 2-2-1983) 
Sec. 2-149. - Organization; powers and duties. 
The industrial building authority members elected shall organize the authority, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of 1962 Ga. Laws, page 939, as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified by the general assembly of the state. 
(Res. of 11-14-1973; Res. No. 83-1, 2-2-1983) 
Secs. 2-150—2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BANKS COUNTY E-911 ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-166. - E-911 advisory board. 
(a)  Banks County E-911 Advisory Board Overseeing Authority will be the county board of commissioner's. 
(b)  Banks County E-911 Advisory Board voting members will consist of the following: Banks County E-911 Director or appointee, Banks County Sheriff or appointee, Banks County Fire/EMS Chief or appointee, Banks County EMA Director or appointee, Banks County Marshall or appointee, Homer Fire Chief or appointee, Baldwin Fire Chief or appointee, Baldwin Chief of Police or appointee, Maysville Chief of Police or appointee, Maysville Fire Chief or appointee, Department of Natural Resources Law Enforcement Official and Georgia Forestry Area Ranger or appointee. 
(c)  A quorum of the advisory board shall be a majority of the membership. No business shall be conducted by the advisory board unless the quorum is present. 
(d)  Guest speakers will be permitted to attend if proper notice is given and topic directly relates to an emergency system or need. No guest will be allowed to vote on any topic. 
(e)  The advisory board shall hold regular quarterly meetings at 2:00 pm on the second Monday of every third month following October 8, 2001. The meetings will be held at the county fire administrative offices training room. The meetings will not be held unless the quorum is present and quarterly meeting dates may be changed by a vote from the quorum. Special called meetings may be necessary from time to time and can be called by the chairman or a majority of the board. All recommendations shall be sent directly to the county board of commissioner's and the county E-911 director. 
(f)  On the first meeting of the county E-911 advisory board the members will elect a chairman for the meetings and a secretary. 
(g)  The duties of the advisory board include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Review and analyze the progress by public safety agencies in the continued development of the 9-1-1 and central communications systems; 
(2)  Recommend steps of action to affect the necessary coordination, regulation and development of the 9-1-1 system; 
(3)  Identify and or review mutual aid agreements necessary to the operation of the 9-1-1 system; 
(4)  Assist in the promulgation of necessary rules, regulations, operating procedures, necessary to notify various agencies that an emergency exists and insure proper response, and other such policy as shall be deemed necessary and appropriate; 
(5)  Act as a quality assurance board in the management and operations of the central dispatch center; 
(6)  Make recommendations concerning equipment and coordinate the acquisition of appropriate radio equipment for all users to insure compatibility with the system as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 2001-31, 10-26-2001) 
DIVISION 6. - BANKS COUNTY PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD 

Sec. 2-217. - Created. 
There is hereby created an advisory board for the Banks County Parks and Recreation Department to be known as the Advisory Board of the Banks County Parks and Recreation Department (the "advisory board"). 
(Res. No. 2002-04, § 1, 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 2-218. - Members. 
The advisory board shall consist of five members who shall be residents of Banks County, Georgia; and appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Banks County. Each member of the advisory board shall serve a term of three years ("regular term"). Each member of the advisory board shall be eligible for reappointment by the commissioners. Each member of the advisory board shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed by the commissioners. If a vacancy occurs on the advisory board, the commissioners, as soon as practicable, shall select a successor to serve the remaining term ("interim term") of the vacated member. Each year of a regular term shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31, notwithstanding the fact that a member may be appointed to a regular term on the advisory board on a date other than January 1, and an existing member shall serve until the member's successor is appointed. 
(Res. No. 2002-04, § 2, 1-8-2002; Res. No. 2016-02 , § 1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-219. - Same—Advisory board elect. 
The advisory board shall elect one of its members as chairperson and another member as vice chairperson and it shall also elect a secretary. A majority of the members of the advisory board shall constitute a quorum necessary for the transaction of business, and a majority vote of those present at any meeting (no absentee voting or voting by proxy) at which there is a quorum shall be sufficient to do and perform any action permitted by this resolution. No vacancy in membership on the advisory board shall impair the right of the quorum to transact any and all business as aforesaid. The advisory board shall adopt the rules and regulations for its governance, provided, however, such rules and regulations shall not conflict with the provisions of this resolution. The advisory board shall continue in existence until terminated or abolished by resolution of the commissioners. 
(Res. No. 2002-04, § 3, 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 2-220. - Compensation. 
The members of the advisory board shall serve without compensation. The members of the advisory board may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties, if the expenses are approved by the commissioners prior to being incurred. 
(Res. No. 2002-04, § 4, 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 2-221. - Duties. 
The advisory board shall study and review the policies and programs of the county parks and recreation department and make recommendations to the board of commissioners on needed changes to the existing policies. After review and study the advisory board shall make recommendations on new programs for the county parks and recreation department and the need for additional equipment or for the replacement of existing equipment being used in the recreation program. In addition, the advisory board shall study and make recommendations to the commissioners on any question referred to them by the commissioners concerning the parks and recreation program in the county. Each recommendation shall have been voted on by the advisory board and the numerical vote of the advisory board on the recommendation shall be included in the report to the commissioners. The advisory board does not have the power or authority to enter into contracts or other agreements or to bind or obligate the county. The sole purpose of the advisory board is to study and make recommendations to the commissioners concerning the parks and recreation program in the county. 
(Res. No. 2002-04, § 5, 1-8-2002; Res. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-222. - Absences. 
The absence of an advisory board member from three consecutive meetings of the advisory board during any calendar year shall result in notification by the secretary to the advisory board chairperson and the absent advisory board member as a reminder of the attendance requirements. The secretary will also notify the chairperson of the board of commissioners of the absences and the chairperson shall have the authority to determine if the absences result in a vacated position. Once the seat on the advisory board is deemed vacated, the chairperson of the Board of Commissioners of Banks County shall submit the vacancy to the board of commissioners for appropriate action (appointment of a new member to the advisory board). 
(Res. No. 2013-02, § 1, 1-8-2013; Res. No. 2016-02 , § 3, 2-9-2016) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2016-02, § 3, adopted Feb. 9, 2016, changed the title of § 2-222 from [unexcused absences] to read as herein set out. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages at adult entertainment, § 10-67; businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 12, 2004, repealed art. I in its entirety. Formerly, art. I pertained to provisions saved from repeal pending revision of the subject matter by the county, as enacted by Ord. No. 81-3; as amended, and regulation and licensing for the sale of malt beverages and wine as enacted by Ord. No. 2002-08; as amended. Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1, further provided for a new article III, which has been codified as §§ 6-51—6-71 herein. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 12, 2004 enacted a new art. I, §§ 6-1—6-19 to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Alcohol" means the product of distillation of any liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall include synthetic ethyl alcohol. 
"Alcoholic beverages" as used in this chapter shall mean any beverage containing alcohol and shall include, but shall not be limited to malt beverages, wines, and distilled spirits. 
"Amusement center" shall mean any business, which has a seating capacity of at least 10,000 people for any type of sporting event, including a golf course and drag racing. 
"County" means Banks County, Georgia. 
"Distilled spirits" means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
"Governing authority" means the Commissioners of Banks County, Georgia. 
"Hotel" shall mean a building or other structure with a restaurant kept, used maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guest whether transient, permanent, or residential, in which 100 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge and restaurant in their premises and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel thereunder. 
"License" shall mean the authorization by the governing authority to engage in the sale for consumption only on the premises of malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits, which may or may not be diluted by water or other substance in solution. 
"Licensee" shall mean any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association duly licensed by the governing authority to sell malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits by the drink and for consumption only on the premises. 
"Lounge" shall mean a separate room connected with, a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in hotels as defined herein with all booths, stools, and tables being unobstructed and open to view. A lounge shall be air-conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 50 persons. 
"Malt beverage" shall mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion of decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese Rice Wine. 
"Person" means and includes any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, or any other entity. 
"Premises" means the space or area owned, leased and/or controlled by the licensee and used for the purposes of operating under the license which shall be a definite closed or partitioned-in locality whether a room, shop, or building, wherein malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits shall be sold and consumed therein; except that in the case of hotels and motels, "premises" shall include only the portion of the property where alcoholic beverages are sold; and except further that in the case of restaurants "premises" includes a deck-or patio that is adjacent to and contiguous with the restaurant. Premises is further defined as one physically identifiable place of business consisting of one room, or two or more contiguous rooms operating under the same name where alcoholic beverages are sold. Any "premises" which cannot be determined as one identifiable place of business shall require additional licenses regardless of such establishments having the same name, ownership or management. 
"Residence" means the place where one actually lives as distinguished from his/her domicile or place of temporary sojourn. 
"Resident" means a person whose primary residence is within the territorial limits of the State of Georgia. 
"Restaurant" shall mean any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are prepared, cooked and served and where meals are actually and regularly prepared, cooked and served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity of at least 100 people, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal a day shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. 
"Wholesaler" and "wholesale distributor" means any person, firm or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to licensees for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink on the premises. 
"Wine" shall mean any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-2. - Compliance with rules and regulations for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises without first complying with the rules and regulations set out in this chapter. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the sale of alcoholic beverages in the County of Banks is a privilege, and not a right, and the issuance of a license hereunder shall not create any property rights in the license holder. 
(c)  No person shall allow alcoholic beverages to be consumed at or within a place of business unless the alcoholic beverages were purchased at the place of business for consumption on the premises from a licensee with a license issued pursuant to this chapter. No person shall sell, offer for sale, possess, or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic beverages, the sale, possession or consumption of which is not authorized under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-3. - License application for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises except under a license granted by the governing authority. Application for a consumption on the premises license shall be made on forms provided by the governing authority as follows: 
(1)  A consumption on the premises license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and no such license may be renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next subsequent calendar year must make a new application for such year, which need not be advertised. 
(2)  In addition to the completion and submission of the application form as required by the governing authority, such applicant shall attach thereto a complete application form which with all attachments is required for a state license to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(3)  A notice of each application shall be advertised in the official legal organ paper of the County of Banks once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the meeting of the governing authority that the application is to be acted upon. 
(4)  The making of any false statements on an application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall constitute grounds for denying the license and grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-4. - Qualifications of applicants for consumption on the premises license. 
(a)  All applications for licenses to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall be presented in person by the applicant to the Banks County Enforcement Officer (the "enforcement officer"). 
(b)  No applicant for a license who has a criminal record (except minor traffic offenses) shall be granted a license. 
(c)  Any applicant for a consumption on the premises license must show to the satisfaction of the governing authority, financial responsibility. 
(d)  Every applicant for a consumption on the premises license shall be at least 21 years of age and shall make application on forms furnished by the enforcement officer and in connection therewith shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits, bonds and other supporting data as required thereby. 
(e)  In all cases where the owner of such business is a resident of Banks County, the application shall be made in the owner's name. 
(f)  Any applicant for a consumption on the premises license must be of good character and all managers, clerks and other employees who receive, inventory, dispense, serve or are in any way connected with the alcoholic beverages shall be of like good character and, if not, the application will not be considered. 
(g)  All applicants, managers, clerks and other employees who receive, inventory/dispense, serve or are in any way connected with the alcoholic beverages shall be subject to investigation by the Sheriff's Department of the County of Banks or other police agency designated by the governing authority. 
(h)  Where the owner is a firm, corporation, partnership, association, or nonresident, the application shall be made in the name of the resident officer, partner, or associate who owns a substantial interest in the business or in the name of the principal resident managing officer or managing agent and the application shall show that the license is for the use of the owner, and the owner shall be named. Corporate applicants shall be of good business reputation. 
(i)  The written application for the license shall be a permanent record that the licensee must maintain current as required by section 6-3 hereof. 
(j)  Failure to maintain a current license application as required by section 6-3 hereof shall be grounds for revocation of same. 
(k)  In addition to all other requirements, no license for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a restaurant, hotel, lounge, or amusement center as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-5. - Ownership disclosure. 
(a)  No person shall have, own or enjoy any ownership, interest in, share in the profits from, or otherwise participate in the business of any consumption on the premises licensee in the county unless a full description of such interest shall have been furnished the governing authority at the time such interest arose. It shall be the duty of the licensee to report to the governing authority, within five days any change in any interest in licensee's business including but not limited to: 
(1)  Any division of the profits; 
(2)  Any division of net or gross sales for any purposes whatsoever; 
(3)  Any change in the payment of rents or leases; 
(4)  Any change in the ownership of any lease or building or land used in such business; or 
(5)  Any change in the ownership of any corporation, firm, partnership, association or other entity that has any interest in such business or the change of management of such corporation, firm, partnership, association, or other entity. 
(b)  After receipt of such notice, the governing authority shall notify such person within a reasonable time of any objection to the ownership or interest set forth therein, and it shall then be incumbent upon such person to dispose of such interest within 30 days after the mailing of the notice to do so by the governing authority to such person at his/her address as shown on such notice of interest. In the event such interest is not disposed of within 30 days after the mailing of the notice by the governing authority, or in the event no objections are filed within said 30-day period, or in the event such person fails to notify the governing authority of the transfer of any such interest within 20 days after the acquisition thereof, then the license as provided for herein may be revoked by the governing authority until the disposition of the interest has been made and notice given to the governing authority of the transfer. 
(c)  The report required by this section shall be in the form required by the governing authority and shall be an amendment to the licensee's permanent license application on file with the governing authority and as such shall be under oath and verified as otherwise required for license applications. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-6. - Consumption on the premises license renewal and transfer. 
(a)  The consumption on the premises license issued shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon. A licensee that desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make a renewal application for such year on or before November 15, of the preceding year. Payment of the license fee for the renewal of a license shall be made at the time of the application, and upon approval by the governing authority and payment of the fee the renewal license will be issued. Applications for renewal shall be treated as applications for new licenses but need not be resurveyed unless requested by the director. Any renewals submitted after the due date of November 15, shall be considered delinquent and assessed a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the fees due. Interest on delinquent fees shall be assessed at one percent for each month or fraction thereof of delinquency. 
(b)  At the time of each yearly renewal of a consumption on the premises license, the licensee shall submit the monthly reports for the year reflecting the gross sales of food and alcoholic beverages at a 60/40 percent ratio along with each quarterly Georgia Sales and Use Report for the year to the clerk of the governing authority of Banks County. 
(c)  No consumption on the premises license shall be transferred or assigned from one person to another or from one location to another without the permission and approval of the governing authority upon written application made to the enforcement officer with the appropriate fee paid. Approvals as to any change shall be made at the discretion of the governing authority. It shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender the license to the governing authority if the application is not approved. 
(d)  Each application for transfer of a license shall have attached thereto a completed copy of the notice of change of interest required by the State Revenue Commissioner, State of Georgia. After receipt of such application, the governing authority shall notify such applicant within 20 days of any objection to the transfer as set forth in the application. Said license shall remain in effect pending approval of the transfer. Upon proper application, the governing authority may permit the license to be transferred upon payment of a "transfer fee" of $200.00, provided that the transferee meets all of the qualifications which would have been required had the transferee originally been an applicant for an alcoholic beverage license. Upon the death of any licensee, his personal representative or his heirs may continue to operate under the said license for the balance of the year without the payment of any fee, if otherwise qualified as a licensee, or the license may be transferred to qualified transferee within 30 days after the condition of the estate of the deceased licensee will permit, upon payment of the above transfer fee. 
(e)  Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at some other location must make a complete new application for such location. 
(f)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only so long as the licensee is actively engaged in such business, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration, and in the event the licensee shall cease to be actively engaged in such business the licensee shall immediately notify the governing authority and return the license to the governing authority. 
(g)  The governing authority may in its discretion require a personal statement of any employee of any licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 3-25-2014) 
Sec. 6-7. - Exceptions to the issuance of a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(a)  When contrary to the public interest and welfare no license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be issued by the governing authority to or for: 
(1)  Any person as determined by the governing authority by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, trade association, personal associations, record of arrest, or reputation in any community in which the applicant has resided, who is not likely to maintain the operation for which the applicant seeking a license in conformity with federal, state, or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law of any felony involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local, law of any felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately preceding the filing of an application for such license. 
(4)  Any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of a misdemeanor, particularly, but not limited to, those involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, or tax law violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(5)  The operation of an alcoholic beverages business hereunder by any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity already holding two such licenses. 
(6)  Any person to operate a restaurant, hotel, lounge, or amusement center except as defined herein. Consumption on the premises sales shall be made in no other place or establishment. 
(7)  When the granting of such a license would constitute a violation of state law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-8. - Unsuitable location for the issuance of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(a)  A location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the governing authority because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties, or in the neighborhood. 
(b)  A location within an area where, in the judgment of the governing authority, the number of alcoholic beverage licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest and welfare. 
(c)  A location at which a previous license has been revoked or suspended and where, in the judgment of the governing authority the problems which have arisen from the operation of the licensee at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location. 
(d)  Which the granting of such license would constitute a violation of state law or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-9. - Procedures for denial, revocation or suspended license for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Before the governing authority shall deny any application for a license or for the transfer of any license, or shall revoke any existing license, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, shall be given notice in writing from the clerk of the governing authority to show cause before the governing authority at a time and place specified therein not less than five days nor more than 15 days from the date of mailing the notice, why said application for license or for transfer of license should not be denied or why said license should not be revoked, as the case may be, stating the grounds therefor, and at the appointed time and place the applicant or licensee shall have the opportunity to show cause, if any exist, why said application should not be denied or said license revoked or suspended, after which the governing authority shall take such action as it, in its judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. The hearing herein provided for need not be a regular meeting of the governing authority but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in said notice. All decisions, denying, approving, suspending, or revoking any permit, license, or application shall be in writing, with the reasons therefore stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant. In addition, at any hearing as provided herein, the party afforded the hearing shall have the opportunity to present evidence and cross examine the opposing witnesses. 
(b)  The governing authority, at their discretion, may consider the extenuating circumstances, which may reflect favorably, or unfavorably on the applicant, application, or proposed location of the business if in their judgment circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-10. - Business location, distances for licenses for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No consumption on the premises license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 600 feet from any church building, school ground, or college campus. Said distance shall be measured in all directions from the nearest wall enclosing the proposed premises where alcoholic beverages are to be sold to the nearest point of any school, college campus or church building. Each application for a consumption on the premises license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church building, school ground, college campus or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with reference to this section. 
(b)  A separate consumption on the premises license shall be required for each place of business. 
(c)  All alcoholic beverages shall be consumed only on the premises. 
(d)  A separate consumption on the premises license shall be required for the sale of wine, malt beverages and distilled spirits. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-11. - Buildings for licenses for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No consumption on the premises license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete, and detailed plans of said building, inside and outside and clearly delineating the area therein where alcoholic beverages shall be sold, consumed and stored, are attached to the application. An application for a consumption on the premises license may be approved, but the application must include detailed plans of the proposed building, inside and outside and clearly delineating the area therein where alcoholic beverages will be sold, consumed and stored and a building permit for the proposed building. The building or the proposed building when complete shall comply with all resolutions, ordinances, regulations and Codes of the County of Banks, rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the laws of the State of Georgia, including, without limitation, the building code adopted by Banks County and the rules, regulations and requirements of the state fire marshal. 
(1)  The building and the proposed building when completed shall also be subject to final inspection and approval by the governing authority and the state fire marshal. 
(2)  Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the retail area inside of the building and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of said building and the parking lot and parking area for the premises and the retail area inside of the building. Each applicant for a consumption on the premises license shall attach to his/her application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. 
(3)  All premises for which a consumption on the premises license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways, and open areas may be clearly seen by customers therein. 
(b)  The lot on which the building is located shall have a minimum frontage on a major street or state highway of at least 50 feet and a minimum land area of one acre. 
(c)  The proposed building shall be set back at least 50 feet from the street or highway right-of-way. 
(d)  The building must contain a minimum of 1,200 square feet, as measured along the exterior walls. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004; Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-12. - General regulations and hours of sale for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No licensee shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  At any time on Christmas Day; 
(2)  At any time in violation of a local resolution, ordinance, Code or regulation of or a special order of the governing authority; 
(b)  The hours of operation for any establishment holding a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. Monday through Friday; between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Saturday; and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday. All customers shall be out of the premises within one hour from the end of the hours of operation. Licensee shall not engage in the sale or serving of such alcoholic beverages after the end of the hours of operation. 
(c)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises during any federal, state or local election day is authorized during the same hours as set forth in subsection 6-12(b). 
(d)  No licensee shall give, sell, or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is under the age of 21 years, or who is noticeably intoxicated, or who is obviously of unsound mind and such fact known to said licensee, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to said licensee. At any time, a state driver's license or State of Georgia authorized picture identification card shall be considered the only legal proof of age which would relieve a person making the sale from responsibility thereof. 
(e)  No licensee shall keep any alcoholic beverages stored in any bonded or other type warehouse in the county nor shall be enter into any type of an arrangement whereby alcoholic beverages ordered by him are stored for him by any licensed wholesaler. A licensee shall keep no inventory or stock of alcoholic beverages at any place except his/her licensed place of business and within his/her licensed place of business his/her storage place for alcoholic beverages shall be immediately adjacent to the room where he/she is licensed to do business. 
(f)  Except for amusement centers on a temporary basis (not more than ten days), Licensee shall not display signs advertising, directly or indirectly, the sale of alcoholic beverages other than in the principal building for which the license is issued. Any sign placed on the licensed premises, within view of the general public, and with the intent to bring attention to the fact that alcoholic beverages can be bought at that location shall be in violation of this section. Licensees shall be permitted to advertise by means of radio, T.V., or newspaper provided that brand names of alcoholic beverages are not used. 
(g)  There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch-boards, slot machines, or tickets of chance in any licensee's place of business or in any room adjoining the same, which is owned, leased or controlled by licensee. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of said license. 
(h)  All licensees for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption an the premises shall remove or cause to be removed, from the area of the premises utilized by customers or patrons, all alcoholic beverages within 45 minutes after the closing time for the sale of said alcoholic beverages. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverages by the drink beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow its customers to remove alcoholic beverages from the premises. 
(j)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to general public use is prohibited except that private parties or conventions, which have been scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms and provided further that this prohibition shall not apply to the registered guests of any hotel or motel in their designated rooms. 
(k)  No licensee shall sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages by use of vending machines. 
(l)  No person shall allow or require a person in his/her employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. This section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets or convenience stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(m)  No trade name, corporate name or name of a business shall be allowed to use the words "beer", "wine", or "beer and wine" in such name. 
(n)  Amusement centers may dispense and sell alcoholic beverages in plastic cups. 
(o)  Amusement centers must be well maintained with adequate security, and may sell alcoholic beverages one hour before the event and up until the last event which was scheduled. 
(p)  No licensee shall permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct or practice on the licensed premises. 
(q)  No licensee shall sell, offer for sale, possess, or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic beverages, the sale, possession or consumption of which is not authorized by the license. 
(r)  No licensee shall add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality, or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(s)  No licensee shall receive or cause to be delivered at the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages by any means other than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a license from the county to make such deliveries. 
(t)  It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises of a consumption on premises licensee with alcoholic beverages and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no beverages are sold and carried out. However, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the carrying out of wine or malt beverages for consumption at a publicly owned or privately owned golf course. 
(u)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(v)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(w)  No licensee shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages in the county without a State of Georgia license(s) for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004; Ord. No. 2014-17, 11-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-03 , § 1, 1-27-2015) 
Sec. 6-13. - Annual license fee for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The annual fee for a consumption on the premises license for distilled spirits shall be $3,000.00 dollars per annum and shall be paid when the application for a license is filed with the Banks County Code Enforcement Officer and shall be paid either in cash or a bank-certified check. Any person who is doing business or begins to do business at any time after the first day of January and before the first day of July shall pay the full licensee fee. 
(1)  No consumption on the premises licensee may purchase distilled spirits in containers smaller than one-fifth-gallon. 
(2)  The sale of distilled spirits in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises is expressly prohibited. 
(b)  The annual fee for a consumption on the premises license for malt beverages shall be $750.00 dollars per annum and shall be paid when the application for a license is filed with the Banks County Code Enforcement Officer and shall be paid either in cash or a bank-certified check. Any person who is doing business or begins to do business at any time after the first day of January and before the first day of July shall pay the full licensee fee. 
(c)  The annual fee for a consumption on the premises license for the sale of wine shall be $750.00 dollars per annum and shall be paid when the application for a license is filed with the Banks County Code Enforcement Officer and shall be paid either in cash or a bank certified check. Any person who is doing business or begins to do business at any time after the first day of January and before the first day of July shall pay the full licensee fee. 
(d)  Any person who begins to do business on or after the first day of July, shall pay a prorated annual fee based on the number of months remaining in the current calendar year (i.e., Application on July 15 the fee would be one-half of the annual fee, application on August 15 the fee would be 5/12 this of the annual fee). In the case of a revocation or surrender of such license, the license holder is not entitled to receive any refund. If an applicant is not approved for a consumption on the premises license, the applicant is entitled to a refund of one-half of the fee paid at the time of the filing of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004; Res. No. 2010-14, §§ 1—3, 9-30-2010) 
Sec. 6-14. - Excise tax. 
(a)  Per liter of distilled spirits. 
(1)  There is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter which shall be paid to the governing authority on all distilled spirits sold for consumption on the premises in the county. Such tax shall be paid to the governing authority by the wholesale distributor on all distilled spirits sold to licensees for the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises in the county as follows: 
a.  Each wholesaler selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits to any licensee hereunder, shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a-summary of all deliveries to each licensee on or before the 15th day of the month following. The $0.22 per liter shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. 
b.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any wholesaler to sell, ship, or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits to a retail consumption dealer without collecting said tax. 
c.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any retail consumption dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any distilled spirits on which such tax has not been paid. 
d.  Each wholesaler shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of said tax. 
(b)  Distilled spirits by the drink. 
(1)  In addition to the excise tax authorized under subsection 6-14(a) of this section, a tax on the retail purchase of distilled spirits by the drink is hereby levied, to be collected at the rates and in the manner hereinafter set forth: 
a.  Every purchaser of distilled spirits by the drink shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three percent of the retail price or charge for such drink. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee hereunder and such licensee shall remit the same to the county on or before the 15th day of the succeeding month along with a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, excluding malt beverages. Gross sales shall include all credit sales and shall be reported and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the governing authority to the same extent as required of cash sales. 
b.  Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction equal to that rate authorized from deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailer's and Consumer's Sales and Use Tax Act", as now written or hereafter amended (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1, et seq.); provided that said tax is not delinquent at the time of payment, it shall be the duty of every licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levied hereunder to keep such records, receipts, invoices and such other books or accounts may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due; and it shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three years, which shall be made available on request for inspection by any duly authorized representative of the governing authority. 
(c)  Malt beverages. 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents per 12 ounce and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(d)  Wines. There is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling wines within Banks County an excise tax in the amount of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at like rates on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-15. - Requirements of wholesalers generally. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of wholesalers as set out in section 6-14 of this chapter, the following shall apply: 
(1)  All wholesale dealers or distributors shall be licensed by the State Department of Georgia and shall comply with all laws and regulations of the state revenue department before they sell or deliver alcoholic beverages in the County of Banks. Deliveries and sales shall be made only to establishments licensed by the County of Banks and all deliveries shall be made in vehicles owned and operated by such wholesale dealer or distributor. 
(2)  Upon each and every delivery by a licensed wholesaler to a licensed retailer, an invoice in triplicate shall be prepared showing the quantities and brands of alcoholic beverages delivered, together with the price thereof, and the excise tax due and collected thereon, the original of such invoice shall be delivered by the wholesaler to the retailer simultaneously with such delivery. The wholesaler shall retain the second copy of such invoice for a period of 12 months after the date of delivery and during such 12-month period, such invoices shall be made available for inspection by the governing authority or its duly authorized representative. Upon request of the county, a copy of such invoice shall be attached to the reports requested or required by the county. 
(b)  Licensees under the provisions of this chapter shall not buy or accept deliveries of alcoholic beverages from wholesalers, dealers, or distributors, except who are licensed by the State Revenue Department of Georgia. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hold a license who has any direct financial interest in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a license to accept or receive financial aid or assistance from the holder of any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's or wholesale dealer's license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-16. - Audit of records and inspection of business premises. 
(a)  Licensees under the provisions of this chapter shall keep and maintain the original invoice of each purchase from a wholesaler of any alcoholic beverages for at least 12 months after the date of such purchase, and shall maintain records to show the sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink and other records as required by the county. The County of Banks or its duly authorized representative shall have the right to inspect the records of each licensee and make a complete audit of the records pertaining to alcoholic beverages at any time. Failure of a licensee to properly maintain records showing receipt of alcoholic beverages, payment therefor, and payment of the taxes due thereon, shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The business premises of the holder of a consumption on the premises license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections by the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-17. - Posting of licenses and Article I, Chapter 6 of the Banks County Code. 
(a)  All holders of a consumption on the premises license shall keep a copy of Article I, Chapter 6 of the Code of Banks County in his/her premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof, the licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of his/her employees in violation of this chapter, of the laws of the State of Georgia, or the rules and regulations of the State of Georgia, and/or the Georgia Revenue Commissioner. 
(b)  Licenses under this chapter shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which same was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-18. - Revocation, suspension of license. 
(a)  Consumption on the premises licenses shall maintain at least 60 percent of their business volume from the sale of food, amusement center excepted. Food sales shall include all consumable items sold on the premises except alcoholic beverages. The 60/40 percent ratio shall be determined on a calendar quarter basis on the monthly report submitted by each licensee. In the event food sales fall below 60 percent of the business volume for any quarter, then the license holder shall be placed on probation for the next succeeding quarter. At the end of the next succeeding quarter, if food sales have not attained 60 percent of business volume, then the governing authority of Banks County shall suspend such license in accordance with paragraphs (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) of this section. Nothing herein provided shall prevent the Governing Authority of Banks County from suspending or revoking such license for any other violations of this chapter. Authorized officials of Banks County may examine the records of business licenses hereunder at any reasonable time to ascertain that the requirements of this and other provisions of this chapter are met. 
(b)  On or before the 20th day of each month, each consumption licensee shall furnish to the Clerk of the Governing Authority of Banks County an affidavit showing the gross sales of food and the gross sales of alcoholic beverages for the preceding month. This affidavit/report shall be on a form furnished by the Clerk of the Governing Authority of Banks County. The licensee shall attach a copy of the Georgia Sales and Use Report for the same period to his affidavit. These reports and affidavits shall remain confidential, except in hearings to suspend or revoke a license. 
(c)  The following shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation, of a license. Whether or not said grounds exist shall be determined by the governing authority in its sole discretion: 
(1)  The violation by the license holder or his/her employee of any state of federal law or regulation, except misdemeanors, or any resolution, ordinance or Code of Banks County, other than traffic violations. The determination of whether such violation has occurred shall be made by the governing authority and an actual conviction in a court for such offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. 
(2)  The failure of the license holder or his/her employee to report promptly to the sheriff's department any violation of law or of this chapter, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, occurring on the premises, including, but not limited to parking lots and parking areas. 
(3)  The failure of the license holder to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of employees, patrons and others on the premises, including, but not limited to, parking lots and parking areas, in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
(d)  Any alleged violation of this chapter shall be reported by any person to the clerk of the governing authority who shall have the power, in his/her discretion to suspend the license for a period not to exceed ten days pending a hearing before the governing authority on the question of whether or not the license shall be revoked for cause or suspended, pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  The sheriff or any deputy on duty at the time, shall have the authority to close any location holding an alcoholic beverage license for a period not in excess of 24 hours in the event there shall occur on the premises any violation of law or of this chapter, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, or other occurrence which is contrary to the public health, welfare, safety or morals, when in the judgment of the sheriff or said deputy such action is necessary to protect the public health, welfare, safety or morals. 
(f)  The governing authority shall have the right to suspend any alcoholic beverage license pending the hearing provided for in this chapter where in the judgment of the governing authority, such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, or morals. 
(g)  Any suspension as provided for herein shall be in writing, with the reasons therefore stated and shall be delivered to a license holder or the person in charge of the place of business if the license holder cannot be located. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-19. - Violation. 
Any person or entity violating the rules and regulations set out in this chapter or the rules and regulations of the State of Georgia Revenue Commissioner dealing with the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be subject to having its license(s) revoked or suspended or the licensee being placed on probation as determined by the governing authority and shall be, if convicted, subject to the punishment as set forth in section 1-11 of this Code. If the violation by the licensee is also a violation of state law, the licensee shall be subject to prosecution under state law and punished under state law, if convicted, in lieu of the punishment set forth in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Secs. 6-20—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FARM WINERIES 

Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
The terms "farm winery" and "tasting room" shall be defined in this article according to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1 and as may be hereafter amended. 
(Res. No. 90-3, § 1, 10-9-1990) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-32. - Type of sale. 
Wine sold under the provisions for farm wineries shall be sold for retail purposes only and shall be sold only in retail package stores operated under a license issued under this article. A farm winery may operate a tasting room in connection with such retail sales so long as upon the same immediate premises as the retail sales. Sale by the drink shall not be allowed in such tasting rooms. Further, such farm winery shall be authorized to carry on the businesses of manufacturing, warehousing and distributing, and selling wine or operating a tasting room as provided by state law provided none of such activities violate any state, local, or federal laws or regulations. 
(Res. No. 90-3, § 2, 10-9-1990) 
Sec. 6-33. - Retail licensee qualifications. 
(a)  The retail licensee must be a person of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. 
(b)  No license shall be granted to any person who shall have been convicted of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(c)  Licenses may be issued to individual applicants, partnerships, or corporations. Upon making application for a license, an individual, partnership, or corporation shall be required to divulge the names of any and all persons who have or will have any interest, monetary or otherwise, in the business he will operate under such license. In addition, applicant shall upon making application, set forth the proposed location for such business operation, including the plans for the building in which such business shall be operated and a plat of the property on which such building shall be situated. 
(d)  The licensee shall be the owner, lessee, or manager of the premises for which the license is held, and such licensee shall be active in, and solely responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. If a corporation, the licensee will be the manager, and such licensee shall be active in, and responsible for the management and operation of the business, whether or not a shareholder of such corporation. The manager of such premises must be a bona fide resident of the county for at least six months prior to making application for a license. 
(e)  No license shall be granted to any state, county, or municipal official nor shall any license be granted to any person to operate a business wherein a public official has any interest in a business being operated under a license issued under this article. 
(f)  Each applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications pursuant to the provisions of section 6-32 and place such statement on file with the clerk of the board of commissioners before any license is issued. Any misrepresentation or concealment of fact in such application or sworn statement shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Res. No. 90-3, § 3, 10-9-1990) 
Sec. 6-34. - Regulations. 
No holder of a license under this article in the county, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Knowingly sell or serve wine to a minor; 
(2)  Knowingly sell or serve wine to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition; 
(3)  Sell wine upon the licensed premises at any time except between 7:00 a.m. and midnight, Monday through Saturday, or sell beer or wine on Sundays, Christmas Day, or any election day; 
(4)  Permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of peace, or any lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct or practices; 
(5)  Operate the licensed business in any building which does not permit full view of the inside from outside the front, or which is not well-lighted inside; 
(6)  Employ in any capacity on the licensed premises any person under 21 years of age; 
(7)  Maintain any type of amusement or music machine except for a radio and/or television set; 
(8)  Allow any purchase made on the licensed premises to be taken therefrom until put in a bag or otherwise securely wrapped in paper by the proprietor or clerk operating the licensed business; 
(9)  Receive wine delivered to the premises of the retail licensee by any means other than a conveyance owned or operated by the licensee or by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the board of commissioners obtained pursuant to section 6-33. 
(Res. No. 90-3, § 4, 10-9-1990) 
Sec. 6-35. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of section 6-34 shall be grounds for immediate revocation of a license by the issuing body. 
(b)  A license shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article or any future resolution pertaining to this article, and subject to revocation at any time. In case of revocation, the licensee shall not be entitled to a return of the unearned license fee. All such licenses shall have printed on the front the following: 
"The license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled by the Board of Commissioners of Banks County, Georgia." 
(c)  Any license granted under this article may be revoked after hearing, by the board of commissioners for any cause deemed sufficient by the board. Notice of such hearing shall be given, either personally or by leaving notice at the licensed place of business at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice, given in the name of the board of commissioners or of the chairman, may include notice that the license is suspended pending hearing; in which case the licensee shall immediately cease to operate his business until further order. All decisions approving, denying, suspending, or revoking such permits or licenses shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant personally upon timely application; any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the governing authority regarding a permit or license shall be afforded a hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(Res. No. 90-3, § 5, 10-9-1990) 
Sec. 6-36. - License fee. 
The applicant for a retail license for the sale of wine and operation of a tasting room shall pay to the clerk of the board of commissioners the sum of $400.00 as an annual license fee for the operation of one year beginning on January 1. All licensed retailers shall store all malt beverages and wine in their possession on the premises for which the license is issued, and at no other place or places except upon written permission from the issuing authority upon written application therefor. 
(Res. No. 90-3, § 6, 10-9-1990) 
Sec. 6-37. - Authority to issue licenses. 
Licenses shall be issued only upon the approval of the board of commissioners. License applications shall be presented to the board of commissioners, and all fees provided for shall be paid to the clerk of the board of commissioners in the amount and at the times specified in this article. 
(Res. No. 90-3, § 7, 10-9-1990) 
Sec. 6-38. - Regulations; future resolutions; revocation of licenses. 
All the provisions of this article are and shall be subject to the regulations hereinafter prescribed by the board of commissioners as the article may be from time to time amended, setting forth the rules, terms and conditions upon which such licenses may be issued; the annual fees; the qualifications of licensees; the proscription on advertising and restrictions on the business locations of licensees and building in which such business are operated; the control of customers doing business with licensees; and any and all other matters which this body may deem advisable to set forth for the proper control and regulation of the sale and consumption of malt beverages and wine in the county; and all such licenses as may be hereafter issued shall be expressly subject to the provisions of such rules or regulations as may be then or thereafter in force; and all such licenses shall be nontransferable, and shall convey to the licensee no property right, but a privilege only, which may be revoked by this body. 
(Res. No. 90-3, § 8, 10-9-1990) 
Sec. 6-39. - Limited license. 
The farm winery license created by this resolution is limited to farm wineries licensed by the state and allows the licensee to perform all acts as allowed by such legislation. No license is created by this resolution authorizing any other such uses. 
(Res. No. 90-3, § 9, 10-9-1990) 
Secs. 6-40—6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RETAIL SALE OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note art. I of this chapter. 

Sec. 6-51. - License issuance. 
Wholesale and retail licenses for the sale of malt beverages and wine in the county will be issued by the board of commissioners of the county pursuant to the rules and regulations set forth in the following paragraphs of this chapter. The holding of any of said licenses is declared to be a privilege and not a right. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-52. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine. 
Director means the Code Enforcement Officer for Banks County. 
Election day means that period of time beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. As used in this section, the term "election" is defined as any statewide primary election and the statewide general election and any runoff held for such primary or general election. The term also includes "local elections." 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by any fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product or any combination of such products in water containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased or controlled by the licensee and used by him for the purpose of operating under the license. It shall be limited to one location for each license and there shall be a separate license for each premises outlet. 
Resident means a person whose primary and principal residence is within the State of Georgia. 
Retail package means sales of malt beverages or wine packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises sales. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparking wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-53. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the business of wholesaling or retailing or otherwise providing malt beverages and wines by the package in the county without first obtaining a license therefor under this chapter. Malt beverages and wines sold in retail packages shall not be opened for consumption or for any other purposes on the premises where sold. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-54. - License classifications. 
Only the following classes of licenses shall be authorized: 
(1)  Malt beverage: 
a.  Wholesale; 
b.  Retail package. 
(2)  Wine: 
a.  Wholesale; 
b.  Retail package. 
(3)  Combination, malt beverage and wine: 
a.  Malt beverage and wine wholesale; 
b.  Malt beverage and wine retail package. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-55. - License fees. 
(a)  The applicant for a retail package license for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine shall pay to the clerk of the board of commissioners at the time of application the sum of $600.00 for the sale of malt beverages and $400.00 for the sale of wine as an annual license fee for operation for one year at one location or one business where the product will be sold. If the applicant applies for a license after July 1, of any year, the fee for the license shall be one-half of the regular license fee. 
(b)  Any wholesale dealer in malt beverages or wines licensed by the state or the agent of such wholesale dealer will be granted a license upon payment of $500.00 annually for malt beverages, and/or $500.00 annually for wine, the distribution to be made outside the county. All appropriate and pertinent parts of this chapter shall be applicable to any applicant for or holder of a wholesale license to sell and/or distribute malt beverages and/or wine under this chapter. 
(c)  Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee. Should the applicant be denied a license or should the applicant(s) withdraw the application prior to its being submitted to the commission, the license fee shall be refunded; however $150.00 for investigation and application processing shall be retained. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004; Res. No. 2010-14, § 4, 9-30-2010) 
Sec. 6-56. - License application. 
(a)  All applications for licenses to sell malt beverages and wine shall be made in person by the applicant to the director in writing on forms furnished by the director. The application shall contain, but is not restricted to, the following information: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Age; 
(3)  Address; 
(4)  Length of residency of the applicant; 
(5)  Name of business; 
(6)  Location of business; 
(7)  Description of the premises or place of business where the license is to be effective; 
(8)  Statement as to whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the applicant has made application previously for any malt beverage or wine license and the disposition of such application; 
(9)  Whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has ever been convicted of a crime other than traffic violations; 
(10)  Whether a previous license issued to the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has been revoked by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government, and the reason for said revocation; 
(11)  Whether any other person is interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses of the proposed business; 
(12)  Each applicant for a malt beverage or wine license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the business premises or a copy of the current lease for the premises upon which the license is to be effective; 
(13)  A survey of the premises where the business will be located; 
(14)  Plans for the building where the business will be located; 
(15)  Only after meeting all requirements for licensing by the applicant shall be application be submitted to the commission for approval. Current license holders applying for additional locations shall be exempt from this provision. 
(b)  Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a scale drawing showing the nearest church, school or college or shall have attached thereto an affidavit of a registered surveyor that the proposed location of the licensed premises complies with the distance requirements of this chapter and any state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-57. - License approval procedures. 
After an application is filed with the director and the investigation completed, the application may be reviewed and considered by the county commission at the next regularly scheduled county commission meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-58. - License renewal and transfer. 
(a)  A licensee who desires to renew his license for a subsequent calendar year must file a renewal application with the director on or before November 15 of the preceding year. Payment of license fees for renewal shall be made at the time of application and, upon approval of the renewal application by the director, the license will be issued. Applications for renewal shall be treated as applications for new licenses but need not be resurveyed unless requested by the director. Any renewals submitted after the due date of November 15, shall be considered delinquent and assessed a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the fees due. Interest on delinquent fees shall be assessed at one percent for each month or fraction thereof of delinquency. 
(b)  No license may be transferred from one person to another or from one managing agent to another without the approval of the director pursuant to written application. 
(c)  Upon change of a license holder or owner (unless the owner is a corporation and stock is traded publicly or listed on a major stock exchange) the license shall be transferred and will remain in effect for no longer than 45 days or until the transfer is granted or refused under this chapter, whichever shall occur first. Payment of the transfer fee of $150.00, if made within five days of the transfer, or $300.00 if more than five days after the transfer, shall be due at the time of application. The license shall cease to be in effect after 45 days or the business is closed. A time extension for the transfer may be granted by the director due to extenuating circumstances. 
(d)  Upon the death of any license holder, his personal representative or heirs may continue to operate under the original license for the balance of the year without payment of any fee, provided those persons are otherwise qualified as license holders. Otherwise, the license may be transferred to a qualified transferee within 30 days after the condition of the estate of the deceased licensee will permit. In such case, the transferee shall pay a transfer fee of $150.00. 
(e)  Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at another location must make a completely new application for the new location. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-59. - Qualifications of license holders. 
(a)  All applicants for a license shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(b)  All owners who are residents of the county shall make application for a license in their own name. Where the owner is a corporation, partnership, association, or nonresident, the application shall be made in the name of the resident officer, partner or associate who owns a substantial interest in the business or in the name of the principal resident managing officer, or managing agent. In such cases the application shall show that the license is for the use of the owner who shall be named in the application. 
(c)  For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, applicant means the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other organization and the managing agent. 
(1)  Every managing agent applicant for a county malt beverage and wine license shall be at least 21 years of age, a U.S. citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residency, and a resident of the state, and shall make application on forms furnished by the business license office and in connection therewith shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits, and other supporting data as required thereby. 
(2)  Where the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and an officer or agent who meets the requirements as set forth in this section. The officer or agent named as the applicant shall be an individual who does in fact have regular managerial authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed fulltime by the corporation. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." 
(3)  Where the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the license shall be issued jointly to the partnership and either the managing general partner thereof, or an individual who meets the requirements set forth in this section does in fact have managerial authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full time by the partnership. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." 
(4)  Where the application is made on behalf of a sole proprietorship, the license shall be issued jointly to the sole proprietorship and an individual who meets the requirements set forth in this section who does in fact have management authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full time by the proprietor. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." The "managing agent" may be the sole proprietor, if he/she otherwise qualifies under this section. 
(5)  Where the application is made on behalf of any other type organization, the license shall be issued jointly to the organization and an individual who meets the requirements set forth in this section who does in fact have management authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full time by the organization. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." 
(6)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(7)  The written application for the license shall be a permanent record which the licensee must maintain current as required by this chapter. Failure to maintain a current application shall be grounds for revocation of the license. The written application shall be under oath. 
(8)  In the event the "managing agent" changes, or ceases to meet requirements as set forth in subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) above, the licensee shall notify the business license director within five days of the change. A fee of $150.00 will be charged for the processing of an application for the change of the "managing agent," or if after five days a fee of $300.00, and such applicant must be approved by the director. 
(9)  The director shall refuse to approve any "managing agent" who has been convicted, within the five years preceding his application, of any felony of any kind or any misdemeanor relating to an alcoholic beverage violation or any state law, or county or municipal ordinance violation relating to alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Registered agent. 
(1)  All applications for licenses under this chapter shall nominate and name in the application one or more residents of the State of Georgia, as the registered agent and representative of the applicant to receive all communications, notices, services or process or other papers or documents, on behalf of the applicant in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any county license. The applicant shall furnish a notarized affidavit from such registered agent, and the mailing to any registered agent at that address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the applicant/licensee. 
(2)  A registered agent must be a U.S. citizen or a legal alien of at least 21 years of age. 
(3)  Such registered agent shall be a representative of the licensee and an employee of the business and must be approved by the director. The business license director shall refuse to approve any registered agent who is not a bona fide resident of the State of Georgia, or who has been convicted, within the five years preceding his nomination, of any felony of any kind or any misdemeanor relating to an alcoholic beverage violation or any state law, or county or municipal ordinance violation relating to alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  If any registered agent shall cease to be a representative of the licensee, or an employee of the business, or shall cease to be a resident of the State of Georgia or in any manner ceases to meet the requirements of subsection (3) of this section, the licensee shall notify the director in writing of such event and shall nominate a new registered agent within five days after such event occurs. Such new registered agent shall meet the requirements in subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section and must be approved by the director. The county shall charge a fee of $50.00 for a change of the licensee's registered agent; provided, however, that if the licensee fails to notify the county and nominate a new registered agent within said five-day period, then the county shall charge a fee of $100.00 for a change of the licensee's registered agent and/or revoke the licensee's license. 
(e)  When contrary to the public interest and welfare, no license shall be issued by the county commission to an applicant under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The applicant's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, arrest record or reputation in any community in which he has resided indicates he is not likely to operate the business for which he is seeking a license in conformance with federal, state or local laws, rules, regulations, or resolutions; 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the license; 
(4)  The applicant was convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a misdemeanor, including, but not limited to, laws involving alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, wine, drugs, pornography, gambling, or tax law violations, if such conviction or plea tends to indicate that the applicant will not operate the business for which he is seeking a license in conformance with federal, state or local laws, rules, regulations, or resolutions; for at least five years from the date of conviction. 
(5)  The applicant is a person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation where any manager, partner, officer, or director thereof has been convicted of or pled guilty to any felony or lesser offense involving moral turpitude. 
(6)  An application which is for an applicant with any of the above convictions shall be automatically denied by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-60. - Building and location requirements. 
(a)  No license shall be issued for a location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the county commission because of traffic congestion, or general character of the neighborhood, or because of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties and neighborhood. 
(b)  No license shall issue for a location within an area where, in the judgment and discretion of the county commission, the number of malt beverage or wine licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
(c)  No license shall issue for a location at which the operation of such a licensed business would violate the zoning rules and regulations of the county or the building code adopted by the county. 
(d)  No license shall issue for a location where a previous license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the county commission, the problems which have arisen from the operation of a licensed business at such a location indicate that it is not in the interests of public health, safety, welfare, or morals that the sale of malt beverages or wines be permitted at such a location. 
(e)  No license shall issue for a location where it would violate state or local law, regulations or resolutions. 
(f)  No license shall issue for a location where the nearest point of the main structure of the business is located within 600 feet of the nearest point of the main structure of any school or church as measured in a straight line between the two structures. The word "school" shall include kindergartens, primary and secondary schools, colleges and other educational institutions whether public or private; provide, however, this provision shall not apply where it would prohibit the renewal of an alcoholic beverage license for the sale of malt beverages and wine at a location where a license holder had been granted a license under the terms of any prior county resolution relating to the sale of malt beverages and wines. In the event a school or church subsequently locates within 600 feet of licensed premises, this provision shall not be applicable under such circumstances and such an event would not cause a license holder to be in violation of this provision or prohibit the renewal of a license. In such cases, the license may be renewed by the same license holder for the same place of business as long as all of the other provisions of this chapter are complied with. 
(g)  The licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by authorized personnel of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-61. - Required reports and notices. 
The licensee must report to the director within five days any change in any interests in the licensee's business, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Any change in the division of the profits of the licensed business; 
(2)  Any change in the division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever; 
(3)  Any change in the payment of rents or leases; 
(4)  Any change in the ownership of any lease or building or land used in such business; 
(5)  Any change in the ownership of stock of any corporation that has an interest in the licensed business except for the sale of stock over the counter or through a recognized stock exchange; 
(6)  Any change in the local managing agent or registered agent of a corporate business licensed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-62. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The hours of sale of packaged malt beverages and wines shall be between 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. Mondays through Friday and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Saturday. Hours on Christmas Eve and the day before Thanksgiving Day shall be 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. No alcoholic beverage sales are permitted when Christmas Eve falls on Sunday. 
(b)  In the event that a licensed business is open for less than the hours stated in the preceding paragraph, then sales of malt beverages and wines shall be restricted to those regular store hours; however, in no event shall sales be made during hours other than described in the preceding paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-63. - Advertising. 
Advertising of the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia and the regulations adopted by the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-64. - Minors. 
(a)  Any license holder, or agents or employees of license holders, who fails to require proper identification and who sells alcoholic beverages to a person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, may be placed on probation for a definite period of time (any ordinance violation during the probationary period shall be an automatic suspension of license holder's right to sell malt beverages and wine for a minimum of 30 days) or may have his license suspended for up to 90 days on the first occasion, and up to 180 days on the second occasion. The board of commissioners, in its sole discretion, may suspend the license for a longer period of time, or revoke the license depending upon the severity of the offense evidenced by the facts in each case, including but not limited to, consideration of prior violations of law by the license holder. In the event the board of commissioners determines a license holder and/or his agents and/or employees have failed to require proper identification and have sold alcoholic beverages to an underage person or persons on at least three separate occasions, then the license shall be revoked and application for a new license shall not be authorized until the expiration of 12 months following the date of revocation. 
(1)  All persons seeking to purchase alcoholic beverages in the county (regardless of their apparent age) shall be required to provide "proper identification" showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. "Proper identification" as defined for purposes of this Subsection means any document issued by a governmental agency containing such person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification and, driver's license. 
(2)  Any license holder, agent or employee of any license holder, who sells alcoholic beverages to a person under the age of 21 years, without requiring proper identification as that term is defined in subsection (1) above, shall, upon first conviction thereof, be sentenced to a mandatory sentence of a minimum of one weekend (48 hours) in confinement and a fine of not less than $500.00. Subsequent violations and convictions shall be punished as provided by section 1-11 of this Code to include imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days and/or a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or both. 
(b)  License holders may not allow a person under 19 years of age to sell malt beverages or wine. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly and intentionally act as agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, or otherwise procure for or furnish to a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as defined by state law, any alcoholic beverage, except for medical purposes upon the written prescription of a duly licensed physician under the laws of the state. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to falsely misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever in violation of this chapter or applicable laws. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to purchase, drink, or possess any alcoholic or malt beverage or wine as defined herein in the county outside of any municipalities. 
(f)  It shall not be considered a violation of this chapter for a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to purchase, drink, or possess any alcoholic or malt beverage or wine if such person is at the time bona fidely acting for and on behalf of law enforcement agencies conducting investigations of license holders and/or their employees. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004; Ord. No. 2007-32, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 6-65. - Sale on Christmas Day. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer to sell alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day. 
(b)  Retail license holders may sell malt beverages or wine on the licensed premises on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(c)  All licensees who open their place of business on Christmas Day for purposes other than the sale of alcoholic beverages shall post signs at all locations where alcoholic beverages are displayed and at each check out place stating in one-inch block capital letters: "NO CHRISTMAS DAY SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES." 
(Res. No. 2016-20 , § 1, 11-29-2016) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2016-20 , § 1, adopted Nov. 29, 2016, repealed the former § 6-65, and enacted a new § 6-65 as set out herein. The former § 6-65 pertained to sale on Sunday, Christmas day, Thanksgiving day and election day and derived from Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 12, 2004; Res. No. 2015-02 , § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2015. 
Sec. 6-66. - Sale, dispensing and miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)  License holders may not sell on the licensed premises less than 24 ounces of malt beverages, whether in one container or a multi-unit container, unless they have consumption licenses, or sell less than one-half pint of wine, unless they have consumption licenses. 
(b)  License holders may not sell malt beverages or wines on the licensed premises to any person who is in an intoxicated condition. 
(c)  License holders shall not permit any disorderly conduct or breach of the peace on the licensed premises. 
(d)  License holders may not sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic or malt beverages and wines which a license holder is not authorized to sell under his license. 
(e)  Malt beverages or wines may not be sold or offered for sale through vending machines on the licensed premises. 
(f)  Deliveries of malt beverages and wines to the licensed premises may be made only by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a license from the board of commissioners to deliver such beverages in the county. 
(g)  No retail license holder shall accept delivery of malt beverages and wines from any wholesale dealer unless the wholesale dealer has fully complied with the state laws regulating and taxing the sale of such beverages at wholesale. 
(h)  No retail license holder shall deliver malt beverages and wines at any location other than the licensed premises. 
(i)  All licensees shall store all malt beverages and wines in their possession only on the premises for which the license was issued. 
(j)  Every license holder shall have available on the licensed premises a copy of this chapter and shall be responsible for compliance with the resolution [this chapter] by all persons on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-67. - Grounds for revocation or suspension of license. 
The following shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a malt beverage and wine license. The existence of such grounds shall be determined by the board of commissioners in its sole discretion, to wit: 
(1)  Violation by the licensee of any state or federal law or regulation, except misdemeanors, or of any resolution or ordinance of the county, other than traffic violations. 
(2)  The failure of the licensee or his employees to report promptly to the sheriff's department any violation of law, regulation, county resolution or breach of the peace, disturbance, or altercation occurring on the premises. 
(3)  Any conduct on the part of the licensee or his employees contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. 
(4)  Operating or conducting a business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(5)  The violation of any state or federal law or regulation, municipal ordinance, or county resolution or ordinance pertaining to alcoholic and malt beverages and wines. This ground specifically includes any violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(6)  The violation by the licensee of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
(7)  The violation by the licensee of any federal, state or local law prohibiting the sale of pornographic materials. 
(8)  Failure of the licensee to furnish to the director any report required by this chapter or any report requested in writing by the director. 
(9)  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who had an alcoholic beverage license revoked by any jurisdiction for violation of its laws or rules within a period of five years immediately preceding the filing of an application for a license under this chapter. 
(10)  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who has been convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony involving moral turpitude. 
(11)  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who has been convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years from date of conviction. 
(12)  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who has violated the provisions of this chapter or any law of the United States or any state law pertaining to the sale of malt beverages, wines or alcoholic beverages within the past five years from date of conviction. 
(13)  The conviction of the license holder or his employee(s) for driving under the influence within the past five years from date of conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-68. - Hearing on revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  A license holder shall be entitled to a hearing by the board of commissioners concerning any alleged violation which could lead to revocation or suspension of the license. 
(b)  Upon the report of any violation of this chapter by the license holder or agents to the board of commissioners, the director shall give notice to the registered agent in writing that the managing agent shall show cause before the commission why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
(c)  A written notice from the director shall specify the time and place for the hearing, which shall be not less than three days nor more than 14 days from the date of service of the notice. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall have the power to suspend any license issued under this chapter for a period of time not to exceed 14 days pending the hearing before the board of commissioners on the question of whether or not the license shall be further suspended or revoked for cause. 
(e)  At the hearing the licensee shall have the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked. 
(f)  The board of commissioners shall hear relevant evidence as to the alleged violation of the chapter. 
(g)  The hearing need not be at a regular meeting of the commission but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice. 
(h)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be by majority vote of the members present at the hearing; provided, however, three members must concur to pass any order. 
(i)  Within five days from the date of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall render a decision in writing and furnish a copy of the decision to the registered agent. A decision of the board shall be effective immediately, whether or not the licensee, managing agent, or registered agent can be personally served with a written copy of the decision. 
(j)  Except as otherwise provided herein, a licensee who has had his license revoked may reapply for a license after 30 days have passed from the effective date of the revocation. Such a reapplication shall conform with all procedural requirements applicable to a new application. The board of commissioners shall consider all matters relevant to the application, including the previous revocation. 
(k)  If the sheriff of Banks County shall find that a business holding a license under this chapter is in violation of a law of the State of Georgia, or in violation of a law or resolution of Banks County, and that the continued operation of the business would create a clear and present danger to the health, safety and general welfare and security of Banks County, the sheriff shall be empowered to seize and temporarily suspend the license of the business. The sheriff shall deliver the license to the Director on the next working day. The chairman of the board shall then schedule a special hearing of the board to consider further action upon the order within five days of the date upon which the Director received the license from the sheriff. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-69. - Distribution of required forms. 
(a)  Any forms required by this chapter shall be printed by the county and furnished to applicants and license holders. 
(b)  License forms shall be printed by the county and signed by the person in charge of issuing licenses for the county. 
(c)  A copy of this chapter shall be furnished to each license holder by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-70. - Violations; penalty. 
Any firm, person or corporation who shall do anything prohibited by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended or who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate court of the county, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days or both by such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Sec. 6-71. - Additional remedies. 
In the event any provision of this chapter has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2004) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— State licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.; authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2; exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c); Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1; use of rooms in roadhouses, public dance halls, etc., for immoral purposes, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-61. 

Sec. 10-31. - Findings. 
(a)  Sexually oriented businesses require special supervision in order to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such businesses as well as the citizens of the communities where they locate. 
(b)  Permitting and/or licensing is a legitimate means of accountability to ensure that operators of sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations and to ensure that operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation. 
(c)  There is convincing documented evidence that sexually oriented businesses, because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing increased crime and the downgrading of property values. 
(d)  It is recognized that sexually oriented businesses, due to their nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when they are located in proximity to each other, thereby contributing to urban blight and downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area. 
(e)  It is the intent of this article not to suppress any speech activities or entertainment protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a content neutral ordinance that addresses the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses as well as the health problems associated with such businesses. 
(f)  Pursuant to Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ VII and to protect the public safety, health and welfare as follows the board of commissioners adopt the following adult entertainment regulations. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-32. - Purpose. 
Based upon the experience of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Marietta, Georgia, which experiences are relevant to the problems and circumstances faced by the county, it is the finding of the board of commissioners that public nudity, either partial or total, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditures for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of criminal behavior and acceleration of community blight in particular areas. The intent of the board of commissioners in adopting this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse effect on property values, on the public health, safety, and welfare of the county, on its citizens and property, and on the character of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. Instead, this article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and their patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment, or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.460, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, merchandise, books, printed material, magazines, or other periodicals (adult material) which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or in any way relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section of the store, comprising five percent of its total floor space, which is devoted to the sale or display of such material, or an establishment with five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means any establishment which is either expressly specified in this ordinance, or which is other than those expressly specified in this ordinance, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities, or which offers its patrons a service or entertainment of any type which is characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means any business or establishment where employees or dancers display or expose specified anatomical areas to others, or any establishment which features live performances by entertainers or employees where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment means any adult theater, adult bookstore, adult business, adult video store, escort bureau, bathhouse or adult dancing establishment operated for commercial or pecuniary gain, regardless of profit or loss, and whether licensed or unlicensed. An establishment with an adult entertainment license is presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. An establishment possessed of an occupational business license is presumed to be operated for commercial or pecuniary gain. 
Adult material means any one or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations, or recordings or other audio matter, which have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult motel means any motel, hotel, boardinghouse, roominghouse, or other place of temporary lodging which advertises the presentation of, or presents films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "adult motel" is included within the term "adult theater." 
Adult theater means any establishment which consists of an enclosed building, or a portion or a part of an enclosed building, or an open-air area used by persons for the viewing of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult motels and establishments which have adult booths are both considered to be adult theaters. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of this stock in trade, videotapes, movies, or other reproductions, whether for sale or for rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or any establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of his total floor space, which is devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or relates in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight. 
Bathhouse means an establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or on specified anatomical areas. 
Church means any place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Conviction means any adjudication or determination of guilt resulting from a plea, trial, or forfeiture of bond when charged with a crime, regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether the imposition of a sentence was suspended. This definition shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the State of Georgia First Offender Act. 
Department means the county business license department, or any other section of the county government set aside for the issuance of business licenses and permits. 
Display means any exposing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion revealing to any person in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision by view from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others, or from any portion of the person's store or property when items and material other than this material are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
Disseminate means to transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration. 
Distance and measurement means the measurement in lineal feet from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of any adult entertainment establishment or adult business (or if not on ground level, then the beginning point for measuring the distance shall be the point at ground level determined by measuring from the center of any door of customer entry which is perpendicular to ground level) to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence, or hospital, as required by this article. 
Distribute means any transfer of possession, whether with or without consideration. 
Educational institution means a site or premises upon which there is an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes and/or course of study. Included in the definition of the term "educational institution" are nursery schools, kindergarten, elementary schools, junior high schools, senior high schools, or any special institution of learning. The term does not include a site or premises upon which there is a vocational institution, professional institution, or institution of higher education, including community colleges, junior colleges, four-year colleges, or universities. 
Employee means a person who works or performs in an adult entertainment establishment, irrespective of whether such person is paid a salary or wage. 
Escort bureau means any business, person, or agency who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit furnishes or offers to furnish the names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes, or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments, or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Establishment means a site or premises, or portion thereof, upon which certain activities or operations are conducted for commercial or pecuniary gain, regardless of actual profit or loss. The owner, lessee, or manager of the establishment shall be presumed to be in possession of an occupational business license. 
Furnish means to issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or otherwise provide. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of any felony or any nonfelony involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The county may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. For the purposes of this definition, conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with either a felony, or a nonfelony involving moral turpitude. 
Inspector means an employee or officer of the health department, business licensing department, building inspection department, zoning department, sheriff, fire department or fire and rescue department who inspects premises licensed under this article and takes or requires the actions authorized by this article in case of violations being found on licensed premises, or who inspects premises seeking to be licensed under this article, or who takes or requires corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on the premises. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years of age. 
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Obscene means any material or performance which, after applying contemporary community standards, is found to predominantly appeal to prurient interest in sex; to be, as a whole, a depiction or description of sexual conduct which is patently offensive to the average person in the community; and when taken as a whole is found to lack serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
Park means any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled, or managed by any county, city, or federal government, or any governmental entity in and upon which recreational activities occur, or upon which places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public, or which is kept or maintained for ornament and/or recreation. 
Performance means any play, motion pictures, film, videotape, dance, or exhibition performed before an audience. 
Religious institution means a premises or site which is used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious activities. 
Residence means a house, apartment, mobile home, boardinghouse or roominghouse, duplex, condominium or other multifamily housing for human dwelling or any property zoned therefor. 
Sadomasochistic abuse means any flagellation or torture by or upon a person as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification. 
School means any state, county, city, church, or other school, public or private, as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post-high school learning centers, kindergartens, and day care centers for persons of all ages. 
Sexual conduct means any actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse; sexual intercourse; or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic areas, buttocks, or the breast of a female in any act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification; or any sadomasochistic abuse, or acts including animals or any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship, including sadomasochistic abuse, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, lesbianism, zooerastia; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contract with an animal by a human being; 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.470, 7-14-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-34. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation of this article shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The county is hereby authorized to punish violations of this article under the provision of section 1-11. 
(c)  Any adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provision of this article shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to or in lieu of any other penalties or remedies, the county may commence an action or actions to enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of the provision of this article. 
(d)  Any violation of the provision of this article shall be considered due cause for the suspension or revocation of any licenses issued by the county to the offending party. Such revocation or suspension shall occur by way of a hearing before the board of commissioners as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.480, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-35. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other business entity to engage in, operate, conduct, or carry on in or upon any premises an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store without first having complied with the provision of this article, or without a currently valid county license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment. No license issued under this article shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the activity is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States or under any other ordinance, rule, or regulation of the county. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.490, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-36. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, licensees, or other adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store to admit or permit the admission of minors into the premises of their adult business or adult establishment, or to allow a minor to remain within a license or unlicensed premises of such a business or establishment. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.500, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-37. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, exchange, trade, give, or offer to sell, barter, exchange, trade, or give to any minor any entertainment, service, material, device, or thing, offered for sale or otherwise, at an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.510, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-38. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall conduct any illegal activity in or upon the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store. 
(b)  No adult entertainment licensee shall permit or suffer an employee or other person to appear nude or semi-nude where there is an individual payment offer or solicitation of money occurring between patron and employee. 
(c)  No adult entertainment licensee shall permit any employee or patron to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this article. 
(d)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to insert an object into her vagina or her or his anal orifice, except for private personal hygiene. 
(e)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation or, in the case of females, fondling of the breasts. 
(f)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit a male employee or any person on the premises to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
(g)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in or simulate bestiality. 
(h)  No employee or person, while on the premises of any adult entertainment licensee, shall expose or be permitted to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage, or female breast in a lewd or obscene fashion or be permitted to do so by the licensee or its employees. 
(i)  No employee or person, while on the premises of an adult entertainment licensee shall dance or perform nude or semi-nude in such manner as to simulate sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee, or other person, or be permitted to do so by the licensee or its employees. 
(j)  No person, while on the premises of an adult entertainment licensee, shall while nude or semi-nude, sit upon or straddle the leg, legs, lap, or body of any patron, spectator, employee, or other person therein, or engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by such patron, spectator, or other person. 
(k)  No licensee shall suffer or permit the use of any areas on the premises of such establishment for sexual contact or private dancing performance or entertainment. 
(l)  No licensee shall suffer or permit any signage or advertisement which encourages, solicits, induces, or promotes conduct or activities proscribed by this article. 
(m)  No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be sold, possessed, or consumed on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(n)  No drugs or illegal or controlled substances of any kind shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed, or sold upon the premises, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein, and each licensee shall be required to provide for adequate security procedures and personnel to insure an orderly operation of such establishment. 
(o)  No adult entertainment establishment, as defined by this article, shall be open for business between the hours of 12:45 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. each day nor shall such establishment operate after the hour of 12:45 a.m. on Sunday or on Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.520, 7-14-1998; Res. No. 2000-23, § 1, 9-13-2000) 
Sec. 10-39. - Location of business requirements. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store shall be located within the following distance and measurement as defined and stated in this section: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any residence; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of a church, school, educational institution, religious institution, governmentally-owned or operated building or structure, library, civic center, public park, park, hospital, community club, or prison; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any establishment or business regulated or defined under this article; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of an establishment selling alcoholic beverages other than the licensed establishment. 
(b)  Each application for license hereunder for which there is no existing county licenses for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment or business then in effect shall include a blue line copy of a surveyor's plat, 8½ inches by 11 inches in size, with a scale of one inch per 200 feet, showing the proposed location and the location of all customer entries in relation and distance, measured as provided in this article, to all real property and buildings on such real property which fall within the distance requirements of this section, together with the zoning classifications and present uses of all real property and the proposed location. 
(c)  Each application for a location which has not previously been occupied for other than residential purposes or on which there is or is to be new construction shall also include a copy of a site plan approved by the county department of planning and zoning. 
(d)  After issuance of any license, no change in the location of the building on the premises or customer entry locations shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.530, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-40. - Existing establishments. 
All existing adult entertainment establishments, adult businesses, bathhouses, escort bureaus, and adult video stores shall obtain a license and comply with all the terms of this article within 30 days of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.540, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-41. - Employees. 
(a)  Employees of adult entertainment establishments, adult businesses, bathhouses, escort bureaus, and adult video stores shall be not less than 18 years of age, and shall be of good moral character. 
(b)  No person shall be employed in any capacity whatsoever, including, but not limited to, performers, entertainers, and musicians, who has been convicted anywhere in the United States, or in federal court within five years immediately prior to the application for employment of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or any charge relating to the manufacture, sale, or distribution of intoxicating liquors, or any other felony or crime involving moral turpitude, or for whom any outstanding warrant exists on which service has not been perfected. The term "be employed" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment on the premises and elsewhere than on the licensed premises, for compensation or otherwise. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of all licensees of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouses, escort bureaus, or adult video store to file with the county sheriff's department the names of all employees with their home addresses and home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees must be filed with the county sheriff's department within seven calendar days from the date of any such changes. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.550, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-42. - Licensing and licenses. 
(a)  All licenses awarded under this article shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license, and shall be subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable provisions of this Code, and other ordinances and resolutions of the county which may relate to such businesses. 
(b)  All licenses awarded under this article shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and revoked under the provision of the ordinances of Banks County, Georgia." 
(c)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(d)  No license shall be issued to any person who is less than 18 years of age. 
(e)  Application for license shall be written and on forms supplied by the county at the county's business license office. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the place where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and shareholders; if other business entity, then the names of all holding any ownership or managerial interest therein; and such other reasonable information as may be required by the supervisor of the inspections and permits division of the county, or by the county sheriff's department, and must be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(f)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information, and records which the county may request of them, and failure to furnish such data within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the applicant's application. By the filing of an application, applicants agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the county or the county attorney, and who may be considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts to such license. The failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of such application. 
(g)  For the purposes of this article, the term "applicant" shall include a person or persons, and shall also include all partners, officers, directors, principals, and shareholders of any partnership or corporation. 
(h)  Each application must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the county for filing and processing. 
(i)  All applicants for licenses shall furnish plans and renderings of the proposed premises. Such premises shall be constructed, renovated, and, when needed, refurbished so as to be aesthetically pleasing, rather than dilapidated. The exterior shall be of finished building material such as brick, steel, stone, or wood, but shall not be constructed of concrete block. The applicant shall comply with all zoning, building, health, and similar county codes. All applicants shall obtain and file with their application a certification of zoning compliance, certifying that the property where the applicant plans to operate the business is zoned for the appropriate category as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.560, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-43. - License fees, penalty for late payment. 
(a)  The annual license fee shall be $3,500.00 as set by the board of commissioners and as from time to time may be amended by resolution. Such fee is a nonrefundable fee and shall be paid upon submission of the application for license under this article. Licenses shall be issued for a period of 12 months only and not for any partial year. No license shall be issued or renewed until all fees and penalties due to the county are first paid. 
(b)  In addition to and not in the alternative to any other penalty which may be provided in this article, any licensee, person, or entity who fails to pay any fee, tax, or other payment due to the county of any kind when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax, or other charge, a separate penalty equal to ten percent of the required fee, tax, or other charge, for each period of 30 days, or portion thereof, following the due date, until paid in full, including penalties. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.570, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-44. - Qualification of applicant. 
No license under this article shall be granted where the application or the evidence on a hearing shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The applicant is not of good moral character, or has a poor reputation in the community, or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. 
(2)  The applicant has previously had revoked or suspended any license issued under the police powers of any county or governmental entity. 
(3)  The applicant, as a previous holder of a license of the sale of alcoholic beverage, any business license issued by the county for any special purpose, or any adult entertainment license, has violated any law, resolution, or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)  Any applicant, or any corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, shareholder, general partner, or managing agent is delinquent in payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to the county or the state. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.580, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-45. - Investigation of applications. 
All applications required by this article shall be investigated by the county sheriff's department, which shall report its findings and recommendations to the county business license office, or any committee or board created by the board of commissioners for the purpose of making recommendations as to any application. No further action shall be taken by the county or by any applicant with respect to any application until completion by the sheriff's department of its investigation. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.590, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-46. - Citizenship and residence requirements. 
(a)  Where the applicant is a corporation, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either (i) the majority shareholder thereof, or (ii) a person employed full time in a managing capacity by the corporation. Each of these persons must be a United States citizen or legal alien for at least one year prior to application. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a partnership, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either (i) the managing general partner thereof, or (ii) a person employed full time by the partnership in a managing capacity. Each of these persons must be a United States citizen or legal alien for at least one year prior to application. 
(c)  Where the applicant is a sole proprietor, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working full time in a managing capacity on the premises, and, if not, then to the sole proprietor and a person employed full time by the sole proprietor in a managing capacity. Each of these persons must be United States citizen or legal alien for at least one year prior to application. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the words "managing capacity" shall mean the president or chief executive officer of a corporation, or the managing or general partner of a partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietary, or other ownership entity. 
(e)  The licensee shall notify the county in writing, and shall keep such notification current, of the name, address, and telephone number of the licensee and the agent of the licensee or any other person under whose name the license is issued, for the purpose of receiving communications and notices required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.600, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-47. - Initial consideration of application. 
(a)  All applications shall be acted upon by the county business license department (the "department") within 45 days of the date of the filing of the application. 
(b)  If the department fails to act on the application within 45 days of the date of the filing of the application, the applicant has the right to begin operating his/her business unless and until the department notifies the applicant of a denial of the application. 
(c)  The department shall act on any application after an appearance at a date, time and place established by the department upon at least five days notice to the applicant. 
(d)  The applicant shall be required to personally appear before the department upon the date and time asset forth in the notice. 
(e)  Any decision of the department shall be final unless an appeal is filed with the clerk to the county board of commissioners (the "commissioners") by any aggrieved party on or before ten days from the date of the decision by the department. 
(f)  A hearing before the commissioners shall be scheduled within 20 days of the date of the filing of the appeal and notice thereof shall be provided to the appellant and other interested parties. 
(g)  The hearing on the appeal shall be held and a decision made on the appeal within 45 days of the date of the filing of the appeal unless the appellant agrees in writing for a hearing date to be held more than 45 days from the date of the filing of the appeal. 
(h)  If the commissioners fail to act on the appeal within 45 days of the date of the filing of the appeal, the applicant has the right to begin operating his/her business unless and until the commissioners notifies the appellant that it has sustained the decision of the department. 
(i)  Upon the hearing of such appeal, the commissioners shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the appellant, from interested parties and from county staff and enforcement officers. 
(j)  The board of commissioners may sustain, overrule, or modify the action complained of. 
(k)  The decision of the commissioners shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2003-06, § 1, 3-11-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-06, § 1, adopted March 11, 2003, repealed § 10-47 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 10-47 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.610, adopted July 14, 1998. 
Sec. 10-48. - Restrictions on transferability and addition of additional partners or shareholders. 
(a)  No license issued under this article shall be sold, given, transferred, or assigned by any licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person, persons, or entities. Any such sale, gift, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, gift, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the license and such license shall thereafter be null and void. Provided, however, if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license, and who wish to carry on the business by their service in a managing capacity, may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the new licensee shall immediately notify the business license department of the county. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of such a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license under this article is thereafter issued and sold, transferred, or assigned. 
(b)  No licensee shall change the name or location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.620, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-49. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions. 
No original license shall be issued to any person where any individual having an absolute interest or a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the establishment either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, or his spouse, shall have been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application of any felony or misdemeanor of any state, of any law of the United States, or of any municipal ordinance, with the exception of traffic offenses, or for whom an outstanding warrant exists on which no service has been perfected. Where the violation is for a misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, violation of a county or municipal ordinance, or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the business license department or the board of commissioners if an appeal is filed, after hearing, may after investigation of the charges involved, waive the violation as a disqualification. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.630, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-50. - Additional standards for issuance or renewal. 
With respect to the issuance, renewal, or retention of licenses issued under this article, any right to retain or have approved an application for a license or renewal, the following standards shall apply in addition to standards stated elsewhere in this article: 
(1)  Where there is evidence that, even though there is compliance with the minimum distance requirements set forth in this article, the type or number of schools or number of churches or other facilities in the vicinity causes minors to frequent the immediate area. 
(2)  Where there is evidence that the location or type of structure would create difficulty in police supervision. 
(3)  Where there is evidence that there are no licenses granted in the area or where there is evidence that the proposed area is already adequately supplied with such licenses. 
(4)  Where there is evidence that a license for the location would be detrimental to the property values in the area. 
(5)  Where there is evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking spaces for automobiles. In addition to compliance with any other parking space requirements of the county and the state, a licensee shall have sufficient parking on the premises so as to provide parking for his customers and so as to prevent parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
(6)  Where there is evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold to intoxicated persons or to a minor. 
(7)  Where there is evidence that the conduct of the business by the licensee or potential licensee would violate the law or this Code, create a disturbance, create a congregation of intoxicated or unruly persons or allow minors to be on the premises or to purchase, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises, or where there is evidence that illegal activities have occurred on or in connection with the premises or establishment, or where the police have been caused to answer complaints or make extra surveillance of the premises or area. 
(8)  In addition to the provisions of this section and in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
a.  If the applicant is a previous holder of any special license under the county business license ordinance, or is a holder of an alcoholic beverage license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual law enforcement observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business. 
b.  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, and the effect such establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
c.  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
d.  If applicant's spouse shall not be able to meet the qualifications of an applicant, particularly if it appears that the applicant's spouse or another person is using the applicant as a guise or front to obtain a license. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.640, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-51. - Prohibition from interest in license. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected or appointed official, employee of the county, or employee of any elected official of the county who receives all or part of his salary from the county, or his spouse or minor child to have any whole, partial, or beneficial interest in any license issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.650, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-52. - Issuance. 
Except as provided for in section 10-54, when a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the county business license department the required fee, the license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.660, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-53. - Causes of mandatory denial. 
No license shall be issued to an applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of an application one or more of the following shall have occurred: 
(1)  The same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of the article applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection related to the location itself. 
(2)  The location has been rejected for any applicant. 
(3)  That applicant has withdrawn, without permission of the board or the department, an application at any time within seven days immediately preceding the time and date set for the hearing before the board or department unless at least one year shall have expired from such withdrawal. 
(4)  When any application for a license to transact any business within the control of the police powers is denied for cause or any license is revoked for cause by the board of commissioners. The one-year waiting period will not apply where the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding 12 months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding 12 months because of a lack of qualifications on the part of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.670, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-54. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
If the building where the adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau is to operate is, at the time of the application for such license, not in existence or not yet completed or renovated, a license may be approved for such location provided the plans for the proposed building or renovation show clearly a compliance with all provisions of this article. No business shall be conducted therein until the premises have been completed in accordance with the plans, and the building is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this article, the Code the county and all laws and regulations of the state or federal government and the license has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.680, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-55. - Forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of a license hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized by the license, but who shall for a period of 30 days thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized by the license, shall, upon completion of such 30-day period, automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity of any further action on the part of the county. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.690, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-56. - Annual renewal required. 
(a)  All licenses under this article shall be issued for a period of one calendar year, the calendar year being January 1 through December 31 of each year. All licensees under this article shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms provided by the county with the annual renewal fee for any such license being $3,500.00. 
(b)  Any license holder upon the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or any application for renewal of license on an existing licensed location shall not be required to meet the distance requirements set forth in this article. An application for renewal shall meet and qualify under all other requirements of this article for the granting of a new license. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.700, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-57. - Revocation and suspension of license; hearing. 
(a)  The board of commissioners, on the basis of citations by, or charges brought on behalf of, the director of the business license department, the code enforcement officer, the zoning officer, a law enforcement official, the county attorney, or any other authorized representative of the county, shall have the right to suspend and/or revoke any license issued under this article whenever the licensee shall violate any county code, rule, regulation, or ordinance or any state or federal code, rule, regulation, ordinance, or statute pertaining to such business. 
(b)  Upon notice to the county that an alleged violation has occurred which may require the suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment license, a hearing shall be scheduled before the board of commissioners to consider the proposed suspension or revocation of such license. The licensee whose license is the subject of such hearing shall be given adequate written notice by the county of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to legal representation, and shall have the right to present witnesses and to cross examine any witnesses presented by the county. No hearing provided for in this article shall be conducted sooner than ten days from the date of issuance of the citation. The board of commissioners shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this section. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(c)  Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, the board of commissioners shall have the sole discretion as to whether to suspend or revoke the license of a licensee, thereby halting the operation of that licensee's adult entertainment establishment, adult bookstore, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau, for the violation of the provisions of any ordinance of the county, or for the violation of any law, rule, or regulation of the state. Further, the board of commissioners may, at their discretion, set terms and conditions upon suspension of a license which must be followed by the licensee in order to have the license removed from suspension, or may place the license on probation for a period of time during which time the licensee may continue to operate his business. During the period of such probation as established after hearing by the board of commissioners, in the event of any subsequent violation of the laws and regulations of the county or the state, the board of commissioners may thereafter either suspend the license, continue the period of probation, or revoke the violator's adult entertainment license. 
(d)  The board of commissioners may choose to revoke such a license at the first hearing following any alleged violation. Neither probation nor suspension is a procedural precondition to revocation of a license issued under this article. The action of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.710, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-58. - Removal of signs upon revocation or suspension. 
When any license issued under this article is revoked, all signs indicating that such business is conducted on the premises shall be removed from the premises, both outside and inside the building, during the period of revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.720, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-59. - Falsified license applications. 
Any material omission, or untrue or misleading information contained in an original or renewal application for a license under this article shall be unlawful, shall be cause for a denial thereof, and shall be punishable as a violation of a county ordinance. If any such license has previously been granted under the above circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.730, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-60. - Adult dancing establishments; special provisions. 
The following provisions shall apply to adult dancing establishments in addition to all other provisions of this article: 
(1)  Licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers or entertainers. 
(2)  All dancing and entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the next highest level of the remainder of the floor. 
(3)  No dancing or entertaining shall occur closer than ten feet from any person. 
(4)  No dancer or entertainer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(5)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(6)  No dancer or entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.740, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-61. - Zones where establishment permitted. 
No adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau shall be located on any premises unless the location has been zoned general commercial district (C-2) or industrial district (M-1) under the zoning laws of the county. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.750, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-62. - Premises. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be conducted, operated, or licensed if the adult entertainment activity on the interior is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
(b)  No booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such establishment so as to prevent a clear view through the premises, except to separate offices, kitchens, rest rooms, or other areas not frequented by patrons. 
(c)  All premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition. Premises shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment, and supplies on the premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or more frequently if necessary to prevent accumulation. 
(d)  No premises for an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau shall have any interior connections or door with any other place of business or with any place where gambling or other illegal activity is conducted, or where persons congregate for the illegal consumption, sale, possession, barter, manufacture, exchange, purchase, dispensation, delivery, or dealing in of alcoholic beverages or illegal substances, such as narcotics or marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.760, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-63. - Display of license and number. 
Each licensee shall have printed on the front window of the licensed premises the inscription, "Banks County License No. ____________ , Licensee" in uniform letters not less than three inches in height. The license itself shall be conspicuously displayed at all times within the premises. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.770, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-64. - Lighting. 
All premises shall be fully lighted, both inside and outside, except during hours when the establishment is not open for business. Interior lighting shall be at least 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.780, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-65. - Advertising prohibited activity. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by this article, any applicable state statute, or any applicable local ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.790, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-66. - Private dancing or modeling sessions prohibited. 
No adult entertainment establishment shall allow and no dancer or model thereof shall engage in private dancing or modeling sessions or other activities involving sexual displays in which one dancer or model is placed in a one-on-one situation with one customer, and a regular show area with open seating shall be required for such sessions or displays; neither shall any adult entertainment establishment or any dancer or model thereof allow personal physical contact between customers and models or dancers. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.800, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 10-67. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No person, association, partnership or corporation licensed to sell alcoholic beverages (including, without limitation, beer and wine) under the ordinances of the county after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine or controlled substances upon the premises of any licensee. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to nor prohibit the live performance of legitimate plays, operas or ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums or educational institutions holding a county alcoholic beverage license or beer and wine license, which derive less than 20 percent of their gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.810, 7-14-1998) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 10-68. - Regulation of obscenity. 
It is not the intent of the board of commissioners that this ordinance legislate or regulate with respect to matters of obscenity. The regulation of obscenity is a matter of state law, and is accomplished by O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-80—16-12-83. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 5.04.820, 7-14-1998) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; fish, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Res. No. 2014-08, adopted June 10, 2014, repealed the former art. II, §§ 14-31, 14-32, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 13, 1988; and Res. No. 2013-17, adopted Oct. 8, 2013. 

Sec. 14-31. - Adoption of state law. 
The county adopts the Responsible Dog Ownership Law (the "Act") of the State of Georgia O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. as the law of Banks County, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Res. No. 2014-08, § 1, 6-10-2014) 
Sec. 14-32. - Dog control officer; hearing. 
(a)  The county marshall shall act as the dog control officer, and in his absence a deputy sheriff. 
(b)  The Probate Court of Banks County is hereby designated to conduct all hearings and appeals authorized under the Act. 
(Res. No. 2014-08, § 1, 6-10-2014) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
ARTICLE III. - DOMESTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-33. - Permitted number of adult dogs and regulations for confinement of adult dogs located on property in R-I and R-II residential zoning districts. 
(a)  If a person's property is located in the R-I or R-II residential zoning districts of Banks County, the person shall not raise on his/her property, at any one time, more than four adult dogs; and 
(b)  If a person's property is located in the R-I or R-II residential zoning districts of Banks County, all of the adult dogs living on the person's property shall not be allowed to freely roam the property. Such adult dogs shall be confined on the person's property in a pen, structure, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2004-17, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 14-34. - Permitted number of adult dogs and regulations for confinement of adult dogs located on property in the ARR, agricultural-rural residential district and CAD, commercial agricultural district. 
(a)  If a person's property is located in the ARR or CAD zoning districts of Banks County, Georgia, the person may allow up to four adult dogs to freely roam on the person's property. 
(b)  If a person's property is located in the ARR or CAD zoning districts of Banks County, Georgia, and if the person is raising, housing, breeding, boarding or training more than four adult dogs, but not more than 12 adult dogs and not for the primary purpose of generating income or revenue, the adult dogs must be confined in a kennel and shall not be allowed to freely roam the person's property. 
(c)  If a person's property is located in the ARR or CAD zoning districts of Banks County, Georgia, and if the person is raising, housing, breeding, boarding or training more than 12 adult dogs, the adult dogs must be confined in a commercial kennel and shall not be allowed to freely roam the person's property. 
(d)  If a person's property is located in the ARR or CAD zoning districts of Banks County, Georgia, and if the person is raising, housing, breeding, boarding or training more than four adult dogs, but not more than 12 adult dogs for the primary purpose of generating income or revenue, the adult dogs must be confined in a commercial kennel and shall not be allowed to freely roam the person's property. 
(e)  If the commercial kennel has dog runs or fenced areas, the adult dogs shall be inside the commercial kennel from 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., eastern time. 
(Ord. No. 2004-17, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; roads and bridges, ch. 62; signs, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 74; erection of buildings, § 74-36; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Grease traps. 
All businesses in the county that prepare and/or process and/or store and/or serve meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables shall have a grease trap and the grease trap shall be pumped out by a qualified person or company at least quarterly or more frequently as directed by the Banks County Water/Sewer Department. Pumping requires the complete removal of the entire contents of the trap with no reintroduction of any portion of the waste into the trap. Each time the grease trap is pumped out, the owner of the business or his agent shall provide the county with a copy of the receipt or other written proof that the grease trap was pumped out. 
(Res. No. 96-10, § I, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 2015-01 , § 1, 1-27-2015) 
Sec. 18-2. - Dumping grease prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump, or cause to be dumped, any grease anywhere in the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Res. No. 96-10, § II, 10-15-1996) 
Sec. 18-3. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the processes of the superior court of the county or the state court of the county or the magistrate court of the county and, upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Res. No. 96-10, § III, 10-15-1996) 
Sec. 18-4. - Self-inspection exemption. 
The board of commissioners, pursuant to 1996 Ga. Laws, page 1632, exempts the county from the alternative inspection procedure as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). 
Sec. 18-5. - Rules and regulations of the department of public health. 
(a)  Banks County hereby adopts (and will enforce the latest amended and revised), the following rules of the department of public health, as adopted, amended and revised: 
(1)  Chapter 511-3-1 "On-Site Sewage Management System Rules and Regulations". 
(2)  Chapter 511-6-1 "Food Service Rules and Regulations". 
(3)  Chapter 511-6-2 "Tourist Accommodations Rules and Regulations". 
(4)  Chapter 511-3-5 "Swimming Pools, Spas, and Recreational Water Parks Rules and Regulations". 
(5)  Chapter 511-4-2 "Control of Rabies, Rules and Regulations". 
(6)  Chapter 511-3-4 "Solid Waste Rules and Regulations". 
(7)  Chapter 511-3-7 "Georgia Smoke Free Air Act Rules and Regulations". 
(8)  Chapter 511-3-3 "Drinking Water Supply Rules and Regulations". 
(9)  Chapter 511-3-6 "Special On-Site Sewage Management Systems Rules and Regulations". 
(b)  The Banks County Marshal and/or the Banks County Code Enforcement Officer and/or a representative of the Banks County Health Department may issue citations for violations of section 18-5. Any person charged with a violation of section 18-5 shall be amenable to the process of the magistrate court of the county and, upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 2-9-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 2016, amended § 18-5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 18-5, pertained to rules and regulations of the department of human resources, and derived from Ord. No. 2003-26, § 1, adopted July 8, 2003. 
Secs. 18-6—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-27, § 1, adopted July 8, 2003, repealed ch. 18, art, II, § 18-31, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 99-4, adopted May, 18, 1999. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

Sec. 18-31. - Enforcement of codes. 
Banks County hereby adopts and will enforce the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
(1)  Standard Building Code. 
(2)  Standard Mechanical Code. 
(3)  Standard Gas Code. 
(4)  Standard Plumbing Code. 
(5)  National Electrical Code. 
(6)  Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
(7)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code. 
(8)  Georgia State Energy Code, (CABO Model Energy Code). 
(9)  Standard Existing Building Code. 
(10)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(11)  International Fire Code, amendments. 
Banks County, Georgia, hereby adopts the International Fire Code, as it exists this date and as it is hereafter amended: 
A.  Department of fire prevention. International Fire Code § 103, Department of Fire Prevention, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
Fire Department. Whenever the term "fire prevention department" is used herein, the term shall mean the Banks County Fire Department. 
Enforcement. 
1.  The Banks County Fire Chief shall be responsible for the enforcement of this fire code. The Banks County Fire Chief may designate such staff of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
2.  To assist in the performance of the responsibilities and duties placed upon the fire chief, a bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the county is created. This bureau shall operate under the supervision of the fire chief of the county. The fire chief shall designate an official of the fire department as fire marshal. The fire marshal shall be administrator of the bureau of fire prevention. The fire marshal shall be responsible for the direct administration and enforcement of this fire code under the supervision of the Banks County Fire Chief. 
3.  Fire inspectors of the county bureau of fire prevention shall also have authority to administer and enforce this fire code under the supervision of the fire marshal. 
B.  Board of appeals. International Fire Code § 108, Board of Appeals, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
1.  Appeals—General. Whenever the fire code official shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the erection or alteration of a building or structure, or when the fire code official has ordered that certain action be taken or refrained from, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the International Fire Code do not apply, or that an equally good or more desirable form of construction or safety precaution can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this Code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure, or his authorized agent, or the person or corporation against whom said action is directed, may appeal from the decision of the fire code official to the Banks County Board of Commissioners in writing, setting forth the action or ruling appealed in detail, within ten days of the action or ruling. The Banks County Board of Commissioners shall hold a hearing on the appeal within 15 days of filing and shall render a decision within 31 days of filing. 
2.  Unsafe or dangerous building. In case of a building or structure or operation which, in the opinion of the fire code official, is unsafe or dangerous, the fire code official may, in his order, limit the time for such appeal to a shorter period. 
3.  Variance to Code after hearing. The Banks County Board of Commissioners, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the code or public interest, or when, in its opinion, the interpretation of the fire code official should be modified or reversed. 
4.  Recording of minutes of hearing. A decision of the Banks County Board of Commissioners to vary the application of any provision of the code, or to modify an order of the fire code official, shall specify in what manner such variation or modification is made, the conditions upon which it is made and the reasons therefor and shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting at which the decision is made. 
5.  Reversal of decision. If a decision of the Banks County Board of Commissioners reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the fire code official or varies the application of any provision of the code, the fire code official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. 
C.  Violations. 
1.  Prosecution of violations. International Fire Code § 109.2.3, Prosecution of Violations, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
In case any building, structure, land, mechanical system, plumbing system, or other system, installation or equipment regulated by this Code is or is proposed to be used, operated, occupied, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure, land, mechanical system, plumbing system, or other system, installation or equipment regulated by this Code is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of the this chapter, the fire code official, county attorney, or other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful operation, occupation, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
2.  Violation penalties. International Fire Code § 109.3, Violation penalties, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who operates, occupies, erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters, converts, maintains or repairs a building, structure, land, mechanical system, plumbing system, or other system, installation or equipment regulated by this Code in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate Court of Banks County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Banks County, Georgia, for each violation in the discretion of the Court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2003-27, § 1, 7-8-2003; Res. No. 2013-10, § 1, 8-13-2013) 
Secs. 18-32—18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 18-61. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes as allowed heretofore adopted. Hereinafter all of the Codes heretofore adopted shall be referred to as the "technical codes," as may be adopted by the state or local jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1.1, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-62. - Codes remedial. 
(a)  Generally. The Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes are hereby declared to be remedial and shall be constructed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this chapter except as it relates to the purposes stated in this section. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan under the requirements of this chapter shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or of their adequacy. Neither the county, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1.2, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-63. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Generally. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provision of the Standard Building Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the Standard Gas Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this chapter. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code, as amended, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewage system. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provision of the Standard Plumbing Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewage system. 
(7)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(8)  Energy. The provisions of the CABO Model Energy Code, as amended, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(9)  CABO one and two-family dwelling. The provision of the CABO One and Two-Family Dwelling Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of this chapter shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. When code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(d)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1.3, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-64. - Building department established; building official. 
There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel are to be established by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1.4, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-65. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1.6, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-66. - Powers and duties of the building official generally. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 2.1, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-67. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which make such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the building or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as provided in this article, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 2.2, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-68. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 2.3, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-69. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alternation, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 2.4, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-70. - Requirements not covered by chapter. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this chapter or the other technical codes, shall by determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 2.6, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-71. - Alternative materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternative has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternative, provided the building official finds that the alternative for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternative. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 2.7, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-72. - Permits; application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(b)  Exception. Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this chapter; 
(5)  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(c)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work provided the work is shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(d)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(e)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and it location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(f)  Time limitation. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 3.1, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-73. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings, drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with his official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer, legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to such drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three or more stories high. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 or more square feet (465 m 2 ) in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
Exception: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor indicating footprint of the building or structure. 
(f)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not to be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, storm and sanitary sewage accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials to be stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquidtight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of hazardous materials to be stored. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 3.2, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-74. - Examination of documents. 
(a)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examination whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit form a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and be accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and, upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems, a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 3.3, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-75. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where such building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the requirements of all applicable laws or technical codes are met. Regarding the state department of transportation right-of-way, evidence of a valid driveway permit shall be required before the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 3.4, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-76. - Contractors responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, or electrical, gas, mechanical sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with his license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 3.5, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-77. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this chapter. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(b)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit, or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, the architect or engineer shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(c)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of the drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 3.6, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-78. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost/size of the building, structure, or electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas system, etc., has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the money was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body, as set out in section 18-111. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of a building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 3.7, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-79. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. The building official shall inspect all buildings, structures, and electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. The building official shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (f) of this section. The building official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the reports are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. Exception: The building official may exempt from inspection bona fide agricultural buildings or structures related to an ongoing farming operation. The intent is to not exempt buildings or structures not a part of a recognized farming operation. This provision does not exempt such construction from any required zoning inspection. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, and electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems upon completion prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit and permit inspection card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit and permit inspection card shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon the permit inspection card. This permit and permit inspection card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixture are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
d.  Note: See Section 311 of the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping had been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)  Energy. 
a.  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
b.  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(h)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the three inspections listed in subsections (f)(1)—(6). 
(i)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(j)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 3.8, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-80. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Such certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 3.9, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-81. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial, or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer state the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square feet uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 3.10, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-82. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 4, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-83. - Construction board of adjustment and appeals—Established; appointment. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of seven members and two alternates. The board of commissioners shall appoint the construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 5.1, 5-18-1999) 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-91 et seq. 
Sec. 18-84. - Same—Membership; terms; quorum; secretary. 
(a)  Membership. The construction board of adjustment and appeals should consist of seven members. Construction board of adjustment and appeals members should be composed of three individuals serving on the county board of commissioners and others with knowledge 
and experience in the technical codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members, there should be two alternate members, one member at large from the building industry and one member at large from the public. A member of the construction board of adjustment and appeals shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(b)  Terms. The terms of office of the members of the construction board of adjustment and appeals shall be staggered so no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. The two alternates, if appointed, shall serve one-year terms. Vacancies shall be filed for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member of the construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, at the discretion of the board of commissioners, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(c)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the construction board of adjustment and appeals shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this Code, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(d)  Secretary. The building official shall act as secretary of the construction board of adjustment and appeals and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 5.2, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-85. - Same—Powers. 
The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in section 18-86, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the technical codes. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 5.3, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 18-86. - Decision of the building official. 
(a)  The owner of a building, structure or service system, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of this Code do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of this Code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. 
(1)  Generally. The construction board of adjustment and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Code or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Code to other buildings, structures or service system. 
d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
e.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this Code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Conditions of variances. In granting the variance, the construction board of adjustment may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the construction board of adjustment and appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(c)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 5.4, 5-18-1999) 
Secs. 18-87—18-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMIT FEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-25, § 1, adopted July 8, 2003, repealed ch. 18, art. IV, § 18-111, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 2001-11, § 1, adopted May 9, 2001; and Res. No. 2001-25, § 1, adopted Sept. 4, 2001. 

Sec. 18-111. - Schedule of permit fees. 
Permit fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners of Banks County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2003-25, § 1, 7-8-2003) 
Secs. 18-112—18-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOW RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES 

Sec. 18-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
County means the unincorporated area of the county. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-142. - Residential construction requirements. 
On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the county for any residential building of any type which employs: 
(1)  A gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  A showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  A urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  A lavatory faucet replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  A kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
Sec. 18-143. - Commercial building requirements. 
On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the county for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections 18-142(1)—(5). 
Sec. 18-144. - Applicability of article to repairs, renovations. 
The requirements of section 18-142 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
Sec. 18-145. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 18-142—18-144 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewer system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewer system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the county. A fee of $30.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
Sec. 18-146. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the building official. Citations for violations may be issued by its building inspector. 
(b)  Any person violating this article shall be tried before the appropriate court of the county. Upon conviction, a violator of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Secs. 18-147—18-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY—REQUIRED 

Sec. 18-170. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-26, § 1, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 18-171. - Definitions. 
Building contractor. As used in this article the word or term "building contractor" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this article if: (a) he has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or (b) he performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Ord. No. 2002-26, § 2, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 18-172. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2002-26, § 3, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 18-173. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this article at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Ord. No. 2002-26, § 4, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 18-174. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this article to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this article. Violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-26, § 5, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 18-175. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this article is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. No. 2002-26, § 6, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 18-176. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 2002-26, § 7, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 18-177. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this article is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this article or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-26, § 8, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 18-178. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is for any reason held by the court to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void, such holding shall not affect the remainder to the article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-26, § 9, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 18-179. - Effective date; expiration. 
This article shall take effect on the date of its being duly adopted and shall apply to all building contractors doing business in the unincorporated areas of Banks County on that date and doing business on any date thereafter. However, this ordinance and any certification issued pursuant to it shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
(Ord. No. 2002-26, § 10, 12-10-2002) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainment, ch. 10; taxation, ch. 78; hotel-motel excise tax, § 78-91 et seq.; financial institutions business license tax, § 78-121 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; C-1 neighborhood commercial district, app. A, § 801 et seq.; C-2 general commercial district, app. A, § 901; M-1 industrial district, app. A, § 1001. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; registration of nonresident contractors with state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-31; electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors, and utility contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - BUSINESS OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 22-31. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the county. 
On and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and each calendar year thereafter, each person commencing or engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated area of the county, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable business registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such business tax registration shall be shown to the sheriff of the county, or to any of his deputies, upon his or their request. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(1), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-32. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
As used in this article the following terms shall apply: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business license means the certificate issued upon payment of the administrative fee and the occupation tax. Only one business license certificate shall be issued which shall demonstrate that the fee and tax have been paid. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Licensee means the person issued the license; his authorized employee in charge of the business of the licensee; or the person operating the business of the licensee. 
Location and office mean any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
Nonprofit organization means a corporation, club or group exempt from income taxation under the Internal Revenue Code and regulations thereunder, as now existing or as hereinafter amended. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person means and includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioners of professions and occupations" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Registration, business registration, and business tax registration are all synonymous with the term "business license" and shall mean the certificate issued upon payment of the administrative fee and the occupation tax. Only one business license certificate shall be issued which shall demonstrate that the fee and tax have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(2), 9-12-1995) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-33. - Administrative fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $30.00 shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start up, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  An occupation tax shall be levied as the revenue-producing component of the license fee structure. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(3), 9-12-1995; Res. No. 2010-15, § 1, 9-30-2010) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 22-34. - Occupation tax—Levied; restrictions. 
(a)  Tax levied. Except as to those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations excluded by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16(a), an occupation tax is hereby levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the unincorporated areas of the county and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule. The occupation tax shall be levied according to the number of employees of the business as follows: 
TAX SCHEDULE 

 
(c)  Categories of taxes not required by county. 
(1)  The county shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have in the county. 
(2)  The county shall not require an additional occupational tax on those businesses that have paid the occupation tax in other localities or states, provided that those businesses were taxed in full compliance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-7 and 48-13-14. 
(3)  The county shall not require an occupation tax from those real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the county, and sell property inside the county. 
(d)  Computation. In determining the amount of the occupation tax to be levied, the number of employees of the business or practitioner will be computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of this computation an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(4), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-35. - Same—Depository financial institution. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual occupation tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(b)  The minimum annual amount of occupation tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00. 
(c)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the business license department of the county on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levy pursuant to this section based upon the information provided in such return. 
(d)  Taxes levied pursuant to this section shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by this section unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(5), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-36. - Same—Business with no location in the state. 
If not exempt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7(f), the board of commissioners requires a business registration and the assessment of an occupation tax on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the largest dollar volume of business in the state is done or service performed in the county, and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the county. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(6), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-37. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the county shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the business license department and that line of business being noted by the business license department upon the business tax registration which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(7), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-38. - Number of businesses considered operating in county. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one store or location, each store or location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(8), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-39. - Professionals. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax: 
(1)  On and after the effective date of the resolution from which this article is derived and each calendar year thereafter the following: 
a.  The occupation tax based on number of employees in section 22-34; or 
b.  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per practitioner fee shall include all persons in the business who qualify as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(2)  This election shall be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(9), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-40. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(10), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-41. - Purpose and scope of the occupation tax. 
(a)  The occupation tax levied in this division is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the occupation tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any profession which is classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). 
(b)  The occupation tax applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. 
(c)  All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(11), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-42. - Allocation of employees of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses which have multiple locations inside and outside of the county where the employees can be allocated to each location, the number of employees used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those employees attributed to each county location. In the case of an employee who works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county, the municipal corporation or county in which the employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year shall be authorized to count the individual as an employee who is employed within the local government's geographic jurisdiction for purposes of occupation tax. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the county the following: 
(1)  Payroll and personnel records necessary to allocate the number of employees of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's number of employees by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business has locations outside of the county and taxation is levied for criteria other than number of employees in the other local government's jurisdiction, the county shall not assess more than the allotted share of number of employees for the local operation. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(12), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-43. - Exemption for nonprofit organizations and authorities. 
No occupation tax shall be levied or assessed on any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(13), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-44. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable. 
Each person who is licensed under title 43 of the state license examining boards shall provide evidence of proper state licensure before the county business registration may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(14), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-45. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificate of qualification, certificates of competency, certificate of occupancy, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the business registration is issued. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(15), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-46. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation taxes provided in this division shall be required to obtain the necessary business registration for such business prescribed in this division, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the business registration provided for in division 2 of this article before commencing the business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation subject to this article without first having so obtained such business registration, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article and upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 22-48. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(16), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-47. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such business registration shall be for the calendar year in which the business registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided in this article before January 1 of each year, and on January 1 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall obtain the business registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained such business registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 22-48. These penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, provided in this article and may be collected by the remedies provided in this article for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The business registration provided for in this article shall be issued by the business license director, and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a business registration shall, after such occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation subject to this article without having first obtained such business registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 22-48. 
(c)  Should any tax or fee imposed by this article remain due and unpaid for 90 days from the due date of the tax or fee, the person liable for the tax or fee shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax and fee due, plus interest on the amount of the tax and fee due at a rate of 1.5 percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(17), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-48. - Penalty of article violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this article inclusive of divisions 1 and 2 of this article shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by confinement in the county jail not to exceed ten days, or both in the discretion of the court. However, any person whose qualifications to practice his profession are determined by the general laws of the state and who fails to pay an occupation tax as provided in this article shall be subject only to the civil penalties provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(18), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-49. - Business inspector. 
The business license director and his duly designated assistants or their successors shall be classified as deputy business inspectors with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business occupation tax and regulations resolution. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(19), 9-12-1995) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 22-50. - Business not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(20), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-51. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
This occupation tax is not levied upon the number of employees of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(21), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-52. - When occupation tax due and payable. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the county, at the business license office of the county, on January 1 each year and delinquent if not paid on or before 90 days from the due date of the tax or fee. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(22), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-53. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
(a)  In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the county in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid as provided in section 22-52. 
(b)  When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year and shall be payable before commencing such business. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(23), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-54. - Public hearing on increased revenue. 
In any year when revenue from occupation taxes in the county is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the county shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenues. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(24), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-55. - Returns confidential. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, information provided to the county by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner is confidential and exempt from inspection or disclosure under the Georgia Open Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.). 
(b)  Information provided to the county by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collection of occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(25), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-56. - Inspection of books and records. 
In any case the business license director of the county, through his officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business upon which the applications are made. The business license director or his designee shall have the right to inspect the books or records of the business for which the application was made in the county, and upon demand of the business license director or his designee such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the county within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the business registration currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept in the county for examination by the business license director or his designee at his discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of ten percent of the tax due over 90 days shall be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(26), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-57. - Revocation of registration for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Except for a person whose qualifications to practice his profession is determined by the general laws of the state, the failure of any business to pay any occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the county under this article permitting the owner of such business to do business in the county for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the county for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided in this division for is at that time unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(27), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-58. - Effect of failure to comply with article; continuing business after registration revocation. 
Any person who does business in the county after the registration for such business has been revoked as provided in section 22-57 is required to make returns showing the number of employees. Any person who fails to make such returns within the time and in the manner provided in this article, or refuses to amend such returns so as to set forth the correct information, or who makes false returns or refuses to permit an inspection of books in his charge when the officer, agent, employee or representative of the county requests such inspection, during normal business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article, shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 22-48. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(28), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-59. - Execution for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided for in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the tax commissioner of the county, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of such tax against the person liable for such tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person liable for such tax, all as provided by the resolutions of the county, and the laws of the state. The lien of such occupation tax shall become fixed on and dated from the time when such tax becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the sheriff of the county upon the property of the person liable for such tax, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of such execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the resolutions of the county and the laws of the state, and the defendant in such execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the resolutions of the county and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the tax commissioner of the county against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest, penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(29), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-60. - Amendment; repeal of provisions. 
Subject to the provisions of section 22-64, this article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the board of commissioners to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the county of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(30), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-61. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance or resolution heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance or resolution have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances and/or resolutions heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances or resolutions, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or resolution, or failure to comply with any other provisions of this article, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(31), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-62. - Enforcement. 
It is hereby made the duty of the business license director, and the county sheriff's department to see that the provisions of this article relating to business occupation taxes and regulations are observed; and to summon all violators of this article to appear before the magistrate court of the county. It is hereby made the further duty of the business license director, the county sheriff, their designees and assistants, to inspect all business registrations issued by the county, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the business registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(32), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-63. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by the board of commissioners. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the board of commissioners. All provisions of this article relating to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(33), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-64. - Public hearing before adoption of tax. 
The board of commissioners shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(34), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-65. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The board of commissioners may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(35), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-66. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(36), 9-12-1995) 
Secs. 22-67—22-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-86. - General authority. 
A business registration is subject to the right of the board of commissioners to regulate and exercise police power over any occupation, business, trade, profession or calling and the right of the board of commissioners to prescribe such rules and regulations as may be necessary in the exercise of the police power and for the protection and the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare and to provide for the suspension of or for the forfeiture of business registration upon failure to comply with this article or any amendment thereof or any other federal, state or local law, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(37), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-87. - Business registration requirement. 
Unless otherwise expressly provided by any applicable federal or state law, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in any occupation, trade, profession, or calling with an office or other business location in the county without first registering and paying the administrative fee and occupation tax in the amounts set out in sections 22-33 and 22-34. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(38), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-88. - Number, term and expiration of registration. 
A business registration shall have a number and expiration date of December 31 of each year. A business having an existing business registration issued by the county must obtain a new business registration on or before the expiration date of the existing business registration in order to continue to conduct business following the expiration of the business registration, unless otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(39), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-89. - Transfer of business registration. 
A business registration shall not be transferable to another person, firm or corporation in the same location. A business registration may be transferred from one business location to another provided the ownership of the business remains the same. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(40), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-90. - Application for registration; contents; investigation; restrictions. 
All applications for a business registration shall be on forms prepared by the board of commissioners or the business license director. 
(1)  The application shall include: 
a.  The name of the business; 
b.  The location of the business; 
c.  The mailing address of the business and the telephone number of the business; 
d.  The name and address of the owner of the business, and if a corporation, the name of the person responsible for corporate affairs in the county; 
e.  The name of the manager at the business location; 
f.  The nature of the business; 
g.  The number of employees or such other information as may be required to assess the occupation tax; 
h.  Such other information as may be required to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Upon completion of the application and the payment of the tax and any applicable fees, the director shall make such investigations and require such reports as necessary to carry out this article. Upon receipt of the necessary reports and investigations, the director shall either issue the business registration or refer the application to the board of commissioners. If the application is referred to the board of commissioners, the applicant shall be notified in person or by mail at his business address. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(41), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-91. - Issuance of business registration; denial; hearings. 
Whenever an application is referred to the board of commissioners under subsection 22-90(2), the board of commissioners shall make such investigation and hold such hearings as it shall determine to be necessary or appropriate to legally determine the issues. After notice and hearing, the board of commissioners may either issue a business registration, issue a business registration with conditions, or deny a business registration, as necessary, in the opinion of the board of commissioners, to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare and security of the county. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(42), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-92. - Business registration denial; exceptions. 
The board of commissioners may deny a business registration to any business engaged in an unlawful activity or operated in such a manner as to violate lawful ordinances or resolutions adopted by the board of commissioners or any other applicable laws, rules and regulations. Unlawful activity shall include, but not be limited to, activities in violation of the zoning regulations and the electrical, health, building and fire codes of the county. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(43), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-93. - Grounds for revocation of registration—Generally. 
The board of commissioners shall have the right, after notice and hearing, to revoke any business registration issued hereunder on the following grounds: 
(1)  Violation of this article; 
(2)  Violation of other laws and resolutions of the county pertaining to the carrying on of such business as would affect the health, safety, and welfare of the public or the county; 
(3)  Violation of a law of the United States or the state, which affects the public health, welfare and safety; 
(4)  Fraudulent business practices; 
(5)  The business constitutes a nuisance. For the purposes hereof, a nuisance is defined as anything that works hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another. The fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(44), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-94. - Same—Preliminary investigation. 
When it is reported to the business license director or sheriff that a holder of a county business registration is engaged in any activity which could form the basis for a revocation of such business registration under section 22-93, a preliminary investigation shall be conducted by the business license director or sheriff in order to determine whether or not there is a basis for the reports. If the business license director's or the sheriff's preliminary investigation reveals that there may be a basis for revocation or suspension of the business registration, the business registration holder will be notified to appear before the board of commissioners for a hearing under the provisions of section 22-96. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(45), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-95. - Seizure of business registration; applicable businesses. 
If the business license director or the sheriff of the county shall find that a business is in violation of a law of the state or in violation of a law or resolution of the county and that the continued operation of such business would create a clear and present danger to the health, safety and general welfare and security of the county, the business license director or the sheriff shall be empowered to seize and temporarily suspend the business registration of the business. The business license director or the sheriff shall deliver the business registration to the clerk of the board of commissioners upon the next working day of the clerk. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall then schedule a special hearing of the board of commissioners to consider further action upon the order within 30 days of the date upon which the clerk of the commission received the business registration from the sheriff. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(46), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-96. - Revocation of business registration—Hearing; notification. 
(a)  When a matter is transmitted by the business license director or the sheriff to the clerk of the board of commissioners for possible suspension or revocation, the chairman of the board of commissioners shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall make such investigations as it deems necessary and shall conduct the hearing pursuant to such procedures as the board of commissioners shall determine in good faith to be lawful and appropriate. 
(b)  The holder of the business registration shall be notified in person or by mail at his business address of the date and time of the hearing. The holder of the business registration may appear in person or be represented by counsel. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of commissioners, based upon evidence submitted at the hearing, shall enter an order making a finding of fact and then: 
(1)  Find that the evidence does not authorize revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Issue a warning to the holder of the business registration; 
(3)  Suspend the business registration and probate the suspension; 
(4)  Revoke the business registration and probate the revocation; 
(5)  Suspend the business registration; 
(6)  Revoke the business registration; or 
(7)  Take any other appropriate action regarding the business registration. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(47), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-97. - Same—Appeal. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation may appeal any action, order, decision, or determination of the director or any other administrative official to the board of commissioners. The appeal is limited to an alleged error of the official from which the appeal is taken. 
(b)  The appeal shall be filed in writing with the clerk of the commission within 15 days following the date on which the alleged error was made. Upon receiving the appeal, the clerk shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners and notify all parties to the appeal by mail at their business address of the time and date of the appeal hearing. 
(c)  All parties to the appeal may appear in person or be represented by counsel. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall conduct the hearing as the chairman shall see fit. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall enter an order making a finding of fact and shall have all the powers of the official from which the appeal was taken. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(48), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-98. - Board of commissioners' decisions are final. 
Any decision, order, requirement or determination of the board of commissioners of the county shall be a final administrative determination. Any application for relief from an official action of the board of commissioners shall be as set forth in section 22-99. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(49), 9-12-1995) 
Sec. 22-99. - Appeal of final decision. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the board of commissioners may appeal any final decision of the board of commissioners to the superior court of the county by filing with the clerk of the court a notice of appeal in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. Such notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the decision of the board of commissioners is rendered. A copy of the notice of appeal shall be served on the clerk of the board of commissioners. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the clerk of the county superior court shall give immediate notice thereof to the clerk of the board of commissioners, and within 30 days from the time of such notice the clerk of the board of commissioners shall cause to be filed with the clerk of superior court a duly certified copy of the minutes of the proceedings had before the board of commissioners and the decision of the board. 
(b)  In the event of an appeal to the superior court, the appellants shall bear the cost of preparing the necessary documents as required by the court. 
(c)  At the next term of the county superior court, or in vacation upon ten days' notice to the parties, the judge of the court shall proceed to hear and pass upon the appeal. In determining the questions presented by the appeal, the superior court shall determine only whether the decision of the board of commissioners is correct as a matter of law, and shall not review issues of fact, unless such a review is otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 1(50), 9-12-1995) 
ARTICLE III. - SPA/MASSAGE AND BODYWORK THERAPY BUSINESSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 2004-16, § 4, adopted July 13, 2004, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2005. 
Cross reference— Adult entertainment, Ch. 10, Art. II et seq. 

Sec. 22-100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate spa/massage and bodywork therapy businesses in the interest of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the unincorporated county. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-101. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article regulating spa/massage and bodywork therapy businesses shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Business license means the certificate issued upon payment of the administrative fee, and the payment of the occupation tax. Only one business license certificate shall be issued, which shall demonstrate that the fees and tax have been paid. 
County means the unincorporated area of Banks County, Georgia. 
Employee means any person over 18 years of age, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business and who receives compensation from the owner, operator or patrons of the business. For the purpose of this article, the term "employee" includes the terms "spa/massage and bodywork therapist" and "independent contractors." 
Good moral character means a person who has not been convicted of a sex-related crime, or convicted of an attempt to commit such offense, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punished as a sex related crime, in the past ten years. 
Home office means any residence which a person may use as a base of operation to include making appointments, receiving phone calls, mail, or engaging in management activity related to a business. This however, would not permit the practice of the business at the home office, any signs, or any visible evidence from the exterior that any type business activity is being conducted at the location. 
Spa/massage and bodywork means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, range of motion stretches, soft tissue manipulation or stimulating of the external parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, hot packs or cold packs with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, water, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. This definition shall also include treatment by baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy. This definition excludes "physical therapy" as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-33-3(7). 
Spa/massage and bodywork therapist means any individual who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of "spa/massage and bodywork or reflexology" as defined herein, whether as an owner, operator or employee of a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business. 
Spa/massage and bodywork therapy business means any business or location operated by any person, firm, association or corporation, who engages in, carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the activities defined under spa/massage and bodywork therapy or reflexology herein. Spa/massage and bodywork therapy or reflexology businesses shall not include any occupations, businesses or professions exempted by section 22-116 of this article. 
Spa/massage parlor means any building, structure, or place used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation, prostitution, or masturbation for hire. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Operator means the manager or other natural person principally in charge of a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business. 
Owner or owners shall mean the proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all partners (general and limited) if a partnership, or all officers, directors and persons holding ten percent or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation. 
Patron means any person over 18 years of age, or a minor with verified written consent of at least one parent or guardian, or who is accompanied by at least one parent or guardian, who receives a spa/massage and bodywork or reflexology therapy under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will give money or any other consideration thereof. 
Recognized school means a state-licensed school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, and work of massage and bodywork, including but not limited to: physiology, anatomy, hygiene, applied kinesiology, AIDS awareness, ethics, and statutes and rules of massage and bodywork therapy, and which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 500 hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. Or a state licensed school or institution of learning which has for it's purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, and work of reflexology, and which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 200 hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. 
Reflexology means the application of specific pressure by the use of the therapist's hands, thumbs, and fingers to reflex points limited solely to the patron's hands, feet, and ears and which practice does not involve or require the patron to undress beyond the removal of the shoes and socks and does not require the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, hot packs or cold packs with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, water, liniments, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations but may include the application of antiseptics to the patron's feet. 
Specific anatomical region(s) means and includes the genitals, anus, perineum, and female breast. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-102. - Facilities. 
No spa/massage and bodywork therapy business establishment shall be issued a license, nor be advertised, operated, established or maintained in the county unless an inspection by the building inspections department reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers shall be made water impervious with approved materials and shall be installed in accordance with all codes and ordinances of the county. 
(2)  All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, and steam or bath areas, shall have surfaces which may be disinfected. 
(3)  The premises shall have equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments, and such instruments shall be disinfected after each use on each patron. 
(4)  All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean linens and towels storage areas. 
(5)  Toilet facilities shall be provided for use by employees and patrons. 
(6)  Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule immediately adjacent thereto. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels or dryers. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-103. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the county, a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business without a license to do so. It shall also be unlawful to be a massage and bodywork therapist, owner, operator or employee of a spa/massage and body work therapy business without a valid employee license issued under terms of this article. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-104. - Qualifications for licenses. 
Owners, operators, and employees of a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business shall be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any owner, operator, or employee who is convicted of a crime specified under good moral character as defined herein, while employed as an owner, operator, or employee of a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business shall not thereafter work as an owner, operator, or employee of any spa/massage and bodywork therapy business in the county for a period of ten years from the date of such conviction unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, or a bond forfeiture. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-105. - Application process for a license to operate a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business. 
Any person, association, partnership, or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any spa/massage and bodywork therapy business shall make application to the Business License Director of Banks County. A nonrefundable new application fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the business license director with the application and all required supporting documentation. The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, or carrying on of any spa/massage and bodywork therapy business. An employee license must be secured by each employee who shall work in the business in any capacity as outlined in section 22-110. Upon payment of a fee of $50.00 by the applicant, the county marshall or the sheriff's department shall complete an investigation and upon the applicant meeting the requirements the business license director shall issue the employee license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-106 - Application contents. 
Each application for a license to operate a spa/massage therapy business shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's full true name, social security number, date of birth, place of birth, aliases, sex, nationality, and citizenship. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(4)  Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation. 
(5)  The business license history of the applicant and where such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business or similar type business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the date and place of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the same, the residence address and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant, corporation, or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(7)  If the applicant, any partners, or any corporate officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, have been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past ten years, and if so a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether any terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(8)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(9)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(10)  Whether the premises are owned or rented. 
(11)  Each applicant for a license to operate a spa/massage and bodywork therapy establishment or business shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, by the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If by a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(12)  In addition to the information required herein, the application shall disclose the name, address, social security number, and date of birth of any and all persons who have a financial interest in the entity applying for the license, and must consent for the county to obtain his or her criminal history record information. 
(13)  The application must be accompanied by a certificate or diploma from a recognized school as defined in section 22-101 for each person working in the business of performing massage or reflexology. This paragraph does not apply to clerical or administrative personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-107. - Application; investigation. 
The county shall have 45 calendar days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. The application will be referred to the business license director for consideration of the issuance of a business license upon the completion of the investigation, and verifying the application meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  Application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted within ten years of the date of the application, in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving moral character as defined herein. Applicant has not had a license or permit to operate a spa/massage and body work therapy establishment or business denied or revoked for cause involving lack of good moral character in this county or any other local government jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(6)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant complies with all applicable zoning and distance laws code. 
(7)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-108. - Licenses nontransferable. 
No license to operate a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the license upon notification to the business license director shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-109. - Change of name or location. 
No licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. Any application for an extension or expansion of a building where a spa/massage therapy business is located shall require inspection and shall comply with all provisions and regulations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-110. - Application process for employee license. 
Before any person may work as an owner, operator, or employee of a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business, such person shall pay a nonrefundable $50.00 fee designated in section 22-105 of this Code and file a notice of intended employment with the business license director on forms that require applicant's full name, current address, social security number, date of birth, birth place, sex, telephone number, address for the last five years, business occupation and employment history for the last five years, proof of age (photo I.D. from a governmental agency), complete information concerning the conviction of any crime within the past ten years, citizenship and consent for the county to obtain criminal history record information. If such applicant will engage in any activities of massage and bodywork or reflexology as defined in this article, such applicant shall provide a required diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school as defined by this article, or provide a current license from another state whose licensure requirements meet or exceed those set forth in this article, or provide proof of successful completion of the National Certification Examination for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork. Upon the filing of the notice and any other required documents with the business license director, the applicant may become a conditional employee and work on the licensed premises. The county shall have 45 calendar days to investigate the information furnished by the applicant. Each applicant shall furnish a consent form authorizing the county to receive criminal history information as may be contained in the files of the GCIC. If the applicant is found to be of good moral character and otherwise qualifies under this article, the business license director shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the applicant shall be issued an employee license. The license shall be with the owner, operator or employee while on a licensed premises or while engaged in or carrying on any activities of massage or reflexology. All notices to applicants or license holders issued pursuant to this article shall be mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address set forth in the notice of intended employment. Applicants and license holders shall have the duty to furnish the business license director a new mailing address if the applicant's or license holder's address shall change during the investigation period or term of employment. Employee licenses issued pursuant to this code section shall remain valid until or unless otherwise suspended, revoked or in such case or circumstance where the employee would not otherwise qualify for the granting of a new license under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-111. - Appeals procedure. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation may appeal any action, order, decision, or determination of the business license director or any other administrative official to the board of commissioners. The appeal is limited to an alleged error of the official from which the appeal is taken. 
(b)  The appeal shall be filed in writing with the clerk of the board of commissioners within 15 days following the date on which the alleged error was made. Upon receiving the appeal, the clerk shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners and notify all parties to the appeal by mail at their business address of the time and date of the appeal hearing. 
(c)  All parties to the appeal may appear in person or be represented by counsel. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall conduct the hearing as the chairman shall see fit. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall enter an order making a finding of fact and shall have all the powers of the official from which the appeal was taken. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-112. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in this Code at section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-113. - Enforcement. 
The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be conducted by the county sheriff's department. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-114. - Renewal of licenses. 
(a)  All licenses for spa/massage and bodywork therapy businesses shall expire on December 31st of each year, including the year of issue, but may be reissued by the business license director for the following year, upon renewal application being made, payment of the appropriate fee designated in section 22-115 of this Code, and a determination by the business license director that the applicant remains qualified as set forth in this article. Renewal applications shall be submitted and renewal fees shall be paid by November 15th. Licenses not renewed by December 31st shall be void and such license holder must reapply as a new applicant in order to obtain a license. 
(b)  All licenses for an employee license shall expire on December 31st of each year, including the year of issue, but may be reissued by the business license director for the following year, upon renewal application being made, payment of the appropriate fee designated in section 22-115 of this Code, and a determination that the applicant remains qualified as set forth in this article. Renewal applications shall be submitted and renewal fees shall be paid by November 15th. Employee licenses not renewed by December 31st shall be void and such license holder must reapply as a new applicant in order to obtain a license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-115. - Fee schedule. 
(a)  New application ..... $100.00 
(b)  Renewal application ..... 50.00 
(c)  Sheriff approval and/or background investigations (each) ..... 15.00 
(d)  Employee license ..... 50.00 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-116. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective occupations, business or professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, occupational therapists, or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state. 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state who practice nursing only. 
(3)  Barbers, cosmetologists and nail technicians who are duly licensed under the laws of the state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging and bodywork of the neck, face, scalp, feet, hands, and hair of the customer or client for cosmetic purposes. 
(4)  A "recognized school" as defined in section 22-101 of this article. 
(5)  Any person actively enrolled in and pursuing a course of study leading to a degree or certificate as a massage and bodywork therapist in an educational program in a "recognized school," not to exceed one year beyond the effective date of this article. 
(6)  None of the provisions of this article shall be construed so as to limit or prevent any person duly licensed under the laws of this state to practice the profession for which he or she was licensed. 
(7)  Persons licensed as a "home office" shall be exempt from requirements of section 22-102. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-117. - License required prior to advertising. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business without a valid spa/massage and bodywork therapy license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-118. - Minimum age of spa/massage and bodywork therapist. 
No spa/massage and bodywork therapy business or owner or operator shall employ or contract with, as a massage and bodywork therapist, a person under the age of 18 years or any person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-119. - Hours of operation. 
A spa/massage and bodywork therapy business shall be closed between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and closed on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-120. - Patrons not to administer massage and bodywork. 
No massage and bodywork business or employee, owner or operator thereof shall offer to permit, or permit, any patron to administer any act of massage and bodywork or reflexology to any person. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-121. - Price rates to be posted. 
Price rates for all services performed at a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective patrons. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-122. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed to be brought into or served, stored, kept, or consumed on the premises of a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-123. - Massage of specific anatomical areas prohibited. 
No owner, operator or employee shall intentionally touch or massage, or offer to touch or massage any specific anatomical region of any patron. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-124. - Patron coverings required. 
(a)  Each spa/massage and bodywork therapy business shall provide to each patron clean, sanitary and opaque coverings capable of covering the patron's specific anatomical regions. Reuse of such covering is prohibited unless the covering has been adequately cleaned. No massage and bodywork shall be administered unless the patron is covered by such covering of the specific anatomical regions. 
(b)  With the exception of bathrooms and dressing rooms, no spa/massage and bodywork therapy business, owner, operator or employee thereof shall permit any person within the spa/massage and bodywork therapy business unless the specified anatomical regions are covered. 
(c)  Opaque coverings shall not be required to be furnished to patrons receiving only reflexology therapy. Patrons receiving reflexology therapy shall not undress beyond the removal of shoes and socks. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-125. - Proper owner, operator, employee clothing required. 
Each owner, operator, and employee of a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business shall, while in the presence of another person, while on the premises of a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business, wear clothing of an opaque material, and it shall be unlawful for such person to fail to fully conceal his or her specific anatomical regions or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-126. - Compliance with laws and ordinances. 
No patron, owner, operator, or employee of a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business shall violate any federal, state or local law or ordinance while engaged in or carrying on any of the activities of massage and bodywork or reflexology as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-127. - Authority to inspect premises. 
Spa/massage and bodywork therapy businesses shall be open at reasonable times for inspection by county employees to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-128. - Minors as patrons unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is under the age of 18 years to become a patron of a spa/massage and bodywork therapy business unless such person possesses verified written permission from at least one parent or guardian, or is accompanied by at least one parent or guardian. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner, operator or employee of each spa/massage and bodywork therapy business to ensure that no person under the age of 18 years becomes a patron of the business unless such person possesses verified written permission from at least one parent or guardian or is accompanied by at least one parent or guardian. It shall be presumed that an owner, operator, or employee knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such owner, operator or employee asked for and was furnished photo identification issued by a governmental agency reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-129. - Proper diploma or certificate required. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee possessing a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school, only for the work or practice of reflexology, to engage in activities beyond those defined under reflexology herein. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-130. - Prohibited devices and preparations in reflexology. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee engaged in the activities of reflexology, to apply to any patron any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, hot packs or cold packs, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, water, liniments, oils, powder, creams, ointments, or other similar preparations. Antiseptics may be applied only to a patron's feet. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-131. - Prohibited businesses—Masseurs or massage parlors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any masseur or masseuse to massage any person in any building, structure, or place used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation, prostitution, or masturbation for hire. 
(b)  Activities in accordance with this article may be licensed, and physical therapy conducted by a licensed physical therapist or conducted under the supervision of licensed medical personnel is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-132. - Suspensions and revocations. 
If the sheriff of the county shall find that a spa/massage therapy business or a massage therapist is in violation of a law of the state or in violation of a law or resolution of the county and that the continued operation of the business would create a clear and present danger to the health, safety and general welfare and security of the county, the sheriff shall be empowered to seize and temporarily suspend the business license of the business. The sheriff shall deliver the business license to the business license director upon the next working day of the business license director. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall then schedule a special hearing of the board of commissioners to consider further action upon the order within five days of the date upon which the business license director received the business license from the sheriff. The commission may suspend or revoke the license for any one of the following reasons: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original or renewal application process. 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed the violation of this Code or the violation of laws of the state to occur on the premises. 
(3)  A licensee fails to maintain good moral character as defined herein. 
(4)  A licensee fails or refuses to provide consent for the county to obtain criminal history record information. 
(5)  A licensee fails to pay any fee or any other amount of money due to the county under this article or any other code section. 
(6)  Violations of any county codes or laws of the state that demonstrate the owner(s) further conducting the business would be a detriment to the community or surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 22-133. - Hearing on revocation of business license. 
(a)  When a matter is transmitted by business license director to the clerk of the board of commissioners for possible suspension or revocation, the chairman of the board of commissioners shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall make such investigations as it deems necessary and shall conduct the hearing as the chairman shall see fit. 
(b)  The licensee shall be notified in person or by mail at his business address of the date and time of the hearing. The licensee may appear in person or be represented by counsel. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of commissioners, based upon evidence submitted at the hearing, shall enter an order making a finding of fact and then: 
(1)  Find that the evidence does not authorize revocation or suspension; or 
(2)  Issue a warning to the licensee; or 
(3)  Suspend the business license and probate the suspension; or 
(4)  Revoke the business license and probate the revocation; or 
(5)  Suspend the business license; or 
(6)  Revoke the business license; or 
(7)  Take any other appropriate action regarding the license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2004) 
Secs. 22-134—22-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CANVASSERS, SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 8, 2015, repealed art. IV in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 22-400—22-414 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-15, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 11, 2015. 

Sec. 22-400. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the sale of goods and services by solicitation of residences and businesses in Banks County, and to prohibit criminal activity and abusive techniques utilized by canvassers or solicitors which would adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare of the people. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-401. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Applicant shall mean the person seeking a license or a permit. 
Canvasser shall mean one who offers one or more services or goods for sale to residents or one who seeks political support or inquiries as to issues of public opinion or sentiments. This term shall be interchangeable with "solicitor" and "peddler'' 
Canvassing shall mean travelling from place to place or door to door on foot or in a vehicle and offering to sell goods or services, or the seeking of political support or the act of inquiring as to issues of public opinion or sentiment. This term shall be interchangeable with soliciting and peddling. 
Goods shall mean any sort of personal property, including but not limited to brushes, vacuums, magazines, newspapers, luggage, house wares, electronics, computers, furniture, food, agricultural products, flowers, tools, clothing, decorative accessories, rugs, paintings, sculpture, dishes, and other types of wares and merchandise. 
License shall mean a business license. 
Peddler shall mean one who offers goods or merchandise for sale along the street or from door to door or house to house on behalf of a business, individual, vocation or occupation; one who engages in peddling. This term shall be interchangeable with "canvasser" and "solicitor." 
Peddling or to peddle shall mean travelling from place to place or door to door on foot or in a vehicle and exhibiting, offering to sell or selling goods or services to households, businesses or passers-by. It shall also mean travelling from place to place, door to door taking orders for the sale of goods or services for delivery at another time or place. The solicitation of orders combined with a separate transaction to make delivery to the purchaser as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed peddling. Visits by sales representatives pursuant to a previously arranged appointment with a specific business or person or as a part of an on-going business relationship shall not be deemed peddling. This term shall be interchangeable with "canvassing" and "soliciting." 
Permit shall mean the authorization by the Banks County Code Enforcement Officer granting a canvasser, peddler or solicitor permission to canvass, peddle or solicit in Banks County, and shall be referred to as a "solicitor's permit." 
Services mean the provisions of any sort of professional or trade service to another to include general maintenance, construction, painting, lawn service, house cleaning, mending, sharpening, motor repair, appliance repair, etc. 
Soliciting shall mean travelling from place to place or door to door on foot or in a vehicle and exhibiting, offering to sell or selling goods or services to households, businesses or passers-by or requesting contributions. This term shall be interchangeable with "canvassing" and "peddling." 
Solicitor shall mean one who offers one or more services or goods for sale to residents or requests contributions by either traveling from place to place or door to door on foot or in a vehicle. This term shall be interchangeable with "canvasser" and "peddler." 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-402. - General information. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation engaging or offering as a canvasser, solicitor, or peddler in person at residences and places of business in the unincorporated areas of the county, with or without the consent or invitation of the occupant, for the purpose of canvassing, soliciting, or peddling orders, sales, subscriptions, contributions, or conducting business of any kind, including giving away any goods or services shall be referred to as a solicitor. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation engaging or offering as a canvasser solicitor, or peddler in person at residences and places of business in the unincorporated areas of the county, with or without the consent or invitation of the occupant, for the purpose of canvassing, soliciting, or peddling orders, sales, subscriptions, contributions, or conducting business of any kind, including giving away any goods or services shall be required to obtain a permit, an identification badge, a business license, and a state peddler's license. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-403. - Registration, permit and license required. 
(a)  A solicitor prior to soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions, contributions, or conducting business of any kind, including giving away any goods or services in person at residences and places of business in the unincorporated areas of the county without the consent or invitation of the occupant shall: 
(1)  Be 18 years of age at the time of application; 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or a legal alien; 
(3)  File an application for a permit with the code enforcement officer; 
(4)  Obtain a business license from the code enforcement officer or be the agent or employee of a firm, or individual with a valid business license. 
(b)  Persons requesting permits for soliciting door to door in private residential areas, shall be required to produce information on each vehicle(s) being used, including at least two photos of each vehicle (front/side view and rear/side view which photographs the vehicle license plate. This information will be provided to the Banks County Sheriff's Office. 
(c)  Each individual person must obtain a permit, to include those persons driving for the person performing the actual soliciting or peddling. 
(d)  Any individual working as an employee of a business may apply for a permit using the owner's business license, but must show proof of employment from the owner of the business and have written permission from the owner to apply for a permit. Proof of employment shall be two current pay check stubs, or evidence of an employment agreement. 
(e)  An independent contractor (persons independently employed or receiving 1099 forms instead of a W-2 form) must apply for a separate permit and business license. 
(f)  All application for permits must include at a minimum the following information and shall be signed by the applicant: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Social security number; 
(4)  Physical description; 
(5)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer; 
(6)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's supervisor; 
(7)  Brief description of products or services to be sold; 
(8)  Description of motor vehicles to be used by the applicant in conducting the canvassing or solicitation; 
(9)  Criminal history; 
(10)  Photocopy of driver's license or other official photo identification of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-404. - Peddler's license requirements. 
In addition to the requirements of this article, peddlers as defined by state law must first obtain a license from the Probate Court of Banks County under the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. The requirements of that statute are separate from this article and obtaining that license shall not satisfy the requirements of this article. The applicant is responsible for payment of any fees for a state peddler's license. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-405. - Fees. 
(a)  The fee for a solicitor's permit shall be $100.00 for each permit. This fee includes the application, background investigation, copy of the solicitation code and an ID badge. 
(b)  Permits for residential solicitation will be issued for a period of two weeks only and may be renewed only once during the calendar year, providing no complaints have been received. 
(c)  A renewal fee shall be $50.00. 
(d)  Fees are nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-406. - Authorization of permit. 
A permit shall be granted or refused after an investigation of the applicant and any canvassers, solicitors peddlers named in the application. 
(1)  Upon approval of the application and issuance of a permit to canvass, solicit, or peddle, an identification badge will be issued to the applicant. 
(2)  Each solicitor must wear the identification badge issued by the code enforcement officer at all times while, canvassing, soliciting or peddling is underway; and show other photo identification if requested by any citizen, homeowner, resident or law enforcement personnel. 
(3)  Permits shall be displayed at the request of any citizen or law enforcement personnel. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail or refuse to display a permit or official identification badge when requested. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-407. - Investigation and background check. 
(a)  A background investigation to review the criminal history records of the applicant is required prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(b)  Two forms of positive identification are required of the applicant. 
(c)  Fingerprints of the applicant shall be taken by the sheriff's office for identification and background check purposes. Applicant is responsible for fingerprint charges. 
(d)  The criminal history record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of criminal history records, the application shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-408. - Disqualification and denial of permit. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued to any applicant who provides any false or misleading information in connection with the application required by this article. 
(b)  No permit or badge shall be issued to any applicant for canvassing or solicitation under the age of 18 or who shall have been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contender for any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, or has pending a charge involving the elements of assault and battery, or any civil judgment involving unethical or improper business actions, including but not limited to actions which would constitute fraud and deceit under the laws of the state, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against a person or property, any crime of possession or sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses or attempts to commit any of these listed offenses. 
(c)  If, as a result of the investigation authorized by this article, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the code enforcement officer shall endorse on such application his disapproval and the reasons for such denial, and shall notify the applicant that the application is denied. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-409. - Approval and issuance of permit. 
(a)  If, as a result of the investigation authorized by this article, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found to be satisfactory, the code enforcement officer shall endorse on such application his approval and reasons for such approval, who shall, upon payment of regulatory fees as established issue a solicitor's permit. 
(b)  A solicitor's permit shall contain the name, address, physical description and organizational affiliation of the permit; a description of the solicitation activity to be engaged in; an expiration date; and the signature of the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer shall keep a record of all solicitors' permits issued. 
(c)  A solicitor's permit will be issued a minimum of ten days after initial application is made for a permit, in order to give time for processing, investigation and ID badge preparation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-410. - Exemption from obtaining permit. 
(a)  Persons, business and organizations exempted from local regulation by operation of state or federal law or by the Constitution of the United States, or of the state, are exempt from the requirements of this article; 
(b)  Bona fide charitable organizations tax exempt under section 501(C)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code are exempt from the requirements of this chapter unless so noted elsewhere; 
(c)  Bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations whose field sales representatives are under the age of 18 years are not required to obtain a solicitor's permit; 
(d)  Solicitors for nonprofit organizations who are regularly enrolled in a public or private school in Banks County shall not be required to obtain identification badges or a solicitor's permit; 
(e)  Persons engaging in political canvassing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-411. - Regulations for canvassers, solicitors and peddlers. 
(a)  Solicitors may only make one solicitation call at the same location/address for each individual business within any consecutive six month period, unless specifically invited back by the homeowner/occupant. 
(b)  Solicitors must inform homeowner/resident immediately in English in understandable terms the purpose for the solicitation. 
(c)  Solicitors may not represent the solicitor is participating in any contest, game or other competitive endeavor, or offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game or endeavor. 
(d)  Solicitors may not use vulgar, insulting or threatening language in the course of any solicitation. 
(e)  Solicitors may not remain on any part of the property of the residence after the occupant has verbally indicated for the solicitor to leave or a refusal to make a purchase. 
(f)  Solicitors may not lend, rent, or sell their permit to another person or business, or use the permit of another solicitor, except as provided in [section] 22-403(d). 
(g)  Door to door solicitation in residential communities or neighborhoods may occur only during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. No solicitation is allowed on Sundays or holidays. 
(h)  Only one solicitor may go to any one residence at a time, unless more are invited back by the homeowner/resident. 
(i)  Solicitors may not solicit from anyone under the age of 18 or request entrance into a private residence from anyone under the age of 18. 
(j)  Solicitors may not enter private residences unless specifically invited by the homeowner/resident who is at least 18 years of age. 
(k)  Solicitors may only use the main or front entrance of the residence. 
(l)  Solicitors must respect all "no solicitation" signs, if there is a sign prohibiting solicitation at the entrance to a community, subdivision, business or residence. 
(m)  Solicitors may not approach a homeowner, resident or occupant when the homeowner, resident or occupant is in the yard where a "no solicitation" sign prohibiting solicitation in a community or subdivision, business or residence is posted. 
(n)  Solicitors may not touch or in any way attach any information to the homeowner, resident or occupant's mailbox, paperbox, or mailbox post, or to the entrance door or residence porch, porch columns, railings, or wall of the residence. 
(o)  Solicitors may not throw, lay, or in any way toss items into a private business, homeowner, or resident's yard or in any other way "litter." 
(p)  Solicitors shall not engage in any aggressive or intimidating sales or solicitation practices, and such will not be tolerated. 
(q)  Soliciting at commercial businesses shall be allowed only if the owner or duly authorized agent agrees in writing for solicitation on the business premises. 
(r)  If a complaint is registered against a solicitor soliciting in a residential area of Banks County, all permits for the group or business may be revoked immediately by the Banks County Code Enforcement Officer after investigation of such complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-412. - Regulations for solicitation on streets/highways/rights-of-way. 
(a)  Soliciting on streets/highways/rights of way is permitted only for non-profit and/or charitable organizations with a current valid business license registered with Banks County (unless exempt under Banks County Business License regulations). 
(b)  Soliciting on streets/highways/rights-of-way will only be allowed Monday through Fridays and only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(c)  Deleted. 
(d)  Based on public safety concerns, one person for each intersecting point shall be allowed to solicit on streets/highways/rights-of-way. 
(e)  Any one group or business will be limited to five days each year to solicit on streets/highways/rights of way in Banks County. 
(f)  Solicitors on streets/highways/rights of way shall not engage in any aggressive or intimidating sales or solicitation practices, and such will not be tolerated. 
(g)  If a complaint is received against any person or persons soliciting on a street/highway/rights of way, all permits for the group or business may be revoked by the code enforcement officer after investigation of the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-413. - Due process. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership who believes he/she has been denied due process of law under this article shall be entitled to a hearing upon written appeal to the board of commissioners which appeal shall allege denial of due process. Unless such hearing is requested within five working days after the alleged denial of due process, such person shall be presumed to have accepted summary process. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 22-414. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any of the above regulations may have its solicitor's permit revoked by the Banks County Code Enforcement Officer upon investigation of the alleged violation. 
(b)  Persons canvassing, soliciting or peddling without a permit or in violation of the permit shall be issued a citation punishable as set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this article as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Banks County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Code of Banks County, Georgia, section 1-11 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(d)  The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be conducted by the Banks County Code Enforcement Officer or the Sheriff/Deputy Sherriff of Banks County. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting [the State of] Georgia or the United States, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code, or any portion thereof, where: (a) the emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; (b) such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and (c) such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and the county building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six [months] in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2002-25, § 1, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 26-2. - Definitions. 
Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a co declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six months the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2002-25, § 2, 12-10-2002) 
Secs. 26-3—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

DIVISION 1. - AUTHORIZING THE SUSPENSION OF PORTIONS OF THE CODE OR ORDINANCES AND OTHER FORMALITIES DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 26-31. - Definition. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin"… "These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services; police services [public safety]; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; [nuclear power] plant protection; temporary restoration of public service utility services: and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions." (Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, as Amended December 1992, Chapter 3, Article 1, 38-3-3.) 
(Res. No. 2002-28, § I, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 26-32. - Local organization for emergency management. 
In cases where a county has an organization for emergency management, such organization shall include participation by each city within the county unless the governing authority of any particular city elects to implement its own organization for emergency management. Any two or more of the above-mentioned political subdivisions may, with the approval of the director, contract with each other so as to form one emergency management organization for the entire area included in the bounds of the contracting political subdivisions. The executive officer or governing body of the political subdivision is authorized to nominate a local director to the director of emergency management who shall have the authority to make the appointment." Upon appointment, the local emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the executive officer or governing body and shall serve at the pleasure of such executive officer or governing body. The local director shall: 
•  Maintain an emergency management office in a building owned or leased by the political subdivision and the director or designee shall be available or on call at all times beyond working hours. 
•  Develop, in conjunction with public and private agencies/organizations that have responsibility for designated emergency support functions, plans for responding to and recovering from disasters [and/or emergencies]. 
•  Respond to emergency scenes, command posts, and operation centers. 
•  Coordinate emergency response of public and private agencies and organizations. 
•  Attend training and meetings convened by the appointing authority or the (state emergency management) director. 
•  Develop or cause to be developed, in collaboration with other public and private agencies within the state, mutual aid arrangements, consistent with state plans and programs, for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in case of emergency or disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted. 
•  Enter into mutual aid agreements, subject to approval of the governor, with emergency management agencies or organizations in other states for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in case of emergency or disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted ([O.C.G.A.,] Chapter 3, Article 3, §§ 38-3-27 and 38-3-29.) 
(Res. No. 2002-28, § II, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 26-33. - Local emergency management powers. 
Each political subdivision shall have the emergency management power and authority to: 
Appropriate and expend funds; execute contracts; obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies; provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to victims; direct and coordinate development of local emergency management plans and programs in accordance with federal and state policies and plans; appoint, employ, remove or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts; and acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease or otherwise [identify] sites required for installation of temporary housing units and prepare or equip such sites. ([O.C.G.A., Chapter 3, Article 2, § 38-3-27.) 
(Res. No. 2002-28, § III, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 26-34. - Local emergency management financial assistance. 
A county or municipality shall be entitled to receive [federal disaster] funds if the local emergency management organization has met all state and federal requirements to receive such funds. Qualifications include: legal establishment of an emergency management organization by local ordinance or resolution; a legally appointed local director who has been endorsed and appointed by the [State of] Georgia Emergency Management Director; an approved emergency and disaster plan with all applicable annexes [emergency support functions]; and an approved fiscal year program and other necessary compliance documents. (O.C.G.A., Chapter 3, Article 2, § 38-3-27.) 
(Res. No. 2002-28, § IV, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 26-35. - Immunity of state and political subdivisions. 
Neither the state nor any political subdivision of the state, nor the agents or representatives of the state or any political subdivision thereof, shall be liable for personal injury or property damage sustained by any person appointed or acting as a volunteer emergency management worker or member of any agency engaged in emergency management activity. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. ([O.C.G.A.], Chapter 3, Article 2, § 38-3-35.) 
(Res. No. 2002-28, § V, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 26-36. - Local emergency management agency plan. 
The Banks County Emergency Management Agency has developed, in partnership with local government and community agencies/organizations which have primary responsibility for emergency support functions, an approved emergency management plan. A copy of this plan and/or major revisions are being submitted to the [State of] Georgia Emergency Management Agency by the local emergency management agency director, in coordination with the undersigned local government officials or legally appointed successors. It is understood that the [State of] Georgia Emergency Management Agency will review this plan for compliance with all federal and state requirements. 
As authorized local government officials, we understand and agree to the requirements of the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, amended, December 1992, as stated in this article. 
(Res. No. 2002-28, § VI, 12-10-2002) 
DIVISION 2. - OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS, MATERIALS, SERVICES AND HOUSING DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY—PROHIBITED 

Sec. 26-37. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Ord. No. 2002-24, § 1, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 26-38. - Definitions. 
(a)  Overcharging. The term "overcharging" is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
(b)  State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(c)  Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2002-24, § 2, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 26-39. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this article upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-24, § 3, 12-10-2002) 
DIVISION 3 - CURFEWS DURING TIMES OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses, ch. 54. 

Sec. 26-40. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of Banks County. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, § 1, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 26-41. - Definitions. 
(a)  Curfew. A "curfew" is a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this article from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
(b)  Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, "exempt individuals" include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to Banks County Ordinance No. 2002-26 ("Ordinance to Require Registration and Licensing of Building and Repair Services During a State of Emergency"), performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
(c)  State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, § 2, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 26-42. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated Banks County during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, § 3, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 26-43. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, § 4, 12-10-2002) 
Secs. 26-44—26-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY 911 SYSTEM[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 911 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq.; authority to provide ambulance and emergency rescue services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); restrictions on operation, installation, maintenance, etc. of electronic security systems by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; emergency medical services, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq.; standards for ambulances, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-34; emergency vehicle equipment, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-90 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-61. - Reaffirmation of necessity for system. 
The board of commissioners reaffirms the necessity for the emergency 911 system for Banks County, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 95-2, § 1, 2-14-1995) 
Sec. 26-62. - Necessity for charges. 
The board of commissioners affirms the necessity for a monthly 911 charge on each exchange access facility subscribed to by a telephone subscriber in areas served by the county 911 service. 
(Res. No. 95-2, § 2, 2-14-1995) 
Sec. 26-63. - Monthly charge. 
The 911 charge shall be $1.50 per month per exchange access facility provided to the telephone subscriber. 
(Res. No. 95-2, § 3, 2-14-1995) 
Sec. 26-64. - Wireless enhanced 911 charge. 
A wireless enhanced 911 charge is imposed upon each wireless telecommunications connection subscribed to by subscribers whose billing address is within the jurisdiction of the county at the rate of $1.00 per month per wireless connection provided to each telephone subscriber. 
(Res. No. 98-16, 9-18-1998) 
Sec. 26-65. - Collection. 
Each service supplier shall, on behalf of the county, collect the 911 charge from those telephone subscribers to whom it provides exchange telephone service in the area served by the county emergency 911 system. 
(Res. No. 95-2, § 4, 2-14-1995) 
Secs. 26-66—26-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 26-81. - Overseeing authority; members. 
(a)  The county E-911 advisory board overseeing authority will be the county board of commissioners. 
(b)  The county E-911 advisory board voting members will consist of the following: the county E-911 director or appointee; the county sheriff or appointee; the county Fire/EMS chief or appointee; the county EMA director or appointee; the county planning commission director or appointee; the Homer fire chief or appointee; the Baldwin fire chief or appointee; the Baldwin chief of police or appointee; the Maysville chief of police or appointee; Maysville fire chief or appointee; the department of natural resources law enforcement official; and a state forestry area ranger or appointee. 
(c)  A quorum of the advisory board shall be a majority of the membership. No business shall be conducted by the advisory board unless the quorum is present. 
(d)  Guest speakers will be permitted to attend if proper notice is given and the topic directly relates to an emergency system or need. No guest will be allowed to vote on any topic. 
(e)  The advisory board shall hold regular quarterly meetings at 2:00 p.m. on the second Monday of every third month following October 8, 2001. The meetings will be held at the county fire administrative offices training room. The meetings will not be held unless the quorum is present and quarterly meeting dates may be changed by a vote from the quorum. Special called meetings may be necessary from time to time and may be called by the chairman or a majority of the board. All recommendations shall be sent directly to the county board of commissioner's and county E-911 director. 
(f)  On the first meeting of the county E-911 advisory board the members will elect a chairman for the meetings and a secretary. 
(g)  The duties of the advisory board include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Review and analyze the progress by public safety agencies in the continued development of the 911 and central communications systems; 
(2)  Recommend steps of action to affect the necessary coordination, regulation and development of the 911 system; 
(3)  Identify and/or review mutual aid agreements necessary to the operation of the 911 system; 
(4)  Assist in the promulgation of necessary rules, regulations, and operating procedures necessary to notify various agencies that an emergency exists and ensure proper response, and any other such policy as shall be deemed necessary and appropriate; 
(5)  Act as a quality assurance board in the management and operation of the central dispatch center; 
(6)  Make recommendations concerning equipment and coordinate the acquisition of appropriate radio equipment for all users to ensure compatibility with the system as a whole. 
(Res. of 10-5-2001) 
Chapter 30 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 26; offenses, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts established, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I; O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1; magistrate courts generally, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; state courts of counties, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-1 et seq.; probate courts generally, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-1 et seq.; compensation of probate court judges and clerks for certain services, O.C.G.A. § 15-1-12; probate court's appellate jurisdiction over judgment of probate and magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-8(3); jurisdiction of municipal courts and magistrate courts to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 30-1. - Magistrate court's jurisdiction; citations; penalty. 
Violations of ordinances and resolutions of the county shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county upon citations issued by the county or by any agent from time to time designated by the county to issue citations on its behalf for ordinance and resolution violations. 
(Res. No. 97-3, § 1, 4-15-1997) 
Sec. 30-2. - Truancy. 
The county commissioners and county board of education hereby authorize the magistrate court of the county to handle truant cases and levy fines against parents who keep their children out of school without valid reason. 
(Res. No. 94-2, 1-12-1994) 
Sec. 30-3. - Agents for the county for issuance of citations. 
(a)  The county marshal, sheriff, sheriffs deputy, zoning administrative officer, and building inspection officer for the county are hereby designated as agents of the county for the purpose of issuing citations for the violation of any ordinance or resolution of the county, except as set forth in [subsection] (b) below; and 
(b)  The county fire chief, county deputy fire chief, county fire marshal, or deputy county fire marshal, are hereby designated as agents of the county for the purpose of issuing citations for the violation of any ordinance or resolution of the county relating to fire or fire safety or burning or fire prevention and protection. 
(Res. No. 97-3, § 2, 4-15-1997; Res. No. 2014-05 , § 1, 4-8-2014) 
Sec. 30-4. - Penalty. 
Violations of county ordinances and resolutions may be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Res. No. 97-3, § 3, 4-15-1997) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes, ch. 50; planning, ch. 58; roads and bridges, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A; environmental conservation districts, app. A, § 1501 et seq. 
State Law reference— Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17; minimum standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; permits for land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-7, 12-7-9; stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-14; Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-09 , §§ I—X, adopted June 12, 2018, repealed the former art. II, §§ 34-30—34-39, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control and derived from Ord. No. 2004-14, § 1(Exh. A), adopted June 24, 2004. 

Sec. 34-30. - Title. 
This article will be known as "Banks County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, § I, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) . These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board. The board of natural resources. 
Buffer. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands. Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission. The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC. Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional. A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director. The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District. The Broad River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division. The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. § Ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 34-33(c) of this article. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 34-32(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority. The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI. A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT. A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator. The party or parties that have: (A) Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall. The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased. Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Broad River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code section 12-5-30. 
State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, § O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov . Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § II, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-32. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 34.33(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1)—(10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § III, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-33. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions . Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this ordinance shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 34-33(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES General Permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs . 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in section 34-33(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land- disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection (c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 34-33(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 34-33(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § IV, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-34. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General . The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements . 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Banks County without first obtaining a permit from the Banks County Planning Department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the banks county planning department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 34-34(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 34-33(b) and (c) of this ordinance will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 34-33(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 34-35(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements . 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 34-34(b) and (c) of this ordinance, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this ordinance. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits . 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 34-33(c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 34-34(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § V, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-35. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The planning department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The planning department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § VI, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-36. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity . If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders . 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this ordinance, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture . If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 34-34(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties . 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this ordinance under county ordinances approved under this ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § VII, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-37. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § VIII, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-38. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies . The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the board of commissioners within ten days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review . Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Banks County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § IX, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-39. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this ordinance, nor the compliance with provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this ordinance shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § X, 6-12-2018) 
Secs. 34-40—34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATERSHED PROTECTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Environmental conservation districts, app. A, art. XV. 

Sec. 34-61. - Findings and objectives. 
The Mountain Creek Reservoir (SCS Structure 11) is located in the county and owned by the county. The reservoir is a soil conservation service rural water supply structure, and water is supplied to the county based on storage between specified elevations. The Grove Creek Reservoir is located in the county and owned by the City of Commerce. The reservoir is a soil conservation service flood control structure, and water is supplied to the City of Commerce based on storage between specified elevations. The purpose of this watershed protection plan is to establish criteria pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 for the protection of drinking water watersheds. This protection is necessary for the enhancement of public health, safety and welfare as well as to assure that surface sources of drinking water are of high quality in order to be treated to meet all state and federal drinking water standards. The criteria set forth accomplish this by establishing buffer zones around streams and by specifying allowable impervious surface densities within the identified watersheds. Secondary objectives are to: 
(1)  Manage the reservoir and its drainage area in a manner that will conserve the basic resources of air, soil, and water. 
(2)  Provide for diverse and viable plant, animal, and fish communities. 
(3)  Give special consideration for the protection of threatened and endangered plant and animal species. 
(4)  Manage the reservoir to properly establish, enhance, and maintain acceptable fish and wildlife habitat, aesthetic quality, and sustain natural environmental conditions. 
(5)  Manage use of the reservoir in a manner that provides the least environmental impact. 
(6)  Provide for the protection of public land and water. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, § I, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 34-62. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this watershed protection plan, certain words or terms used in this article are defined as follows: 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. Buffer setbacks are specified in sections 34-65 and 34-66. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas and other setback areas specified in sections 34-65 and 34-66. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface which prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. No impervious surface areas are allowed within the reservoir buffer area as specified in subsection 34-66. 
Land disturbing activity means any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; and any construction, rebuilding, or alteration of a structure. Land disturbing activity shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single-family residence, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Perennial stream means a stream which flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGS Quad map. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by the county. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
Water supply watershed protection plan means a land use plan prepared and adopted by the county for the protection of the quality of drinking water obtained from the water supply watershed. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, § II, 3-10-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-63. - Coverage area. 
The criteria of this article shall apply to all governments located within the Grove Creek Watershed and the Mountain Creek Watershed. The criteria of this article do not apply to watersheds not used for public drinking water supply. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, § III, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 34-64. - Exemptions. 
The following activities shall be exempt from the plan: Utilities from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provision of the watershed protection plan in accordance with the following conditions if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas: 
(1)  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible. 
(2)  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
(3)  The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, § IV, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 34-65. - Minimum criteria. 
Grove Creek Watershed and the Mountain Creek Watershed are classified as small water supply watersheds. A small water supply watershed is one that contains less than 100 square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. Grove Creek Watershed and the Mountain Creek Watershed contain less than 100 square miles of drainage area upstream of the raw water intakes. Stream corridor criteria shall be as follows: 
(1)  The perennial stream corridors of a small water supply watershed within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir are protected by the following criteria: 
a.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
c.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the setback area of subsection (1)b of this section. 
(2)  The perennial stream corridors within a small water supply watershed and outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir are protected by the following criteria: 
a.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
c.  Septic tanks and septic tanks drain fields are prohibited in the setback areas of subsection (2)b of this section. 
(3)  The following criteria apply at all locations in a small water supply watershed: 
a.  No sanitary landfills are allowed in the drainage area of the reservoirs. 
b.  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
c.  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to 12 percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. Determination of compliance, shall be made by the county zoning administrator by comparison of proposed development impervious area and existing open space of the reservoir drainage area. The total impervious area ration shall be calculated at time of adoption of this article and maintained in the office of the zoning administrator. 
d.  All permitted and acceptable land disturbing activities will be vegetated or revegetated immediately with appropriate grasses or legumes. 
e.  Harvesting of forest products will be performed in accordance with a harvesting plan agreed to by the state forestry commission and an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by the soil conservation service. 
f.  Forestry management within the drainage areas will follow the state forestry commission's Best Management Practice Guidelines for Streamside Management Zones, Stream Crossings, Access Roads and Their Construction, Timber Harvesting, Site Preparation, Reforestation and Forest Protection (Prescribed Burning, Firelines, and Chemical Fire Retardant). 
g.  No new commercial livestock operations will be allowed in the drainage areas. Commercial livestock operation is defined as a private or public entity in which livestock are raised for the sole purpose of selling, trading or bartering the livestock or its byproducts to the marketplace and the gross revenue of such operations is greater than $5,000.00 per calendar year. Present operations will be allowed to continue only at their present production levels. Agricultural activity shall comply with Georgia Pesticide Act of 1976, Georgia Pesticide and Use Act of 1976, and Georgia Laws 1982, House Bill 1780, (O.C.G.A. § 2-1-4). 
h.  No new land application of animal waste will be allowed without approved nutrient management plan. Such plan will be prepared by either the soil conservation service or the UGA Cooperative Extension Service. 
i.  Broad use of chemical agents such as pesticides are prohibited. Use of pesticides shall be in accordance with Georgia Pesticide Act of 1976, Georgia Pesticide and Use Act of 1976, and Georgia Laws 1982, House Bill 1780, (O.C.G.A. § 2-1-4). Fires or burning on the shoreline are not authorized regardless of the lake level. 
j.  Lot sizes within 1,000 feet of the reservoir pool will be no less than two acres and contain only single-family housing units. Commercial and industrial developments shall be restricted to a lot size minimum of five acres within the defined drainage area of the reservoir. 
k.  Permitting for activities in the watershed will be governed by the watershed protection criteria of this section, administered by the county planning commission. It shall be the responsibility of every land user, developer or builder to present plans for land use alternations within the drainage areas to the county planning commission for review and approval. Plans for commercial projects shall bear a stamp by a state registered engineer and shall include at a minimum the calculated total impervious area and shall have a detention/retention pond to control stormwater runoff from the site. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, § V, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 34-66. - Reservoir management for Grove Creek Reservoir. 
The reservoir management plan for Grove Creek Reservoir is attached as appendix A, article XV. The Grove Creek-RMP is maintained by the City of Commerce. The City of Commerce has adopted a management plan and is made a part of the county watershed protection plan by reference hereto. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, § VI, 3-10-1998) 
Editor's note— The Grove Creek Reservoir Management Plan has been omitted from this codification. An official copy of such plan is on file in the office of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 34-67. - Reservoir management plan for Mountain Creek Reservoir. 
The 50.0 acre Mountain Creek Reservoir was constructed in 1993 as a Rural Water Supply project by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service (USDA SCS). The county maintains the reservoir. The reservoir shall be governed by a management plan which addresses the recreational use of the reservoir and the maintenance of the buffer around the reservoir. 
(1)  Recreational uses. The following recreational uses are either prohibited or restricted to protect the water quality of the reservoir for drinking purposes while optimizing its recreational benefits. Public recreation is not a purpose of the reservoir and such recreation is not encouraged: 
a.  Swimming is prohibited. 
b.  Fishing is allowed. 
c.  Boating will be limited to electric, wind and manual boats only. 
d.  No floating facilities of any type will be allowed on the reservoir pool. 
e.  Boat docks or similar facilities are prohibited. Existing docks, connecting ramps or boat launch ramps may continue to exist without further improvements or enlargements. 
f.  Public access is not provided other than those existing legal rights-of-way. 
g.  No special events permits will be issued. 
h.  No private shoreline use permits will be issued. 
(2)  Buffer requirements. A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 150 feet from the normal pool elevation (985 feet above mean sea level) of the reservoir. Should questions concerning the normal pool elevation arise, it shall be resolved by an engineering survey on a case by case basis. The 150-foot buffer shall not be disturbed nor be encroached on by any impervious development. 
(3)  Reservoir monitoring. The county will be responsible for the management of recreational uses and the buffer requirements as defined in the watershed protection plan. The county shall be responsible for the monitoring of the water quality of the watershed. The city shall establish a monitoring plan as follows: 
a.  General inspection of the Mountain Creek Watershed annually to monitor urban and rural development. 
b.  Aerial inspection of the Mountain Creek Watershed once every three years to monitor urban and rural development. 
c.  Establishment of three water quality monitoring points along the perennial streams feeding the reservoir in coordination with GA-DNR-EPD Water Quality Program. 
d.  Sampling of water samples from the three monitoring points will be coordinated between the county and EPID for report scheduling and parameters with copies of such report filed with the EPID Water Resources Program. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, § VII, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 34-68. - Enforcement. 
Violations of the criteria set forth in this article for protecting the water quality of the Grove Creek and Mountain Creek shall be enforced by the county, assigns or duly authorized agents. All incidents of littering, water pollution, or infringement of the buffer zone or any other act which threatens water quality, shall be punishable by the maximum fine of $1,000.00 allowed by law in the magistrate court pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. This is in addition to any other punishment provided by other local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, § VIII, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 34-69. - Connection to water system. 
Developments shall be prohibited from connecting to the county water system if the development will cause development of the floodplain by placing fill or a structure in the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 2003-29, § 1, 8-12-2003) 
Secs. 34-70—34-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER CONSERVATION PLAN 

Sec. 34-85. - Adopted. 
The Banks County hereby adopts the Water Conservation Plan attached hereto as exhibit "A" and by reference made a part hereof, including, without limitation, the State of Georgia Water Conservation Law of 1991, as amended. 
(Res. No. 2001-26, § 1, 8-31-2001) 
Editor's note— The Banks County Water Conservation Plan (Exhibit "A") is attached to Res. No. 2001-26. An official copy of such plan is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; local fire safety standards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; false fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23; smoke detector requirements, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; following fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247; Georgia Fire Sprinkler Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 38-31. - Established. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 5-3-4, the board of commissioners (the board) hereby organizes and establishes a fire department for the unincorporated areas of the county for the following: 
(1)  Protection of life and property against fires, explosions, hazardous materials, or electrical hazards; 
(2)  Detection and prevention of arson; 
(3)  Administration and enforcement of the laws of this state; the rules and regulations adopted by the board as related to the prevention and suppression of fires, explosions, or injuries from hazardous materials and the protection of life and property from such hazards; 
(4)  Conducting programs of public education and fire prevention and safety; 
(5)  Conducting emergency medical services and rescue assistance subject O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq.; 
(6)  Control and regulation of the flow of traffic in existing areas of existing emergencies, including rail, highway, water and air; 
(7)  To take the actions as outlined in O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq. necessary for the protection and preservation of life and/or property; 
(8)  Adoption of any and all other rules and regulations necessary to the protection of the citizens of the county in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § I, 11-12-1996) 
Sec. 38-32. - Appointment of fire chief; duties. 
The board of commissioners may appoint a fire chief, delegate his duties and responsibilities, and determine his compensation and term of employment. Notwithstanding such appointment, the fire chief shall serve at the pleasure of the board, supervise the activities of the county fire department, and perform such other duties as directed by the board. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § II, 11-12-1996) 
Sec. 38-33. - Contracting for services. 
Notwithstanding section 38-31, the board of commissioners may contract with various municipalities for fire protection in certain unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § III, 11-12-1996) 
Sec. 38-34. - Qualification of members of department. 
All members of the county fire department shall meet the qualifications of the Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act. All candidates for membership in the county fire department shall submit an application for membership and all candidates must be approved by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § IV, 11-12-1996) 
Sec. 38-35. - Volunteer fire stations. 
The volunteer fire stations now in existence in the unincorporated areas of the county will not receive any additional funding for the operation of such fire stations. The county shall not assume any existing obligations or liabilities of the volunteer fire stations unless the board specifically assumes such obligations and liabilities in writing. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § V, 11-12-1996) 
Sec. 38-36. - Prohibited burning; exceptions. 
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning at any place in the unincorporated areas of the county except as follows: 
(1)  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops; 
(2)  The burning over of any forest land by the owners of such land; 
(3)  For recreational purposes or cooking food for immediate human consumption; 
(4)  Fires set for purposes of training firefighting personnel when authorized by the appropriate governmental entity and the guidelines set forth by the fire marshal are strictly observed; 
(5)  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame-making equipment; 
(6)  Setting and maintenance by contractors and tradesman of miscellaneous small fires necessary to such activities as street paving work, and installation or repair of utilities, provided that such fires are kept small in size, that no smoke emissions exceed 40 percent opacity, and that local ordinances and regulations do not prohibit such actions; 
(7)  Disposal of all packing materials previously containing explosives, in accordance with U.S. Department of Labor Safety regulations. 
(Res. No. 2013-15, § 1, 9-10-2013) 
Sec. 38-37. - Permitted burning. 
The following shall be permitted if adequate disposal facilities for the particular combustible materials involved are not reasonably available: 
(1)  Reduction of leaves on the premises on which they fall by the person in control of the premises; 
(2)  Destruction of combustible demolition or construction materials either on sight or transported to a burning facility approved by the fire marshal; 
(3)  Disposal of tree limbs from storm damage; 
(4)  For weed abatement, disease, and pest prevention; 
(5)  Open burning in other than predominately residential areas for the purpose of land clearing or construction or right-of-way maintenance provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Prevailing winds at the time of the burning are away from the major portion of the area's population; 
b.  The location of the burning is at least 1,000 feet from any dwelling located in a predominately residential area; 
c.  The amount of dirt on or in the material being burned is minimized; 
d.  Heavy oils, asphaltic materials, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any materials other than plant growth are not being burned; 
e.  Not more than one pile 60 feet by 60 feet, or equivalent, is being burned within a nine-acre area at one time; provided, however, that in no event shall the open burning of more than 100 cubic yards per day of material described in subsection (5) of this section be permitted unless the person performing such burning shall have first given two days' written notice of the time and place of such burning to the fire marshal. 
(Res. No. 2013-15, § 1, 9-10-2013) 
Sec. 38-38. - Prohibited smoke. 
Except for a reasonable period to get a fire started, no smoke of a shade darker than a #2 of the Ringelmann Chart, or equivalent opacity, shall be emitted by any source of open burning listed in subsections 38-37(1) and (2). 
(Res. No. 2013-15, § 1, 9-10-2013) 
Sec. 38-39. - Open burning during air pollution episodes. 
During an air pollution episode declared by the proper authorities, no open burning of any kind shall be permitted unless open burning is required in the performance of an official duty of any public office, or a fire is necessary to thwart or prevent a hazard which cannot be properly managed by any other means, or is necessary for the protection of public health. 
(Res. No. 2013-15, § 1, 9-10-2013) 
Sec. 38-40. - Open burning regulations. 
The following regulations shall apply to open burning which is authorized in the unincorporated areas of the county: 
(1)  No person shall kindle or maintain an open fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained without a permit or other proper authorization. 
(2)  No person shall kindle or maintain an open fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any private land unless: 
a.  The location is not less than 50 feet from any structure and adequate provision is made to prevent fire from spreading within 50 feet of any structure; or 
b.  The fire is contained in an approved waste burner located safely not less than 15 feet from any structure. 
(3)  Open fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such fire is extinguished. Such person shall have a garden hose connected to the water supply, or other fire extinguishing equipment, readily available for use. 
(4)  The fire marshal may further regulate or prohibit any or all open burning when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous and may determine whether a permit is required or otherwise give authorization for open burning authorized by sections 38-36 and 38-37. 
(Res. No. 2013-15, § 1, 9-10-2013) 
Sec. 38-41. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate Court of Banks County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Banks County, Georgia for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. No. 2013-15, § 1, 9-10-2013) 
Secs. 38-42—38-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUTUAL AID PACT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq. 

Sec. 38-61. - Participation in mutual aid pact. 
(a)  The county resolves to provide the best possible protection to its citizens in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 25-6-1—25-6-11. In order to maximize the saving of life and property when disastrous incidents occur, the county resolves to join the Georgia Mutual Aid Resources Pact as provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1 et seq. 
(b)  The county may withdraw its membership by delivering written notice to an officer of the pact given 90 days' notice. 
(c)  There shall be no liability imposed on the county for any action or failure to act as a party of the Georgia Mutual Aid Resource Pact. 
(Res. No. 2001-01, § 6, 1-9-2001) 
Chapter 42 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes, ch. 50; planning, ch. 58; roads and bridges, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq.; Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-11, arts. 1—6, adopted July 13, 2010, has been treated as superseding art. II, §§ 42-31—42-42, 42-61—42-65, 42-81—42-85, to read as herein set out. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 98-1, adopted Jan. 13, 1998. The original ordinance numbering may be found in the history note following each section. 

DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 42-31. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of Banks County, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 1, § A, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-32. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Banks County, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 1, § B, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-33. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 1, § C, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-34. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize floodblight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 1, § D, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-35. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 42-52. 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1—A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1—A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1—V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before December 17, 2010 [the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before January 13, 1998 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after December 17, 2010 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after January 13, 1998 [the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after January 13, 1998 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements).) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially-improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 6, 7-13-2010) 
Secs. 42-36—42-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 42-51. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Banks County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 2, § A, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-52. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Banks County, Georgia are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS (Banks County, Georgia entirely included in FIS). 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: 
Banks County GIS Mapping Department  150 Hudson Ridge  Homer, GA 30547 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 2, § B, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-53. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 2, § C, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-54. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 2, § D, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-55. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 2, § E, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-56. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 2, § F, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-57. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Banks County, Georgia or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 2, § G, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-58. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 per day or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Banks County, Georgia from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 2, § H, 7-13-2010) 
Secs. 42-59—42-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 42-71. - Designation of article administrator. 
The Floodplain Administrator of Banks County is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 3, § A, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-72. - Permit required. 
No development shall commence within an area regulated by this article until and unless a development or a building permit, or both if required has been approved by the floodplain administrator. No development activity shall be approved unless it conforms with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. No building or structure shall be constructed within an area regulated by this article until and unless a development permit or building permit, or both, if required shall have been approved by the floodplain administrator. No building or structure shall have been approved unless it conforms with the provisions of this article prior to the construction of said building or structure. 
Prohibition of development/construction within any watershed lake flood hazard area —Any development or construction within any watershed lake flood hazard area is strictly prohibited. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the planning and zoning department on forms furnished by Banks County prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 42-92(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 3, § B, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-73. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-52, then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 42-72(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 42-72(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the floodplain administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with [subsection] 42-72(1)c. and [subsection] 42-92(2), or [subsection] 42-94(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the floodplain administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 3, § C, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-74. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The Banks County Board of Commissioners shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Banks County Board of Commissioners may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Banks County, Georgia, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the Banks County Board of Commissioners shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a Historic Structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the Banks County Board of Commissioners may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 5, 7-13-2010) 
Secs. 42-75—42-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 42-91. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not complaint with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 4, § A, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-92. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-91(4), "Elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above two feet above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1—30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water-tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 42-73(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially-improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (Ref. [subsection] 42-91(6) above). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 42-92(3)a. [and] c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-52, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 4, § B, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-93. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 42-52, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 42-52, then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions, [subsections] (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-91(4), "Elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The floodplain administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 4, § C, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-94. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (AE zones) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-52, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (AE zones) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 42-92. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 4, § D, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-95. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-52, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly-defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-91(4), "Elevated buildings". 
The floodplain administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus two feet, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 42-72(1)c. and 42-72(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 4, § E, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-96. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 4, § F, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 42-97. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, Art. 4, § G, 7-13-2010) 
Chapter 46 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Regulations for septic tanks or individual sewerage management systems in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(a)(4); power of county board of health to adopt rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6; promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by state department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; authority to provide public health facilities and services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq.; hospital authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq.; smoking in public places, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2; authority to adopt ordinances for the purpose of preserving public health, safety and welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 

Sec. 46-1. - Collection of environmental fees by the board of health. 
The county board of health is authorized to collect the following environmental fees: 
ENVIRONMENTAL FEE SCHEDULE 
Tourist accommodation permit\$150.00 
Septic tank permit (new system)\50.00 
Septic tank reinspection \50.00 
Septic tank evaluation letter for refinance/resale\50.00 
Special case\300.00 
Lot approval/subdivision per lot\15.00 
Food service permits: 
Initial inspection\150.00 
Annual renewal fee\125.00 
Reinspection (after failing score)\35.00 
Water testing: 
Sample (up to two additional tests)\25.00 
Rabies specimen for testing\50.00 
Swimming pool inspections\100.00 
Environmental record search\15.00 
(Res. No. 99-12, 7-14-1999) 
Chapter 50 - MANUFACTURED HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-07, § 3, adopted April 9, 2002, repealed Ord. No. 99-11, adopted Jul. 14, 1999, in its entirety. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Ord. No. 99-11 pertained to the enforcement of regulations for mobile/manufactured homes. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; roads and bridges, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. VII, § I, ¶ III; The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-38; removal of transportable housing from lands subject to writ of possession, O.C.G.A. § 44-7-59; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.; issuance of mobile home location permits; display of decals, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. 

ARTICLE I. - REGULATIONS FOR MOBILE HOME AND MANUFACTURED HOME 

Sec. 50-1. - Location disclosure and decal required. 
Every person holding a title to or possessing a mobile home or a manufactured home which is placed or located within the limits of Banks County, Georgia, shall report the location to, and shall obtain a location decal for said mobile home or manufactured home from, the tax commissioner of the county annually, no later than April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 50-2. - Building permit required. 
No mover, hauler, or person shall move a mobile home or a manufactured home to any location beyond the limits of the lot or parcel of land upon which it presently is located, or upon which it was originally located, whether existing within the county, without first obtaining a building permit from the building department of the county. No building permit shall be issued unless the person, firm, corporation or other entity moving it specify the new location to which it is to be moved. Any failure to secure a building permit required by this section shall be considered in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 50-3. - Proof of tax payment a condition of permit. 
It shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any building permit required by this chapter that the owner of said mobile home or manufactured home submit to the aforesaid building department proof that all state and county taxes theretofore accruing and payable with respect to such mobile home or manufactured home have in fact been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 50-4. - Permit application procedures. 
(a)  All mobile homes or manufactured homes must be located at an approved site. This approval is obtained by the issuance of a building permit and a sanitary permit for wastewater hookup for that site. In the event that a municipality will provide sewer hookup, that municipality verifying that it will allow sewer hook up must provide a letter. A building permit application is available at the planning commission office and the sanitary permit application is available at the county health department. A building permit to move a mobile home or a manufactured home into or within the county shall not be issued until the building and sanitary permits have been issued. Upon the issuance of the above permits, a mobile home or manufactured home may be moved into the county or within the county and installed for occupancy. Mobile homes or manufactured homes may be brought into the county and located on a sales lot of a state approved dealer as listed in the office of the state safety fire commissioner for resale without a building or sanitary permit. Installation must comply with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes made and promulgated by the [State of] Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner pursuant to the authority set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-135; 8-2-137(b); 8-2-161; 8-2-162; 8-2-165; 8-2-168 and 25-2 in order to obtain approval and to obtain permanent electrical service. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued indicating compliance with all applicable codes before any person or persons are authorized to occupy any newly installed mobile home or manufactured home. 
(b)  For purpose of this section, the building official shall issue the aforementioned building permit, and the health department shall issue the aforementioned sanitary permit. These permits shall be considered separate permits. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 50-5. - Provisions for temporary power after the issuance of a building permit. 
The building official is authorized to permit the applicable power company to provide temporary power not to exceed 110 volts for the express purpose of completing necessary installation of the mobile home or manufactured home. This provision specifically does not authorize permanent power hookup or occupancy of the mobile home or manufactured home. It shall be unlawful for temporary power to be utilized on a permanent basis or for occupancy of said home. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 50-6. - Mobile home and manufactured home minimum construction standards. 
(a)  Each newly installed mobile home or manufactured home in the county shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by the U.S. Housing and Urban Development, as required by the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C., Section 5401, et. seq., before that mobile home or manufactured home is entitled to receive any utility service to said mobile home or manufactured home. It is the intent of this section of this chapter to prohibit moving mobile homes or manufactured homes into the county that do not conform to the applicable U. S. Housing and Urban Development Department's construction standards, as expressed in 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et. seq. and regulations established pursuant to that Act. To that end, no mobile home or manufactured home shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this county unless that mobile home or manufactured home complies with the minimum construction standards required by the U.S. Housing and Urban Development Department and has been inspected by the county building inspection department to insure that all windows, doors, smoke detectors, plumbing systems, electric systems, heating system and ventilation system are in working order, the general appearance of the mobile home or manufactured home shall be acceptable with all siding and paneling in its proper place. 
(b)  In the event said mobile home or manufactured home was manufactured prior to U. S. Housing and Urban Development construction standards, said mobile home or manufactured home shall not be allowed to locate or relocate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this county, and said mobile home or manufactured home shall not be freely transferable and relocated in the county except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. No permit shall be issued under this section unless a septic tank permit has been obtained from the county health department provided however, that the mobile home or manufactured home will not be connected to a publicly owned sewer system. No mobile home or manufactured home permit will be issued unless proof of payment of current year taxes is provided. 
(c)  No person may occupy a home described in this section after the effective date of April 9, 2002, without a certificate of occupancy issued by the county building inspection department. The county building inspection department shall issue a certificate of occupancy within five working days after satisfactory final inspection. 
(d)  Minimum health and safety standards. All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector and prior to being located in or relocated in Banks County: 
(1)  HUD code . Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD code. 
(2)  Interior condition . Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(3)  Exterior condition . The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(4)  Sanitary facilities . Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(5)  Heating systems . Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Un-vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(6)  Electrical systems . (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
(7)  Hot water supply . Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(8)  Egress windows . Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(9)  Ventilation . The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(10)  Smoke detectors . Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 4-9-2002; Ord. No. 2002-14, §§ 1, 2, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2010-22 , §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 50-7. - Mobile homes and manufactured homes not meeting minimum construction standards. 
A mobile home or manufactured home that is more than seven years old and does not meet the requirements of this chapter and a mobile home or manufactured home that is located in the county and was manufactured prior to U. S. Housing and Urban Development construction standards may be transferred to a county licensed dealer authorized to buy and sell mobile homes and/or manufactured homes for location at said dealer's place of business for sale or transfer outside of the county. In no event shall this exception allow any person to live in said mobile home or manufactured home or to allow said home to receive any utility service. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 50-8. - Mobile homes and manufactured home installation requirements. 
A pre-owned mobile home or manufactured home that does not meet the minimum health and safety standards of this chapter may be transferred to a county licensed dealer authorized to buy and sell mobile homes and/or manufactured homes for location at said dealer's place of business for sale or transfer outside of the county. In no event shall this exception allow any person to live in said mobile home or manufactured home or to allow said home to receive any utility service. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 4-9-2002; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 3, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2010-22 , § 3, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 50-9. - Process of inspection for mobile homes and manufactured homes. 
(a)  Foundation. The building official shall require the foundation to be inspected to ensure compliance with the rules and regulations for manufactured homes made and promulgated by the [State of] Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner as they now exist and as hereinafter amended. These rules and regulations for manufactured homes are incorporated as a part of this chapter by reference. 
(b)  Plumbing. The building official shall require the external plumbing system to be inspected, including water and sewage connections, to ensure compliance with the rules and regulations for manufactured homes and the 2000 Georgia State Plumbing Code, as it now exists or as hereinafter amended. 
(c)  Stairs and landings. 
(1)  The building official shall require stairs and landings to comply with Section 1112—Stairway Construction of the Georgia State Building Code as may be subsequently revised: The height of the riser shall not exceed 7¾ inches, and treads, exclusive of nosing, shall be not less than nine inches wide. Every tread less than ten inches wide shall have a nosing, of effective projection, or approximately 1 inch over the level immediately below the tread. The width of the landings still is not less than the width of stairways they serve. Every landing shall have a minimum dimension measured in the direction of travel equal to the width of the stairway. Such dimension need not exceed four foot when the stair has a straight run. 
(2)  All stairways having treads located more than 30 inches above a floor or grade shall be equipped with handrail located not less than 30 and not more than 34 inches above the leading of a tread. The minimum width of any stair serving as a means of egress shall be a minimum of 36 inches. 
(d)  Electrical. The building official shall require inspection of the electrical system to ensure compliance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes and the 1999 National Electrical Code, as may be subsequently revised. 
(e)  Gas. The building official shall require inspection of the gas system to ensure compliance with the 2000 Standard Code as may be subsequently revised. 
(f)  Until the above inspections have been completed and the mobile home or manufactured home is found to be in compliance with all applicable codes, no permanent power may be installed, and no occupancy shall be permitted. Occupancy is permitted upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 4-9-2002; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 4—7, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 5-10. - Additional administrative procedures. 
The planning commission is authorized to establish other administrative procedures so the regulations can be more effectively and consistently applied. The zoning administrator is authorized to address situations where the ordinance does not indicate a procedure, provided the planning commission at the next regular meeting ratifies such action. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 4-9-2002) 
Chapter 51 - MOBILE/MANUFACTURE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 51-1—51-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 51-31. - Permanent occupancy of recreational vehicles. 
No recreational vehicle shall be permanently occupied nor connected to water or electrical power, and no mobile home/manufactured home location permits shall be issued for recreational vehicles. For the purpose of this section, any recreational vehicle occupied for less than ninety (90) days shall be considered non-permanent and temporary, and any occupancy of ninety (90) days or greater shall be considered permanent. All recreational vehicles must display a current license before movement. 
Said prohibition on permanent occupancy shall apply to all recreational vehicles regardless of location, including locations within approved recreational vehicle parks. 
(Ord. No. 2000-10, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 51-32. - Mobile home/manufactured home park regulations. 
All mobile/manufactured home parks hereafter developed shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Site plan approval required: All mobile/manufactured home park developments shall require site plan approval by the governing body. 
(2)  Location and frontage: A mobile/manufactured home park district development shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a public street. 
(3)  Street requirements: Interior roads serving the development are required and shall be suitably drained and have a minimum pavement width of 22 feet plus 4 feet of drainage area on both sides of road, for a total road width of 30 feet. If dedicated to the public, the roads within the development shall meet the same requirements as required for subdivision roads/streets. 
(4)  Lot area and width: A mobile/manufactured home park development shall have a minimum area of ten contiguous acres and a lot width of at least 200 feet. Each lot space within the park shall have a minimum of 14,000 square feet and shall have not less than 50 feet of frontage on the interior road. 
(5)  Recreation and other community facilities: Not less than ten percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to recreation and other community use facilitates [facilities] for those mobile/manufactured homes parks containing ten acres or 25 units. 
(6)  Setbacks required: No mobile/manufactured home or other building or structure shall be located closer than 60 feet to any mobile/manufactured home park perimeter property boundary. Each mobile manufactured home shall be setback from the front lot line and any other mobile/manufactured home by at least 60 feet. 
(7)  Perimeter buffer required: A buffer at least 60 feet in width shall be provided and maintained around the entire exterior perimeter of the mobile/manufactured home park. 
(8)  Lightning: All mobile/manufactured home parks shall have lighting at appropriate height, spacing and intensity so that each mobile/manufactured home site's access and parking is appropriately illuminated. Mercury vapor halogen or low pressure sodium lights that are not less than 500 feet intervals with a minimum height of 18 feet. 
(9)  Utilities: All mobile/manufactured home parks shall be served by water and public sewer systems and shall be subject to approval by the Banks County Health Department. 
(10)  Parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit plus one space for each resident manager and additional spaces for visitor parking. All parking spaces as well as walkways shall be of concrete or a pavement substance. 
(11)  Swimming pools: In the event that a swimming pool is developed or planned as a part of the park, a chain link, masonry or wood [fence] not less than six feet high with locking gate shall enclose this facility. 
(12)  Park grounds: All park grounds shall be maintained with grass, trees and/or shrubs to enhance the appearance of the park and to prevent soil erosion or the creation of dust. 
(13)  Use by recreational vehicles limited: Ten percent of the lot spaces may be allocated for temporary use by recreational vehicles, the length of such use to be limited to 90 days per occupying any such space in the park. 
(14)  Service buildings: Accessory structures and community service facilities are hereby permitted for the convenience and well being of park residents. Such structures may include, but are not limited to the following uses: 
a.  Park management offices, repair shops, and storage. 
b.  Community sanitary facilities. 
c.  Community laundry facilities. 
d.  Community postal facilities. 
e.  Indoor community recreation areas. 
f.  Commercial uses supplying essential goods and services. 
(15)  Listing of mobile/manufactured homes required: Every person, or other entity owning or operating a mobile/manufactured home park, and each such entity engaged in the sale or rental of mobile/manufactured homes or lots upon which to place them, shall furnish the tax commissioner a complete list of all mobile/manufactured homes parked, rented or otherwise located upon the property of the entity or in a mobile/manufactured home park operated by the entity. 
(16)  Registration of park residents required: Park management must maintain a register of all park residents. The register must be available to any authorized person inspecting the park. 
(Ord. No. 2000-10, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 51-33. - Recreational vehicle park regulations. 
All recreational vehicle parks shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Site plan approval required: All recreational vehicle parks shall require site plan approval by the governing body in accordance with the procedures and requirements established in Article XX. 
(2)  Location and frontage: All recreational vehicle parks shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a public street. 
(3)  Street requirements: An interior road(s) serving the development is required and shall be suitably graded, stabilized and covered with a dustfree material which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. Said interior road(s) shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. Exception: the first 200 feet of the entrance road from the public street shall be paved with either concrete or asphalt. 
(4)  Lot area and width: The minimum land area of any recreational vehicle park shall be five contiguous acres. Each space within the park shall have a minimum area of not less than 2,000 square feet, and lot lines shall be clearly delineated. Lots may be set at an angle, set parallel to the street, or varied in other ways provided that the arrangement is approved as a part of site plan approval. Each lot within the park shall have a minimum of 25 feet of street frontage, and shall have a minimum depth of 50 feet. 
(5)  Utilities and improvements: Each vehicle/camping space shall be equipped with a suitable and approved electrical outlet, a threaded potable water standpipe and faucet, and approved connection to the community sewer system except at tent-only sites, a fire pit with permanent masonry or stone enclosure, a picnic-type table and a covered trash and garbage container. Garbage shall be removed daily from campsites. 
All recreational vehicle parks must be equipped with men and ladies restrooms with toilet, shower and lavatories at a ratio of two fixtures for each sex per vehicle spaces, and a central sanitary dump station. Each recreational park must provide on-site public telephone access. 
(6)  Recreation facilities required: Parks designed to accommodate 15 or more recreational vehicles, campers, etc; shall provide one or more recreation areas. The size of the recreation area(s) shall be based on a minimum of 200 square feet for each travel trailer space. No recreation area shall be smaller than 3,000 square feet and each shall be equipped for family activity. 
(7)  Service building permitted: Community service facilities and accessory structures are hereby permitted, subject to site plan approval, for the convenience of park patrons. Such structures may include, but are not limited to the following uses: 
a.  Park management offices. 
b.  Community laundry facilities. 
c.  Indoor community recreation areas. 
d.  Commercial uses supplying goods or services for the use of park patrons. 
(Ord. No. 2000-10, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 51-34. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In cases where a violation of this article has been found by the zoning administrator and building official, he shall notify the owner of the property on which such violation is found by certified mail sent to the address of the property owner as it appears in tax information. If the owner of the mobile/manufactured home is different from the property owner, the violation notice shall also be sent by certified mail to the owner of the mobile/manufactured home. In the case no valid mailing address can be obtained, or if the certified mail is returned to the zoning administrator, the notice of violation may be hand delivered to the person deemed responsible for said violation. The notice of violation shall clearly state the nature of the violation, including specific provision(s) of this article which have not been complied with, and the date upon which said violation(s) will be remedied. Said date will be determined by the zoning administrator based on the nature and extent of the violation, but in no case shall exceed 30 days from the date the certified mail was received, the date upon which said violation(s) will be remade shall not exceed 30 days from the date of delivery. 
(b)  Issuance of stop work orders. The zoning administrator and building official is authorized to issue stop work orders in any instance where a violation of this section is found. The procedure for issuance of stop work orders shall be the same as the notification procedure for violations as specified in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  Procedure for non-compliance. In cases where a violation has occurred, and the violator has not remedied the violation within the specified time period, or in cases where stop work orders have not been fully complied with, the county marshal, upon written notification from the zoning administrator of such violation or non-compliance, shall issue a citation requiring appearance in Banks County Magistrate Court. Said citation shall include any and all violations found by the zoning administrator or building official. 
* The only exceptions to the aforementioned enforcement procedures are cases that involve a violation regarding location decals, relocation permits, or failure to provide a complete list of all mobile/manufactured homes parked, rented or otherwise located upon the property of the entity or in a mobile/manufactured home park operated by the entity. In these cases where a violation occurs, it shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to enforce the provisions of this resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2000-10, 4-11-2000) 
Chapter 54 - OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 30; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 54-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following in the area of the county shall be guilty of disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of his life, limb or health. 
(2)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm. 
(4)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property. 
(5)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and cause, provoke or engage in any fight or brawl. 
(6)  Any person who shall collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities. 
(7)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and engage or attempt to engage in gaming. 
(8)  Any person who shall frequent any public place and obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, tricks, artifice or device, or attempt to do so. 
(9)  Any person who shall appear in a public place under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicants, and whose condition shall be made manifest by loud, profane, vulgar or boisterous language. 
(b)  Any person or persons failing to comply with the mandatory provisions of this section or doing any act prohibited by this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction in the magistrate court of the county shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 92-11, §§ 1, 2, 9-8-1992) 
Chapter 58 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; roads and bridges, ch. 62; signs, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A; planning commission, app. A, § 1401 et seq. 
State Law reference— Regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; Redevelopment Powers Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1 et seq.; City Business Improvement District Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.; area planning and development commissions succeeded by regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-41; automatic membership of counties and municipalities in regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-33; authority to adopt plans and exercise zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-A-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2008-30, adopted Oct. 28, 2008, repealed the former art. II, §§ 58-31 and 58-32, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 92-8, adopted July 14, 1992; Res. No. 97-15, adopted Sept. 9, 1997; and Res. No. 99-15, adopted Oct. 12, 1999. 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

Sec. 58-31. - Adopted. 
The Banks County Board of Commissioners does hereby approve and adopt the Banks County Comprehensive Plan 2008-2018 as a general guide for future growth, change, development and progress. 
(Res. No. 2008-30, 10-28-2008) 
Secs. 58-32—58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2003-02, § 1, adopted Feb. 11, 2003, repealed art. III, divs. 1—4, §§ 58-61—58-63, § 58-81—58-84, 58-101—58-110, 58-126—58-130, in its entirety. Former art. III, pertained to Land Use Public Hearing Policies and Procedures and derived from Ord. No. 97-2, exh. B, arts. III, IV, V(5.01—5.04), VI(intro., (a)—(i)), VII(7.01—7.05), adopted March 11, 1997. 

Sec. 58-61—58-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, adopted May 9, 2006, repealed art. IV, §§ 58-161—58-172, which pertained to multifamily housing developments and derived from Ord. No. 2001-11, §§ 1—12, adopted April 11, 2000. The user's attention is directed to App. A, §§ 1901—1912. 

Secs. 58-161—58-172. - Reserved. 
Chapter 62 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; planning, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; vehicles for hire, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, >Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; probate court's jurisdiction involving the removal of obstructions from roads, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.1; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Injuries to public roads. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to obstruct, encroach upon, solicit the sale of any merchandise on, or injure materially any part of any public road of the county public road system. For purposes of this Code section, the term "obstruct" shall include without limitation the causing of any buildup of rock, gravel, mud, dirt, chemicals, or other materials by continued ingress or egress of vehicles or of any natural waters dammed or redirected by diversion to an extent which presents a hazard to the traveling public. 
(b)  Any person or entity who unlawfully obstructs, encroaches upon, or injures said public road shall be responsible for reimbursing the county for the costs of removal of said obstructions or encroachments and the costs of repairs to the public road incurred by the county, including any costs associated with traffic management; provided, however, that such costs shall be limited to those costs which are directly incurred from such damages. Costs incurred for traffic management may include, but not be limited to, costs incurred for flagging, signing, or provision of detours, provided that these activities are directly caused by the obstruction, encroachment, or injury to the public road system. 
(c)  Any person or entity convicted of violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code and the court may, in addition to any other sentence authorized by law, order a person or entity convicted of violating this section to make restitution for the offense. 
(Ord. No. 2003-33, § 1, 10-14-2003) 
Secs. 62-2—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PULPWOOD, LOGGING AND TIMBER OPERATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-09 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted June 9, 2015, repealed art. II in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 62-31—62-33 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2001-18, § 2, adopted July 10, 2001; Ord. No. 2003-39, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 9, 2003; and Ord. No. 2004-19, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 2004. 

Sec. 62-31. - Purpose and findings. 
It has been determined by the Banks County Board of Commissioners that it is necessary and desirable to require any person or entity engaged in pulpwood, logging, or timber operations in Banks County to comply with the requirements set forth in this article in order to perform any pulpwood, logging or timber operations in Banks County, and shall further require the compliance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24. 
( Ord. No. 2015-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-9-2015) 
Sec. 62-32. - Notice and general requirements. 
Any person, partnership, corporation or any other entity and their agents, independent contractors and employees (hereafter collectively referred to as "harvester") involved in pulpwood, logging, timber or any similar operations (hereinafter referred to as "timber operations" and/or "timber operation") in the county shall be required to perform the following requirements: 
(1)  Each harvester engaged in any timber operation in Banks County for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located inside or outside Georgia shall provide notice of harvesting operations to Banks County Planning Department prior to entering onto the property if possible, but in no event later than 24 hours after entering onto the property. 
(2)  The prior written notice shall be made only in such form as prescribed by the Banks County Planning Department and shall be limited to the following: 
a.  A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for the purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road, and if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
b.  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5; 
c.  The name, address and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
d.  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber; 
e.  The completed notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via telefacsimile, e-mail or such other means as approved by the Board of Commissioners of Banks County or by mail; 
f.  No fee of any kind shall be required for the notice of a timber harvest. 
(3)  Each harvester, subject to such notice requirement and prior to beginning the timber operation in the county, shall deliver a bond or letter of credit to the Banks County Planning Department upon a form approved and provided by the county planning department. 
a.  The notice shall not be or remain effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the harvester providing such notice has delivered to Banks County Planning Department a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in Georgia, protecting Banks County against any damage caused by such harvester in the amount of $5,000.00. The purpose of the bond is to ensure that all damages caused by a harvester during timber operations to the roadways, ditches, or bridges in the county be repaired by the harvester or be repaired by Banks County at the expense of the harvester. 
1.  Each harvester and surety on a bond, by executing the bond, submits to the jurisdiction, venue and service of process of the Superior Court of Banks County in any suit arising out of or in connection with the bond and/or the costs of such repairs and waives any and all objections to the jurisdiction, venue and service of process of the Superior Court of Banks County in any suit arising out of or in connection with the bond and/or the costs of such repairs. 
2.  If the harvester submits and Banks County approves a surety bond, and if Banks County has to file suit on the surety bond to collect the costs of the repairs, the harvester and the surety on the bond shall be liable for the costs and reasonable attorney fees of Banks County in filing suit to collect on the surety bond. If the repairs exceed the amount of the bond, the harvester shall be liable for the difference between the costs of such repairs and the amount of the bond, which amount shall be due and payable by the harvester on demand by Banks County. 
b.  At the option of the harvester, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4 in the amount of and in lieu of such bond may be substituted and delivered to Banks County. 
c.  Banks County shall require no more than one bond from the harvester regardless of the number of tracts harvested in Banks County by such harvester as long as the bond remains in effect. Otherwise a valid replacement bond must be obtained and delivered to the Planning Department of Banks County no later than the close of business on the fifth business day following the day that Banks County filed a claim to recover damages against the then-existing bond. Upon filing such claim, Banks County shall immediately provide notice thereof, including the date such claim was filed to the harvester causing the damage. Such notice may be given in person, by transmission of an electronic record via telefascimile, or by e-mail. 
d.  The harvester shall notify the Banks County Planning Department in writing within 24 hours when a timber operation has been completed. 
1.  The Banks County Planning Department will inspect the roadways, ditches and/or bridges used by the harvester during the timber operation and notify the harvester of any needed repairs. The harvester shall make the required repairs within 30 days of the date of notification to the harvester. If the harvester disputes the decision of the county planning department, the harvester shall have the right to appeal to the superior court of the county. If the harvester does not repair the damages to the roadways, ditches and/or bridges as set forth in the notification and/or does not appeal the decision of the county planning department and/or does not complete the required repairs within such 30-day period, the county shall have the repairs completed, and the costs of such repairs shall be: 
(i)  Paid by the harvester; or 
(ii)  Draw the costs of such repairs from the irrevocable letter of credit; or 
(iii)  Make demand on the surety for the costs of such repairs, and if the surety fails to pay the costs of such repairs within 15 days of the date of the demand, file suit to collect the costs of such repairs in the Superior Court of Banks County. 
2.  If the harvester does not damage the roadways, ditches and/or bridges in the timber operation or completes the repairs as set forth in the notice to the harvester from the Banks County Planning Department within such 30-day period, and if the harvester is in compliance with all of the provisions of this article for all of its other timber operations in Banks County, including, without limitation, that a bond be [in] effect during any timber operation, the county will return the bond, without any interest, to the harvester. 
e.  For the purposes of this section, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar in which delivered. 
(4)  Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within Banks County upon receipt of the same by the Banks County Planning Department and, if applicable, compliance with the requirements of subsection (3) of this section and until such time as the harvester giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of the notice shall be reported to the Banks County Planning Department within three business days after such change. 
(5)  Notice requirements shall be applicable to any such timber harvested on or after the effective date of the ordinance adopted pursuant to this article. 
(6)  Violation of the notice requirements of this article shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(7)  The Banks County Planning Department shall promulgate such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary for purposes of the standard form required by this article. 
(8)  The Banks County Planning Department shall transmit a copy of the notice regarding timber operations to the Banks County Board of Commissioners. 
(9)  Banks County shall not require any person or firm harvesting standing timber for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located inside or outside Georgia to provide any notice or plan or security for such harvesting or hauling of forest products except as provided by this article. 
(10)  Banks County shall not require any person or firm harvesting standing timber for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located inside or outside Georgia to obtain any permit for such harvesting or hauling of forest products, including without limitation any permit for any new driveway in connection with timber harvesting operations. This paragraph shall not limit the authority of Banks County to regulate roads or streets under its jurisdiction. 
(11)  The provisions of this article shall not prevent Banks County from enacting and enforcing tree ordinances, landscape ordinances or streamside buffer ordinances providing such ordinances shall not apply to timber harvesting or in unzoned tracts. 
(12)  This article shall apply only to timber harvesting operations which qualify as forestry land management practices or agricultural operations under O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 not incidental to development, on tracts which are zoned for or used for forestry, silvicultural, or agricultural purposes and those tracts which are unzoned. 
(13)  If the harvester is performing a timber operation on a tract or parcel of land of two acres or less, the harvester shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-9-2015) 
Sec. 62-33. - Penalties. 
Except for the notice requirements, any person or entity violating, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
( Ord. No. 2015-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-9-2015) 
Secs. 62-34—62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET NAMES/HOUSE NUMBERING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-17, §§ 1—4, adopted April 8, 2003, repealed art. III, §§ 62-61—62-64 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No 2001-16, §§ 1—4, adopted June 22, 2001. 

Sec. 62-61. - Street names. 
(a)  All new public streets not located within a subdivision within the unincorporated boundaries of Banks County shall be approved by the county board of commissioners (the "board"). 
(b)  All requests for street names shall be submitted to the board at least three weeks prior to date the approval is needed, except for streets within a subdivision. 
(c)  The name of a new street shall not duplicate the name of an existing street within the county. 
(d)  The name of a new street shall not be the name of a person unless it is a special circumstance approved by the board. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § 1, 4-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-62. - Designation of street numbers. 
(a)  Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business (collectively "structures") on all public and private streets and roads shall be assigned by the Banks County E-911 with the assistance of the county planning department, if requested. 
(b)  Street numbers for parcels of land will only be given if the owner has a driveway in place. This number will be assigned for emergency purposes only and does not give said owner rights to erect any dwelling on the property or install power to the property without complying with all of the county ordinances, building code and obtaining proper permits. 
(c)  The Banks County E-911 shall keep a record of all street numbers assigned to structures. 
(d)  No structures shall be occupied prior to the assignment of a street number. 
(e)  No structure shall obtain permanent power or gas connections prior to obtaining a street number. 
(f)  All persons or entities requiring a street number assignment must apply by telephone for such street number with the Banks County E-911 at least two weeks in advance of the date the street number is needed. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § 2, 4-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-63. - Posting of designated street address. 
(a)  The owner of property or person in charge of any structure shall be notified by the Banks County E-911 of the assigned street number. 
(b)  Within 30 days after receipt of such notification, the owner or person in charge of the structure to which a street number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous place. The number shall be easy to see both in daylight and at night from the road. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of such owner, occupant or person in charge of a house or building to affix the new number and to remove any different number which might be mistaken for, or confused with the street number assigned to the structure by the Banks County E-911. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of each owner, occupant, or person in charge of every structure to which a street number has been assigned to display such number in figures at least three inches high with reflective numbers. 
(3)  The number must be posted on both sides of the mail receptacle or on a sign at the road if there is no mailbox and also at the entrance to the residence if the residence is not where the mail receptacle or sign is located. If there is more than one residence or structure addressed on one drive, the number must also be affixed to the structure itself. 
(4)  Each owner, occupant, or person in charge of the structure is responsible for purchasing the material for the street number. 
(5)  All numbers must conform to standards that allow for prompt and accurate emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2003-17, § 3, 4-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-64. - Penalties. 
(a)  In the event the owner, occupant, or person in charge of any structure to which a street number has been assigned refuses to comply with the provisions of this article by failing to display the assigned street number within 30 days after notification, he or she shall be fined $25.00 for each day after notice for so long as such failure to comply continues. 
(b)  The county marshall will issue citations for violations of sections 62-61 through 61-63, will enforce the penalty, and will work with the Banks County E-911 on insuring that county residents who do not reside within a municipality abide by article III, chapter 62 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § 4, 4-8-2003) 
Chapter 66 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; planning, ch. 58; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Signs used by retail distilled spirits dealers, signs advertising Georgia lottery, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3; prohibited placement of campaign posters, signs and advertisements, O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; outdoor advertising near state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq.; control of signs and signals, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The following regulations in this chapter are designed to promote the public health, safety, order, aesthetics and general welfare of the community by: controlling the number, placement, size and height of signs to prevent excessive and undue distraction to motorists and pedestrians and to prevent traffic hazards; avoiding an environment that encourages visual blight; and encouraging a more attractive urban environment. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 1, 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-2. - Signs shall meet applicable codes. 
Signs and other advertising structures shall be constructed and maintained in strict conformity with building and electrical codes and all other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 2, 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-3. - Signs are permitted accessory uses. 
Signs and other advertising structures are permitted as accessory uses, subject to all applicable limitations as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 3, 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-4. - Permit required. 
Except as otherwise excepted by the provisions of this chapter, any sign 16 square feet in area or larger shall require a permit to be issued by the building official before installation, construction, or erection. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or convert any sign, 16 square feet or larger, without first obtaining a permit from the building official; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be constructed to require a permit for the repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 4, 1-11-2000; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 1, 10-8-2002) 
Sec. 66-5. - Permit application. 
Applications for permits to erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert signs shall be made to the building official upon forms furnished by the building official. The application for permit shall include any such information such as, but not limited to, ownership information, location, construction cost, scaled site plans and elevation drawings, structural details or other information necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 5, 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-6. - Permit fees. 
No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed and fees have been paid as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 6, 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-7. - Signs and sign devices prohibited. 
The following signs and sign devices shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Animated signs involving motion or sound. 
(2)  Flashing, blinking, or varying light intensity signs, except time, temperature, date and public service signs. 
(3)  Projecting signs. 
(4)  Roof signs. 
(5)  Sandwich, sidewalk or curb type signs. 
(6)  Signs erected on or over public property including public rights-of-way, other than signs erected by public authority for a public purpose. 
(7)  Signs, except those designated "posted property" or "no trespassing," which are erected or maintained upon trees or other natural features. 
(8)  Signs attached to or painted onto a vehicle parked adjacent to and visible from a street for the sole purpose of advertising onto such street. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 7, 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-8. - Public signs and sign devices exempted. 
Any sign designed, erected or maintained for a public purpose by a public agency or authority, or by a private person for a public purpose, is exempt from the provision of this chapter. Public signs include, but are not limited to, the following: signs denoting routes to any city, town, village, historic place, shrine or hospital; signs directing or regulating traffic; notices of any railroad, bridge, airport or other transportation activity necessary for the direction or safety of the public; legal notices or other official instruments denoting time and place of civic meetings; signs denoting street names and street number, address or unit designations; flags of the United States, state, county, municipality or other public authority; flags, banners and other devices for celebrations, conventions, commemorations events, festivals and other community activities authorized by the governing body; public memorial signs and tablets; and identification signs and bulletin boards for churches and places of worship. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 8, 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-9. - Signs permitted in agricultural rural residential district. 
The following signs are permitted in agricultural rural residential districts: 
(1)  Directional signs, not exceeding four square feet of area, nonilluminated. 
(2)  Flags, banners and flying paraphernalia. 
(3)  Holiday lights and decorations. 
(4)  Home business and cottage industry signs. 
(5)  Identification signs, nonilluminated, at the entrance drive of individual residences, estates, farms, ranches and plantations which do not exceed 30 square feet of area, with a limit of two signs for each entrance drive. 
(6)  Identification signs and project identification monuments, nonilluminated, for residential subdivisions and complexes not exceeding 32 square feet of area. 
(7)  Identification signs, nonilluminated, for fraternal organizations or other similar permitted institutional uses, located on site, limited to one sign per premises not exceeding 32 square feet of area. 
(8)  Political signs, nonilluminated, not to exceed eight square feet of area. 
(9)  Portable signs, nonilluminated, limited to one sign per individual business establishment. 
(10)  Real estate signs, nonilluminated, located on site, pertaining to the rent, lease or sale of the premises, not exceeding eight square feet of area, limited to one sign per premise. 
(11)  Signs, nonilluminated, for permitted sales, rental and leasing offices, and manager's residences that do not exceed eight square feet of area. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 9, 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-10. - Signs permitted In C-1, C-2 and M-1 districts. 
The following signs are permitted in the C-1, C-2, and M-1 districts: 
(1)  Any sign permitted as specified in section 66-9. Maximum sign area specifications and lighting limitations specified in section 66-9 do not apply to signs permitted pursuant to this section. 
(2)  A business identification sign, either freestanding or attached, not exceeding 32 square feet in area, on which the name and nature of the business operated on the premises as the principal use are shown. Such business identification signs shall be permitted to be as large as 64 square feet if the owner of the property/premises in question elects not to utilize his allowance for a portable sign. 
(3)  A secondary business identification sign, either freestanding or attached, not exceeding eight square feet in area, on which the name and nature of a business operated on the premises are shown. 
(4)  Attached signs, including marquee and canopy signs, with a total sign area not exceeding 25 percent of the area of the building wall, marquee or canopy to which the sign or signs are attached. 
(5)  Off-site signs, including billboards, provided such signs conform to the following: 
a.  Off-site signs shall be located only in C-1, C-2, and M-1 districts. 
b.  No individual off-site sign shall exceed an area of 300 square feet per face with the limitation of one face per location which shall be located on the same side of the roadway upon which direction of travel it faces. 
c.  The maximum height of an off-site sign shall be 40 feet. 
d.  No off-site signs shall be permitted within 1,500 feet of any other off-site sign on the same side of the roadway, provided however, that such off-site signs shall be within 600 feet of an ongoing recognized commercial or industrial activity on the same side of the roadway, and the sign shall be situated within the property line of such activity. 
e.  Off-site signs shall be required to conform to all applicable regulations of the state for the control of outdoor advertising, as may be amended from time to time. The state regulations shall apply on all routes within the county's unincorporated area. 
(6)  Window signs, not exceeding 25 percent of the total area of the window. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 10, 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-11. - Maximum sign height. 
No permitted sign, regardless of type, shall exceed the following height limitations: 
(1)  Twenty feet as measured from road surface in the agriculture rural residential district. 
(2)  Forty feet as measured from road surface in the C-1, C-2, and M-1 districts. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 11, 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-12. - General requirements for signs. 
Signs, regardless of the district in which they are located, shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Signs, together with any supporting members, shall be kept in good repair and maintained so as to present a neat, clean appearance and be in a safe state of preservation. Painted areas and sign surfaces shall be kept in good condition, and illumination, if provided, shall be maintained in safe and good working order. 
(2)  Signs shall be set back a minimum of two feet from any public street right-of-way. 
(3)  No sign shall be erected where it will interfere with vision clearance along any street or obstruct the vision of either drivers or pedestrians. 
(4)  Any illuminated sign shall be placed so that the rays and illumination therefrom shall not be cast upon neighboring dwellings. 
(5)  All permitted marquee or projecting signs shall be erected under the supervision of the building official. 
(6)  Other attached signs shall be inspected for safety and compliance with this chapter at the discretion of the building official or other official designated by the board of commissioners. 
(7)  When a building is constructed, remodeled, or expanded, all signs shall be approved by the appropriate official before an occupancy permit is issued. Drawings containing dimensions of signs and/or descriptions of sign dimensions, construction materials, and methods of erection or design and stress diagrams may be approved by the building official or other appropriate official, when, in his best judgement, erection of the sign will not constitute a safety hazard and upon determination that the sign meets all the requirements of this chapter and the building code of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 12, 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-13. - Variances permitted. 
(a)  Recognizing that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter may, in limited instances involving unique or unusual physical conditions or other such unanticipated situations, pose an unnecessary hardship to the owner or user of a sign, the board of commissioners is authorized to permit variances from the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  An increase in the height of a sign. 
(2)  Reduction of the required two-foot setback for a sign. 
(3)  A sign of such type that is prohibited by section 66-7. 
(4)  An increase in the maximum area of a sign. 
(5)  Temporary signs and sign devices. 
(b)  Applications for any of the variances set out in subsection (a) of this section shall be filed and considered in accordance with the requirements and procedures for variances and in addition shall require the filing of an elevation drawing of the sign or signs proposed to be erected, constructed, modified or continued, along with written justification that unusual conditions warrant such consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 13, 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-14. - Procedures for dangerous or unlawful signs. 
Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the building official, the owner thereof, or the person or firm maintaining the sign, shall upon written notice from the building official or the administrative officer, forthwith in the case of immediate danger, and in any case within ten days, secure the sign in a manner to be approved by the building official, in conformity with the applicable provisions of the building code of the county. If such order is not complied with in ten days, the sign shall be removed under instruction of the appropriate official at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. In case any sign shall be installed, erected, or constructed in violation of any of the terms of this chapter the administrative officer shall notify by certified mail, or written notice served personally, the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign, secure the necessary permit, make required alterations, or remove the sign. If such order is not completed within 24 hours from the time of notice being received, the sign shall be removed under instruction of the appropriate official at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2000-01, § 14, 1-11-2000) 
Secs. 66-15—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTERSTATE SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Outdoor advertising near state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

Sec. 66-31. - General provisions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all outdoor advertising signs abutting or visible from the Interstate 85 right-of-way in the county. 
(b)  No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this article. 
(c)  All signs located on sites abutting or visible from the Interstate 85 right-of-way shall conform to all regulations of the state outdoor advertising code as amended and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit to install a sign along the I-85 corridor. In instances where this article is stricter, this article shall take precedence. 
(d)  Any sign which advertises an activity, business, product or service, which has ceased operation or production, shall be removed within one month of the discontinuance of such activity. 
(e)  The height of a sign cannot exceed 40 feet, as measured from the road bed of the interstate, with a minimum height of a sign being ten feet as measured from the road bed. 
(f)  Sign dimensions cannot exceed 600 square feet in area per face. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-32. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Signs imitating warning signals are prohibited. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles, nor shall any sign use the words, slogans, dimensional shape and size, or colors of the governmental traffic signs. 
(b)  No signs, except traffic signs and informational signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any interstate right-of-way. 
(c)  Signs painted on or attached to natural features such as trees or rocks, telephone poles, utility poles, or fence posts are prohibited. 
(d)  Fluttering ribbons and banners are prohibited. 
(e)  Signs within 1,500 feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 66-33. - Specific requirements. 
(a)  Uniform size. The outside dimensions of all signs shall not exceed 12 feet in height and 50 feet in length, with or without trim. 
(b)  Illumination. All illuminated signs shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited. 
(c)  Height above interstate grade. All signs shall be a minimum of ten feet and a maximum of 40 feet above interstate pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. Two signs in the same location either back-to back-or V formation shall be the same height above the interstate surface. 
(d)  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
(e)  Number of signs per location. Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back-to-back or V formation but prohibits two signs (side by side) facing the same direction. 
(f)  Spacing. Sign structures shall be no less than 500 feet apart measuring from the two closest points. 
(g)  Setbacks. Sign structures shall be no less than ten feet from any property line or right-of-way. 
(h)  Quantity of signs per quadrant. Allow for six outdoor advertising signs per quadrant of any interchange adjacent to the interstate highway, and are restricted to an area of 3,000 feet long beginning 500 feet from the point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp. 
(i)  Marshland and historic area locations prohibited. No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of a marshland or an area of designated historic interest. 
(j)  Advertisement limitations. Outdoor advertising shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  Travel service facilities including lodgings, fuel, food, camping and business establishments. 
(2)  Areas of scenic beauty. 
(3)  Public attractions including historic, natural, scientific or recreational amenities. 
(4)  Any combination of the facilities listed in subsections (j)(1) through (3) of this section. Further, the content of all advertising shall be directional in nature. 
(k)  On-premises signs located within 100 feet of a regularly used part of the activity being advertised and located on the same property and for sale or for lease signs located on the property being advertised would not be prohibited. 
(l)  Any legally erected sign which would become nonconforming as a result of this article would be allowed to remain until modified, changed or damaged beyond minor repairs or maintenance, provided the sign structure met all state and federal guidelines and laws at the time of installation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, 4-11-2000) 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, >Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1. 

Sec. 70-31. - Adopted. 
The board of commissioners hereby officially adopts the solid waste management plan for the county and the City of Homer as revised October 1993, prepared by Moreland Altobelli Associates, Inc. 
(Res. No. 94-1, 1-11-1994) 
Sec. 70-32. - Additional participant. 
The board of commissioners hereby officially amends its solid waste management plan to include the Town of Maysville as a participant. 
(Res. No. 95-7, 6-13-1995) 
Sec. 70-33. - Shortterm work program update. 
The county commission hereby adopts the updated solid waste plan and shortterm work program update covering the county. 
(Res. No. 2000-09, 4-28-2000) 
Secs. 70-34—70-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means all rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, unburied dead animals, or discarded materials of every kind and description, except scrap tires which is covered in art. III, §§ 70-91—70-96 of this chapter. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
(Ord. No. 90-4, § 16-7-42, 8-14-1990; Ord. No. 2004-07, § 1, 4-13-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-62. - Dumping, depositing, etc., litter on public or private property or waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this state or any waters in this state, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00. Any such person who violates subsection (a) of this section may be punished for a term of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days; 
(2)  In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained; the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(c)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-4, § 16-7-43, 8-14-1990) 
Sec. 70-63. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of section 70-62, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of section 70-62 is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-4, § 16-7-44, 8-14-1990) 
Sec. 70-64. - Enforcement of article. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers, and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof or any enforcement agency, officer, or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof is authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-4, § 16-7-45, 8-14-1990) 
Sec. 70-65. - Receptacles to be provided; notice to public. 
All public authorities and agencies having supervision of properties of this state are authorized, empowered, and instructed to establish and maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where the property is frequented by the public, to post signs directing persons to the receptacles and serving notice of the provisions of this article, and to otherwise publicize the availability of litter receptacles and requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-4, § 16-7-46, 8-14-1990) 
Sec. 70-66. - Designation of containers for household garbage; misuse or vandalization of container. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "household garbage" means animal, vegetable, and fruit refuse matter and other refuse matter ordinarily generated as byproducts of a household or restaurant, such as tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics, and wrapping or packaging materials. 
(b)  The governing authority of each county of this state which provides containers for the dumping of trash or garbage therein shall be authorized to designate any or all such containers as being suitable for the dumping therein of household garbage only. If a container is clearly marked "household garbage only," it shall be unlawful for any person to dump any refuse or other material into the container other than household garbage. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any containers provided by any county for the dumping of trash or garbage. 
(d)  Any person who violates subsection (b) or (c) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 90-4, § 16-7-47, 8-14-1990) 
Sec. 70-67. - Transportation of litter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate any motor vehicle containing litter unless the litter in such vehicle is adequately secured and covered to prevent the dumping, depositing, placing or throwing of litter onto public or private property in Banks County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 1-13-2009) 
Secs. 70-68—70-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SCRAP TIRES 

Sec. 70-91. - Definitions. 
(a)  The term "dump" means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 1 
(b)  The term "manifest" means a form or document used for identifying the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 2 
(c)  The term "person" means the State of Georgia or any other state or agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association, or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. 3 
(d)  The term "retail tire dealer" means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 4 
(e)  The term "scrap tire" means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 4 
(f)  The term "scrap tire carrier" means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. 5 
(g)  The term "scrap tire generator" means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county and state governments. 6 
(h)  The term "scrap tire processor" means any person who is approved by the environmental protection division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 7 
(i)  The term "scrap tire sorter" means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. 8 
(Ord. No. 2004-08, § 1, 4-13-2004) 
1  As defined in O.C.G.A. 16-7-51 
2  As defined in Section 391-4.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
3  As defined in Section 391-3-4.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
4  As defined in Sections 391-3-4.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
5  As defined in Sections 391-3-4.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
6  As defined in Sections 391-3-4.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
7  As defined in Sections 391-3-4.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
8  As defined in Sections 391-3-4.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
Sec. 70-92. - Scrap tire management—General. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all scrap tires on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in Banks County, including, without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any public or private property in the county or any waters in Banks County unless such scrap tires originate in Banks County or other areas authorized by the Banks County Board of Commissioners and: 
(1)  The property is designated by the board of commissioners or its duly designated agent and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for the collection or disposal of scrap tires and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)  The scrap tires are placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and 
(3)  The property has a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification numbers, approvals and/or permits issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) when required. 
(c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in Chapter 391-3-4, et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-8-20, et seq. and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-03-4, et seq. applicable to solid waste, except where requirements of this article are more stringent. 
(Ord. No. 2004-08, § 1, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 70-93. - Accumulation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a R-I, Single-Family Residential District or in a R-II, Multifamily Residential District to accumulate any amount of scrap tires on or around property, which they own or occupy. 
(b)  A retail tire dealer may hold up to 100 scrap tires per garage bay in storage, up to a maximum of 1,000 scrap tires. 
(c)  Tires must be stored in covered or enclosed areas to prevent the accumulation of water. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a CAD, Commercial Agricultural District, or ARR, Agricultural, Rural-Residential District, to accumulate more than 40 tires on any single tract of land. 
(Ord. No. 2004-08, § 1, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 70-94. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person(s), firm, or corporation violating any portion of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the Magistrate County of Banks County, shall be punished as follows. 
(1)  For the first offense: By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,200.00 1 , or up to 30 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the county from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the county to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area; 
(2)  For the second or more offense(s): The violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature punishable by a fine of not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or up to 60 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; and/or 
(b)  The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this division; and/or 
(c)  The court may order the person to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation 2 ; and/or 
(d)  In case of a tire dump, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this division, Banks County shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation; and/or 
(e)  The expenses incurred by the county for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to, court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this division. 
(f)  In addition to actions filed by Banks County for violations of this ordinance, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within the respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2004-08, § 1, 4-13-2004) 
1  As provided in O.C.G.A. section 16-7-43(b.1) 
2  As provided in O.C.G.A. section 16-7-53(d) 
Sec. 70-95. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this division shall be the responsibility of the Banks County Board of Commissioners, the environmental education and enforcement officer or his/her designee, and/or the Banks County Marshal's Office and/or the Banks County Sheriff's Office. 
(b)  Any person(s) authorized to enforce this division shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this division, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this division must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon said person(s) having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this division, or by a judge's order upon said person(s) having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(c)  Appeals for the violation of this division may be made to the Magistrate Court of Banks County, or higher court if the person so chooses. The person always has the right to consult his/her attorney at any time before the hearing is scheduled for court. 
(Ord. No. 2004-08, § 1, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 70-96. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  In the event that any person violates any provision of this division, the county or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation 1 . In addition, the county may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other county issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(b)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer(s) in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court as defined in subsection 70-94(a)(2) of this division. 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this division, the court and/or the board of commissioners may cause written notice to be given, or incorporate into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provisions still remaining in violation of this division for which said violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and in the event the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(d)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within 20 days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the board of commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of scrap tires, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the division on behalf of the county. The expenses incurred by the county shall be chargeable to the violator and the board of commissioners and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. 
(e)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the board of commissioners shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement as provided for in this section, the board of commissioners shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the county, the dates of county action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(f)  This section 70-96 shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
(Ord. No. 2004-08, § 1, 4-13-2004) 
1  As provided in O.C.G.A. sections 16-7-52, 16-7-53 
Chapter 74 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-6(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; planning, ch. 58; roads and bridges, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in the Constitution of the state as amended, for the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(2)  To ensure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilitates and services to land developments; 
(3)  To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments; 
(4)  To ensure the provision of needed public open spaces in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; 
(5)  To ensure wise and equitable handling of all development of land by providing uniform procedures and standards for observation and enforcement of regulations by developers and local public bodies as appropriate; 
(6)  To hold the interests of the county residents as a whole above all other interests in pursuing the above purposes; 
(7)  To encourage economically sound and orderly land development in accordance with the comprehensive plan of the county; 
(8)  To protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(102), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-2. - Conflicting provisions. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter and those of some other resolution or statute apply to the same subject matter, that resolution requiring the highest, or more strict, standard shall govern except in cases where the public interest is clearly better served by one resolution or statute over another. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(103), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-3. - Conditions on development; compliance. 
(a)  Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to the county. The developer has the duty of compliance with this chapter and any reasonable conditions laid down by the county planning commission for design, dedication, improvement, planning, etc., so as to conform to the physical and economic development of the county and to the safety and general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large. 
(b)  The county planning commission may disapprove all or any part of a subdivision (preliminary plat and/or final plat) where safe and convenient access are not available, drainage is not adequate for the layout of roads and lots and the provision of services affecting the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county are jeopardized. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(104), 3-13-2001) 
Secs. 74-4—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATION, PLATTING JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 74-31. - Plats required. 
Any subdivider proposing to subdivide land within the county shall submit to the planning commission plats of the proposed subdivision which shall conform to all requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(201), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-32. - New work. 
No subdivider shall proceed with any construction work on a proposed subdivision before obtaining preliminary plat approval from the planning commission. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(202), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-33. - Platting authority. 
The planning commission shall be the official platting authority. No plat of a land subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county unless it shall have the approval of the planning commission written on such plat. The filing or recording or attempted filing of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the planning commission as required by this chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor. The planning commission is authorized to levy charges for certain actions, inspections, and to cover certain direct costs. Such fees are to be used only to defray costs of the planning commission staff. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(203), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-34. - Use of plat. 
No person shall sell or transfer or agree to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of or other use of a plat of a subdivision before that plat has been approved by the county planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(204), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-35. - Opening and improving public streets. 
The board of commissioners of the county shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street or lay any utility lines in any street, which had not attained the status of a public streets prior to the effective date of the resolution from which this chapter is derived, unless such street corresponds to the street location shown on an approved subdivision plat or on an official street map adopted by the planning commission; provided that the board of commissioners may locate and construct, accept, lay out, open or improve any street not so platted if it first submits such proposed action to the planning commission for its review and comment. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(205), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-36. - Erection of buildings. 
No building permit shall be issued for any lot in any subdivision for which there is no approved and recorded final plat. As a single exception builders who are also the developer/subdivider may be granted a building permit for one model home per subdivision after preliminary plat approval and approval from the county health department, if the property is being or has been subdivided five or more times and any lot is three acres or less. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(206), 3-13-2001) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Secs. 74-37—74-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 74-61. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Terms not defined here shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. The term "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. The words "structures" and "building" have the same definition. Words used in the singular include the plural and those used in the plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. 
Alley and service drive mean a public way used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets (other than alleys), rivers, streams or United States government property, regardless of size, shape, or number of lots therein. 
Block corner means the corner of any subdivision block where two streets intersect, or the intersection of the back lot lines of a subdivision which define the outside limits of the subdivision at points having a change of direction greater than ten degrees. 
Building setback line means a line across a lot establishing the minimum open space required between buildings and the street right-of-way line and rear and side property lines. 
Classes of subdivisions means subdivisions as divided into four classes as follows: 
(1)  Class I: A subdivision involving the division of a tract or parcel of land among immediate family members into two or more lots or parcels; 
(2)  Class II: A subdivision involving the division of a tract or parcel of land into two to four lots or parcels; and 
(3)  Class III: A subdivision involving a division of a tract or parcel of land into five or more lots or parcels. 
(4)  Minor Subdivision: A subdivision involving the division of a tract or parcel of land into two lots or parcels or tracts. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic, the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
Easement means a recorded grant by a property owner for use by the public, a corporation, or person, of a strip of land for specified purposes. 
Field representative means the person or persons appointed by the board of commissioners, being assigned the responsibility for administering zoning and soil erosion ordinances and subdivision regulations of the county. The office of the filed representative shall act as staff to the planning commission and shall be given full responsibility for receiving applications, fees, and filings from developers and citizens and shall report to the planning commission the ongoing status of the various activities involving soil erosion and zoning ordinances and subdivision regulations. 
Health department means the county health department. 
Lot means a portion or parcel of land separated from other portions of parcels by description on a subdivision plat or record survey map or described by metes and bounds and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development or both. For the purpose of this chapter, a lot shall not include any portion of a street right-of-way. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot other than a corner lot abutting upon two or more streets. 
Pavement means any finish road/street surfacing treatment. 
Planning commission means the county planning commission hereafter sometimes referred to as BCPC. 
Plat, final, means a drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certification necessary for recording. 
Plat, preliminary, means a drawing showing proposed layout of a subdivision in adequate detail to convey to the planning commission or others the concept and workability of a subdivision, but not complete in form or detail required for recording. 
Roadbed means the graded portion of a road/street within top and side slopes, prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulder. 
Roadway means the portion of a road/street within the limits of construction. 
Shoulder means the portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use, and lateral support of base and surface courses. 
Street means a right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane or other way. A street shall be a public street with right-of-way dedicated to the county or a right-of-way by prescription. The words street and road have the same meaning and are used interchangeably in this chapter. 
Subdivider means the person, firm or corporation or other entity acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined below, including any agent of the subdivider or combination of these. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, a new street, or a change in existing streets, and includes a resubdivision; where appropriate to the context, subdivision also relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. The term "subdivision" shall also include the opening of a new street or road. The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots meet the standards of the county subdivision regulations are not included within this definition. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(301), 3-13-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 74-62—74-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL OF PLATS 

Sec. 74-91. - Preapplication review. 
Whenever subdivision of a tract of land within the county is proposed, the subdivider is urged to consult early and informally with the field representative of the planning commission. The subdivider may present sketch plans (see Figure 1) and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision and request advice and guidance concerning the project and the administrative procedures involved. No fee shall be charged for the preapplication review and no formal application shall be required. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(401), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-92. - Sequence of administrative procedures. 
Listed below in normal sequential order are the generally occurring steps required to successfully complete development of a subdivision: 
(1)  Preapplication review session with the field representative (sketch plan and general data). See Figure 1. 
(2)  Purchase a copy of the county subdivision regulations. 
(3)  Consult with the health department to identify any possible water or sewage problems associated with the land proposed for subdividing and health department approval of the lots. 
(4)  Consult with U.S. Soil Conservation Service for assistance in ensuring development land does not propose building sites in floodplains or flood hazard areas and that natural waterways will not be interrupted. 
(5)  Have land surveyed to obtain data for preliminary plat and final plat and to determine how land is to be divided. 
(6)  Develop preliminary plat with surveyors and submit to the planning commission 30 days before meeting at which preliminary plat approval is to be sought. 
(7)  Be prepared to accompany field representative or commission member to development site prior to the next commission meeting. 
(8)  Attend planning commission meetings at which preliminary plat approval is sought, or send a competent representative who can answer questions in your name. No action will be taken by the planning commission when no representative is present. 
(9)  Obtain grading permit, which requires plan and profile of new streets, from planning commission office if preliminary plat was approved. 
(10)  Begin initial subdivision work. 
(11)  Request inspection of earthwork, and utility work if any, by field representative prior to applying road surface material such as gravel or pavement and before seeding required by conditions of grading permit. 
(12)  Complete survey work as needed. 
(13)  Develop final plat for submission to the planning commission. 
(14)  Complete road, utility, and soil erosion work. 
(15)  Request final planning commission on-site inspection of completed required improvement work. 
(16)  Submit final plat to planning commission office 30 days before meeting at which approval is sought. Plat must bear all required certificates noted in this chapter as well as all notations or changes specified by the planning commission when the preliminary plat was tentatively approved. 
(17)  Attend planning commission meeting at which final plat approval is sought. No action will be taken by the planning commission when no representative is present. 
(18)  Record approved subdivision final plat in clerk of superior court office. 
(19)  Sell subdivision lots. If phased development is involved, only lots from final plats of approved phases can be sold or shown in conjunction with any subdivision plat. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(402), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-93. - Application for preliminary plat approval. 
The subdivider shall submit to the chairman of the planning commission, or his designated representative, at least 21 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission the following: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of preliminary plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the preliminary plat shall be sent. 
(2)  Five copies of the preliminary plat and other documents, as may be specified. 
(3)  Payment of a preliminary plat filing fee. 
(4)  [Reserved.] 
(5)  The following types of subdivisions shall be exempt from the requirements of a preliminary plat and shall not be required to obtain a certificate of preliminary plat approval: (1) a subdivision where all the lots front at least 50 feet on a paved road or street with a right-of-way of at least 60 feet and with the paved road or street being shown as a public road on the official road map of Banks County; provided no new road or street is required and such lots or parcels shall not be further subdivided for a period of one year from the date on the certificate of final plat approval and provided that the lots are not adjacent to other property to be developed as a subdivision within 12 months of the date of the recording of the plat for the lots described in this subparagraph (1); (2) Class I Subdivisions; (3) Class II Subdivisions; and (4) Minor Subdivisions. 
Note: All subdivisions shall comply with the regulations and rules of the Banks County Health Department and all subdivisions must have a final plat with a recording and approval certificate from the Banks County Planning Commission and the Banks County Health Department. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(403), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 2005-21, § 1, 7-12-2005; Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 2007-18, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 74-94. - Review of preliminary plat. 
(a)  The chairman or a designated representative of the planning commission shall check the plat for compliance with all relevant county regulations and ordinances and report findings and recommendations to the planning commission in public session. 
(b)  No preliminary plat shall be acted upon by the planning commission except in public session. Such sessions or hearing must be held at least monthly and are generally held on the first Tuesday of each month. The field representative is not empowered to approve or disapprove preliminary plat requests. The field representative will attempt to send not less than five days before the public hearing a notice of the date and time of the hearing by regular mail to the person designated in the letter requesting preliminary plat review. The field representative will attempt to contact by telephone the person designated in the letter requesting preliminary plat approval to reminded the person of the date and time of the hearing. However, it is the responsibility of the person requesting preliminary plat review to know the date and time of the hearing and to be present at the hearing or have a representative at the hearing. 
(c)  The planning commission shall take no action on a preliminary plat if the applicant or designated representative is not present at the hearing. 
(d)  At the public hearing the planning commission shall take one of the following actions which shall be recorded, with reason for disapproval where appropriate, in the minutes: 
(1)  Approve preliminary plat. 
(2)  Approve the preliminary plat on condition that necessary modifications be made (such required modifications must be recorded on the plat and in the minutes). 
(3)  Disapprove the preliminary plat. 
(4)  Table the request for approval to a date certain. 
(e)  The action of the planning commission shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat. One annotated copy of the plat shall be returned to the subdivider or agent and one copy permanently filed in the planning commission records. Both must clearly record approval or disapproval and reasons for disapproval or additional requirements for approval. 
(f)  All preliminary plat approvals shall be limited by these qualifications: 
(1)  The approval is a tentative approval only, pending submission of a final plat. 
(2)  The approval of the preliminary plat is valid for only one year from the date of approval of the planning commission and shall be null and void after that date. If the final plat is not received by the planning commission by the end of one year a new preliminary plat request shall be submitted before a final plat request can be considered. 
(g)  Preliminary plat approval constitutes authorization for subdivider to begin physical improvement to property being subdivided, to request a grading permit and building permit for one model house after approval of the health department and after an erosion and sediment control plan from the Broad River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(404), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 2007-08, § 1, 3-13-2007) 
Sec. 74-95. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
The preliminary plat shall conform to the following specifications and contain the required information: (See Appendices A—D) 
(1)  Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of either 100 feet to one inch or 200 feet to one inch. 
(2)  Index map. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet. 
(3)  Ground elevations. The preliminary plat shall show ground elevations, based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey as required by the planning commission. 
a.  For land that slopes less than approximately ten percent, spot elevations shall be shown at all breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swells, and selected points not more than 500 feet apart in all directions; 
b.  For land that slopes more than approximately ten percent, contours shall be shown with an interval of not more than 20 feet. A tie to one or more benchmarks shall be shown. 
(4)  Information to be provided on preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider. 
b.  Proposed name of subdivision and its acreage. 
c.  North point and graphic scale, date and vicinity map. 
d.  Acreage of the subdivision. 
e.  Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearing and distances. 
f.  Names of owners of record of adjoining land and zoning classifications. 
g.  Existing streets, utilities, and easements on and adjacent to the tract. 
h.  Proposed layout including streets and alleys with proposed street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses, any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings, and proposed provisions for maintenance of streets and other reserved/dedicated areas. 
i.  Block numbers and lot numbers and total land acreage for each lot. If river front lot, show water acreage separately in parentheses. 
j.  Provisions of water supply, sewerage and drainage. 
k.  Minimum front yard building setback lines. 
l.  Such street cross sections and centerline profiles as may be required by the planning commission. 
m.  Provisions for open space requirements. 
n.  Phased development plats must also show all other phases either by an attachment or a sketch map, index map, or boundary line trace on the same sheet as the preliminary plat phase being submitted. 
o.  Setback lines and undisturbed area in accordance with the county watershed plan, if applicable. 
p.  Reserved. 
q.  Width of right-of-way and status of access road into subdivision. 
(5)  Certification of preliminary plat approval. A certificate of preliminary plat approval by the planning commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
"Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Regulations of Banks County, Georgia, all the requirements of preliminary plat approval having been fulfilled, this preliminary plat was given approval by the Banks County Planning Commission on ____________ , ____________ . This approval does not constitute approval of a final plat. No property can be sold by use of this preliminary plat. This Certificate of Approval shall expire and be null and void on ____________ , ____________ . 

 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(405), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 2007-19, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 74-96. - Developments within municipalities. 
Plats of developments within municipalities where this chapter has not been adopted shall have the following certificate attached: 
"This plat of land within the city limits of is not subject to regulations by the Banks County Planning Commission." 

 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(406), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-97. - Application for final plat approval. 
After the preliminary plat of a proposed land subdivision has been given tentative approval by the planning commission, the subdivider may, within one year from tentative approval, submit to the planning commission at least 30 days prior to the next regular meeting the following: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat and giving the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the final plat shall be sent. 
(2)  Five paper copies of the final plat and other documents, as may be specified; and the original tracing or reproducible print thereof drawn in permanent ink or equivalent on drafting cloth or film, which is to be returned to the subdivider for filing. 
(3)  Payment of a final plat fee. 
(4)  A complete disclosure on how all utilities, roads and amenities are to be maintained, (including department of housing and urban development property report where appropriate) plus information requested as a result of findings during preliminary review. 
(5)  A copy of all covenants associated with the subdivision. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(407), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-98. - Review of final plat. 
(a)  The chairman or a designated member of the planning commission shall check the plat for conformance with the approved/conditionally approved preliminary plat and for compliance with this chapter and other relevant county regulations and ordinances and report findings and recommendations to the planning commission in public session. 
(b)  No final plat shall be acted upon by the planning commission except in public session. Such sessions or hearings must be held at least monthly and are generally held on the first Tuesday of each month. The field representative is not empowered to approve or disapprove a final plat request. The field representative will attempt to send not less than five days before the public hearing a notice of the date and time of the hearing by regular mail to the person designated in the letter requesting final plat review. The field representative will attempt to contact by telephone the person designated in the letter requesting final plat approval to remind the person of the date and time of the hearing. However, it is the responsibility of the person requesting final plat review to know the date and time of the hearing and to be present at the hearing or have a representative at the hearing. 
(c)  The planning commission shall take no action on a final plat if the applicant or designated representative is not present at the hearing, in which case the 45 day requirement in subsection (f) of this section is automatically waived for 46 days. 
(d)  At a public hearing within 30 days of request for final plat approval, the planning commission shall take one of the following actions which shall be recorded, with reasons for disapproval where appropriate, in the minutes: 
(1)  Approve the final plat. 
(2)  Disapprove the final plat and further notify the subdivider in writing of the specific reasons for disapproval within five days. 
(3)  Table the request for approval to a date certain. 
(e)  In order for the planning commission to approve a final plat, all requirements of these regulations must have been satisfied, and all improvements required must have been completed not less than 15 work days prior to the scheduled hearing at which final plat approval is requested. All improvements shall be inspected by the planning commission during this five-day period. 
(f)  Plats not acted on by the planning commission within 45 days of request for approval shall be deemed approved and a certificate of final plat approval shall be issued on request of the subdivider (tabling a request is acting on the request). If, however, the planning commission determines that additional time is required to study a final plat, an extension of time shall be requested in writing from the subdivider, who may agree to a specific time extension in lieu of a plat disapproval. 
(g)  If final plat approval is requested two times and is denied both times because required improvements have not been made, the planning commission shall not further consider that plat for 90 days following the date of the second disapproval. 
(h)  When all conditions for approval of the final plat have been met and such approval has been granted, the planning commission shall endorse and date the certificate of final plat approval on the original copy of the final plat. Such approval and endorsement convey the authority to record the plat and to sell lots shown on the plat. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(408), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-99. - Recording of final plat. 
Upon approval of a final plat, the chairman of the planning commission or his designated representative shall have the final plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. The subdivider shall be responsible for the payment of the recording fee at the time of submitting the final plat as provided in the section 74-98. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(409), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-100. - Final plat specification. 
The final plat shall conform to and meet the following specifications and contain the required information (See Appendices A—D): 
(1)  Scale. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of either 100 feet to one inch or 200 feet to one inch. 
(2)  Index map. Where more than one sheet is required an index map shall be required. 
(3)  Information to be provided on final plat. The following information is to be provided on the final plat: 
a.  Name and address of owner of record and subdivider. 
b.  North point, graphic scale and date. 
c.  Vicinity map. 
d.  Bearings and distances to the nearest existing street lines or bench marks or other permanent monuments (not less than four) shall be accurately described on the plat. 
e.  Municipal, county and land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
f.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth foot and angles to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one to 3,000. 
g.  Name of subdivision; its acreage; exact location, width, and names of all street rights-of-way and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat and description of how such streets within the subdivision are to be maintained. 
h.  Street right-of-way lines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents. 
i.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth foot and bearings. 
j.  Minimum front, rear and side yard building setback lines. 
k.  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically and total land acreage for each lot. If water front lot, show water acreage separately in parentheses. 
l.  Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use and boundary line notations disclosing plans for future development/phasing. 
m.  Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers. 
n.  A description, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants. 
o.  The following certifications: 
1.  An engineer's or surveyor's certification, directly on the final plat as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that the plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future," and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown and that all engineering requirements of the Subdivision Resolution of Banks County, Georgia, have been fully complied with." 

 
2.  An owner's certification, directly on the final plat as follows: 
Owner's Certification: 
State of Georgia, County of Banks. 
"The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey." 

 
3.  Certificate of dedication. A certificate of dedication by the owner submitted with the final plat and in such form as approved by the county attorney which sets forth the description of the areas and improvements dedicated by the owner to the public and the extent of title which is being dedicated. When appropriate, this is to be accompanied by a letter through the planning commission to the county commissioners requesting acceptance of streets as public streets. 
4.  Certificate of approval of the final plat. A certificate of approval of the final plat by the planning commission, directly on the plat, as follows: 
"Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Resolution of Banks County, Georgia, all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was given final approval by the Banks County Planning Commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ , and such plat is released for recording and for use in sale of land described hereon." 

 
5.  Copy of official action of board of commissioners. A copy of the resolution adopted by the governing body accepting the streets, improvements, easements and any other property dedicated by the owner for public use as indicated on the final plat, shall be attached to the final plat within 45 days after action by the governing body. 
6.  All developments having 100 lots or more shall have certification by a registered professional landscape architect attesting to conformation to reasonable standards of curvilinear design appropriate to the site topography as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that this plat is a reasonable and acceptable design having features which conform to the demands of the topographic, geographic, and aesthetic characteristics of the site, and having reasonable, acceptable relationship to the known resource capabilities of the given site." 

 
p.  Set back lines and undisturbed area in accordance with the Banks County Water Shed Plan, if applicable. 
q.  All subdivisions shall comply with the rules and regulations of the Banks County Health Department and all subdivisions must have a final plat with a recording and approval certificate from the Banks County Planning Commission and the Banks County Health Department. If any lot is not in compliance with the Banks County Health Department rules and regulations such lot is not a buildable lot and shall be so designated on the final subdivision plat. 
r.  Width of right-of-way and status of access road into subdivision. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(410), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 2002-12, §§ 1—3, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2007-20, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-12, § 2, adopted July 9, 2002, renumbered subsections 74-100(4)—(7) as 74-100(3)o.3.—6. 
Secs. 74-101—74-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL DESIGN AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 74-121. - Suitability of the land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons (e.g., traffic safety) unsuitable for residential use that will contribute to or increase danger to health, safety, or property destruction shall not be platted for residential use, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. No land determined to fall in a 25-year floodplain identified by state or federal authority shall be approved for any building site. All land falling into the 26—100-year flood zone must be so identified on the preliminary and final plats. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(501), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-122. - Name of subdivision. 
(a)  The name of the subdivision must have approval of the planning commission. 
(b)  The name shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision in the county. 
(c)  All class III subdivisions must have a sign erected at the entrance to the subdivision designating the name of the subdivision. The design of the sign shall be approved by the planning commission at the meeting for the approval of the preliminary plat for the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2003-13, § 1, 4-8-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-13, § 1, adopted April 8, 2003, repealed § 74-122, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 74-122 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1(1503), adopted March 13, 2001. 
Sec. 74-123. - Access. 
Access to every subdivision shall be over a county maintained public road or a county maintained public access road, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. Access to a Class III subdivision in a R-1, Single Family Residential District, shall be over a County maintained paved road with a dedicated right-of-way of at least 60 feet. Access to Class III subdivisions not in a R-1, Single Family Residential District, shall be over a County maintained paved road. Access cannot be provided over private easement, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. No more than 75 lots in a subdivision can be dependent on a single road for access/exit - to/from a subdivision if the access is to/from a County road and no more than 100 lots in a subdivision can be dependent on a single road for access/exit - to/from a subdivision if the access is to/from a State of Georgia Highway. Subdivisions with 25 or more lots shall have an acceleration-deceleration lane (length to be determined by planning commission but not more than 150 feet and width of 20 feet) at the entrance to the subdivision. Subdivisions with ten or more lots shall have concrete curb and gutters. The concrete curb and gutters shall be constructed with 3,000 pound concrete at 28-day breaking strength. Construction shall be of 3,000 P.S.I. concrete 24 inches wide (see plate 3 codified in this section and included at the end of this title as Appendix E). The curb and gutter shall be so constructed as to present a smooth, even line both vertically and horizontally. One-half inch expansion joints shall be provided at intervals not to exceed 50 feet, at the ends and midpoint of returns, and at any point where the new curb and gutter abuts other concrete structures with preshaped joints every ten feet. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(503), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1, 2-11-2003; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 1, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 1, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1, 3-13-2007) 
Sec. 74-124. - Conformance to adopted major thoroughfare and other plans. 
All streets and other features of the major thoroughfare plan of the county shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the major thoroughfare plan. When features of other plans such as schools or public building sites, parks, or other land for public uses are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acceptance or acquisition within a reasonable time by the appropriate public agency. Upon approval of the planning commission, a comparable sum of money may be contributed in lieu of dedication of land. Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the planning commission finds not required or suitable for such public use, the planning commission shall refuse to approve the plat, and shall notify the board of commissioners of the reasons for such action. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(504), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-125. - Innovation in large-scale developments. 
A comprehensive group development, including large-scale construction of housing units together with necessary drives and ways of access may be approved by the planning commission although the design of the project does not include standard streets, lot and subdivision arrangements, if departure from the chapter can be made without destroying its intent, and if substantial evidence can be provided demonstrating the acceptable performance of the nonconformance. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(505), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-126. - Easements. 
Easements having a minimum width of 12 feet and located along the front, side and rear lot lines shall be provided for utility lines, underground mains, and cables. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage right-of-way of adequate width and parallel streets may be required by the planning commission. When suitable road shoulder slopes cannot be obtained within prescribed road right-of-way widths, slope easements shall be required on abutting lots. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(506), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-127. - Reservation of public sites and open spaces. (Figure 2) 
(a)  Where the features of the comprehensive plan, such as school sites, parks, playgrounds and other public spaces are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision such features shall be reserved by the subdivider, provided, however, that no more than ten percent of the total area of the subdivision shall be required for reservation to fulfill the requirements of this section. Whenever the land required for such plan features is not dedicated to and accepted, purchased, acquired, optioned, or condemned by the appropriate public agency within a two-year period from the date of recording of the plat of the subdivision or by the time that at least 75 percent of the lots are built on and occupied, whichever is sooner, the subdivider may claim the original reservation and cause it to be subdivided in a manner suitable to the subdivider, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Whenever the public body responsible for land acquisition executes a written release stating that the reserved land is not to be acquired, the planning commission shall waive the reservation requirements. 
(b)  The planning commission shall not approve plats when such planned features, as specified by the comprehensive plan, are not incorporated into the plat. 
(c)  When a development is of such size or of a nature which will have a significant impact on community facilities, the dedication of an appropriate amount of land to meet such needs may be required by the planning commission. On approval by the planning commission a comparable sum of money may be contributed in lieu of such dedication. 
(d)  Whenever the planning commission finds that proposed reservation of land or dedication of land for public use is not required or suitable for such public use it may require the rearrangement of lots to include such land. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(507), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-128. - Community assets. 
In all subdivisions due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees, and watercourses, as well as for historical sites and similar community assets. These natural features, when preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property or community. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(508), 3-13-2001) 
Secs. 74-129—74-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND OTHER RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 74-161. - Continuation of existing streets. 
Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(601), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-162. - Street names, street signs and street numbers. 
(a)  Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the name of proposed streets duplicate existing street names, regardless of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, way or court. 
(b)  An index list of street names shall be placed on file with the planning commission to assist the subdivider in avoiding duplication. 
(c)  As part of the development of subdivisions, the developer of the subdivision must erect street signs designating the name of each street in the subdivision. 
(d)  Street numbers for dwelling units on all public and private streets and roads shall be assigned by the Banks County E-911 with the assistance of the county planning department, if requested. 
(e)  Street numbers for parcels of land will only be given if the owner has a driveway in place. This street number will be assigned for emergency purposes only and does not give said owner rights to erect any dwelling or install power without complying with all of the county ordinances, building codes and obtaining proper permits. 
(f)  The Banks County E-911 shall keep a record of all numbers assigned as street numbers. 
(g)  No building or structure for which a street number is required shall be occupied prior to the assignment of the street number. 
(h)  No building or structure for which a street number is required shall obtain permanent power or gas connections prior to the assignment of the street number. 
(i)  All persons requiring a street number assignment must apply by telephone for such number with the Banks County E-911 at least two weeks in advance of the date the street number is needed. 
(j)  The owner of property or person in charge of any house to which a street number has been assigned shall be notified by the Banks County E-911 of the assigned street number. 
(k)  Within 30 days after receipt of such notification, the owner or person in charge of a house to which a street number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous place. The number shall be easy to see both in daylight and at night from the road. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of such owner, occupant or person in charge of a house to affix the new number and to remove any different number which might be mistaken for, or confused with the street number assigned to the house by the Banks County E-911. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of each owner, occupant, or person in charge of every structure to which a street number has been assigned to display such number in figures at least three inches high with reflective numbers. 
(3)  The street number must be posted on both sides of the mail receptacle or on a sign at the road if there is no mailbox and also at the entrance to the residence if the residence is not where the mail receptacle or sign is located. If there is more than one residence or structure addressed on one drive, the number must also be affixed to the structure itself. 
(4)  Each owner, occupant, or person in charge of the structure is responsible for purchasing the material for the street number. 
(5)  All street numbers must conform to standards that allow for prompt and accurate emergency response. 
(l)  In the event the owner, occupant, or person in charge of any structure to which a number has been assigned refuses to comply with the provisions of this article by failing to display the assigned street number within 30 days after notification, he or she shall be fined $25.00 for each day after notice for so long as such failure to comply continues. 
(m)  The county marshall will issue citations for violations of this section 74-162, will enforce the penalty, and work with the Banks County E-911 on insuring that county residents who do not reside within a municipality abide by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-18, § 1, 4-8-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-18, § 1, adopted April 8, 2003, repealed § 74-162, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 74-162 pertained to street names and derived from Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1(602), adopted March 13, 2001. 
Sec. 74-163. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(603), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-164. - Culs-de-sac or dead-end streets. 
(a)  Minor streets or courts designed to have one end permanently closed shall be no more than 1,600 feet long unless necessitated by topography. Minor street or courts shall be provided with a turnaround at the closed end. 
(b)  Where in the opinion of the planning commission, it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining property, streets shall be extended to the boundary of such property and provided with a temporary turnaround. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(604), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-165. - Development along major thoroughfares, limited access highway or railroad right-of-way. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains a major thoroughfare, a limited access highway, or a railroad right-of-way, the BCPC planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street or at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land, with a nonaccess reservation suitably planted. Due regard should be given requirements for approach grades and future grade separation in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to a major thoroughfare (or limited access highway) but only to the access street. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(605), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-166. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial, or industrial developments but shall not be provided in one and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(606), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-167. - Street right-of-way. 
The right-of-way width shall be the distance across a street from property line to property line. All subdivision streets, public or public access, shall be platted as right-of-way streets. Lot shall not include any portion of the right-of-way. No street shall be platted on the basis of a private easement. Minimum street right-of-way, roadbed and pavement widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Streets. 
a.  Right-of-way: Minimum of 60 feet (40 feet cleared of all trees). 
b.  Roadbed: Minimum of 30 feet (pavement width plus shoulder width plus ditches width). Ditches should be two feet wide and two feet deep. 
c.  Pavement: Minimum of 20 feet. 
(2)  Culs-de-sac. Turnaround right-of-way: 100 feet in diameter. 
(3)  Variance. A variance may be granted on street right-of-way and pavement widths when adequate and acceptable justification is submitted; however, the standards will be routinely employed in all but severe cases. 
(4)  On each side of the pavement in subdivision streets in the county, there will be painted a solid white line; and a broken white line will be painted down the centerline of each subdivision street. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(607), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 2003-15, § 1, 4-8-2003) 
Sec. 74-168. - Right-of-way on existing streets. 
(a)  The owner/developer of a Class II or a Class III subdivision that adjoins existing county streets or roads shall dedicate 40 feet of right-of-way to the county on each side of the road or street measured from the centerline of the existing roadway where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the street or road and 
(b)  The owner/developer of a Class II or a Class III subdivision that adjoins existing county streets or roads shall dedicate 40 feet of right-of-way to the county on one side of an existing street or road, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway, if the Class II or Class III subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street or road. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 1, 10-8-2002) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-18, § 1, adopted Oct. 8, 2002, repealed § 74-168 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 74-168 pertained to additional width on existing streets and derived from Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(608), adopted March 13, 2001. 
Sec. 74-169. - Street grades. 
Maximum and minimum street grades shall be as follows: (See Figure 3) 
(1)  Streets, not in excess of 16 percent. 
(2)  No more than 25 percent of the total square feet of the pavement within a subdivision may be applied to a grade of 12 to 16 percent. 
(3)  No street grade shall be less than one-half of one percent in cases where streets are curbed and guttered. 
(4)  In meeting these grade and slope requirements on steep terrain, the planning commission suggests that wherever feasible the developer utilize a divided roadway in which the lanes for travel in opposite directions are cut at different levels of elevation. Under certain conditions, this method of giving separate treatment to each travel lane would lessen cut and fill requirements. Median cuts would be used at points where both lanes have the same road grade. The median cuts would shorten distance of travel in any one direction and facilitate access to lots served by each lane. (See Figures 4 and 5.) 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(609), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-170. - Street intersections. 
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersection shall be at an angle of less than 75 degrees, unless required by unusual circumstances. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(610), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-171. - Single entry road restriction. 
No more than 75 lots in a subdivision can be dependent on a single road for access/exit - to/from a subdivision if the access is to/from a county road and no more than 100 lots in a subdivision can be dependent on a single road for access/exit - to/from a subdivision if the access is to/from a State of Georgia Highway. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(611), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1, 3-13-2007) 
Secs. 74-172—74-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS 

Sec. 74-201. - Block lengths and widths. 
Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Blocks shall not be greater than 1,800 feet nor less than 600 feet in length, except in unusual severe circumstances. 
(2)  Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots, except where fronting on major thoroughfares, limited access highways, or railroads, or prevented by topographical conditions or size of property. In these cases the planning commission may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth to include a buffer zone. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(701), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-202. - Lot sizes and proportions. 
(a)  Residential lots shall meet the lot width and lot area requirements of the zoning ordinance of the county at the time of the development in the zoning district where the property being developed is located. 
(b)  Residential lots shall have a depth of not less than 150 feet and not less than 200 feet wide at building site, except that flag lots and cul-de-sac lots shall be 200 feet wide at the building line. Lots served by septic system and private well shall be at least 1½ acres in area if zoned residential (R-1) and two acres in all other zoning districts. 
(c)  Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building setback requirements from both abutting streets. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(702), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-203. - Adequate building sites. 
Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements or building setback lines required by this chapter and any existing zoning resolution. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(703), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-204. - Panhandle or flag lots. 
Panhandle or flag lots are discouraged, may be allowed where terrain makes standard design or frontage impossible or impractical. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle access lot shall not be less than 30 feet wide, and the panhandle access shall be not more than a 200 feet long. No more than two panhandle or flag lots shall be allowed in any subdivision. (See Figure 6). 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(704), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-205. - Buidling setback lines. 
(a)  Building setback lines shall be indicated on each plat. 
(b)  The minimum building setback lines on each lot shall be no less than 30 feet from each side lot line and 30 feet from the rear lot line. 
(c)  The minimum building set back line for the front lot line shall be 70 feet from the centerline of any road right-of-way or 30 feet from the front property line, whichever is greater, unless the lot fronts on a paved roadway with a dedicated right-of-way of 60 feet or more and in such case, the minimum building setback line shall be 30 feet from the front property line. 
(Ord. No. 2003-14, § 1, 4-8-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-14, § 1, adopted April 8, 2003, repealed § 74-205, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 74-205 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(705), adopted March 13, 2001. 
Sec. 74-206. - Utilities. 
All utilities in a class III subdivision shall be underground. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(706), 3-13-2001) 
Secs. 74-207—74-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 74-231. - Performance and specifications. 
Every subdivider shall be required to make the improvements outlined in this article in accordance with the specifications in this chapter or otherwise adopted by the county. The necessity for storm drainage on each site will be determined by inspection by the county planning department. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(801), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-232. - Iron pins. 
Lot corners shall be marked with solid steel rods not less than five-eighths inch in diameter and 24 inches in length and driven so as to be six inches above the finished grade. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(802), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-233. - Grading. 
All streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded by the subdividers so that pavements and sidewalks can be constructed to the required cross section. The minimum width of grading shall be the pavement width as specified in section 74-240, plus five feet on each side (20 feet of pavement plus ditches two feet deep on each side of the pavement plus three feet of shoulder on each side of the pavement). Deviation from the above will be allowed only when due to special topographical conditions. 
(1)  Preparation. Before grading is started, that part of the right-of-way consisting of the area to be paved plus the shoulders, shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials and all trees not intended for preservation. 
(2)  Cuts. All tree stumps, boulders and other obstructions shall be removed to a depth of two feet below the subgrade. Rock, when encountered, shall be scarified to a depth of 12 inches below the subgrade. 
(3)  Fill. All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches, or at other places as needed. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clays, etc., shall be removed from the roadway. The fill shall be spread in layers not to exceed six inches loose and compacted by a sheepsfoot roller. The filling of utility trenches and other places not accessible to the roller shall be mechanically tamped. 
(4)  Subgrade. The subgrade shall be properly shaped, rolled and uniformly compacted to conform with the lines, grades, and typical cross sections as shown on drawings approved by the planning commission. Unsuitable materials shall be excavated and replaced with acceptable compacted material. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(803), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-234. - Storm drainage. 
An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural waterflow, and shall be of sufficient length to permit full width roadway (roadway is defined as the portion of a road or street within the limits of construction) and the required slopes. The size of pipe to be provided shall be determined by an engineer, but in no case shall the pipe diameter be less than 18 inches. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(804), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-235. - Storm drainage plan. 
A storm drainage plan shall be submitted at the request for a grading permit stage and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Location of proposed drainage ways, streams and sediment ponds within the development. 
(2)  Location, size, and invert elevations of proposed drainage structure including culverts, bridges, pipes, drop inlets and top elevations of head walls, diversion ditches, etc. 
(3)  Area of land contributing runoff to each drainage feature. 
(4)  Location of easements and right-of-way for drainage ways and maintenance accesses therefor. 
(5)  Typical improvement around drainage features and culverts, if any. 
(6)  Direction of waterflow throughout the subdivision and computed velocities at those points deemed necessary by the review of the planning commission staff. 
(7)  Detailed engineering drawings on all impoundment structures, dams, sediment ponds, etc. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(804.1), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-236. - Form of certificate. 
Certificate executed as shown below: 
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM CERTIFICATION 
"I, (developer's engineer), a registered civil or hydrological engineer, certify that the storm drainage system shown on this drawing is properly designed to serve the subdivision shown thereon, as well as being adequate both in size and design to serve the entire drainage area, above each structure or feature, whose storm drainage waters would normally be carried through this subdivision on a 25-year floor frequency and/or three-inch per hour peak rainfall. It is further certified that the information shown hereon is true and correct and all data has been checked in the field. All drainage easements have been provided, where necessary." 

 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(804.2), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-237. - Installation of utilities and driveways. 
After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the underground work, water mains, gas mains, etc., and all service connections shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the road and across the flat section. All driveways for houses to be built by the developer shall be cut and drained. The installation and connection of water lines to the Banks County Water System shall be in accordance with specifications adopted by Banks County. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(805), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 2007-11, § 1, 3-13-2007) 
Sec. 74-238. - Water supply system. 
(a)  If a public water system is available, the subdivision must be connected to the public water system and water mains within the subdivision must be provided with connections to each lot. 
(b)  Minimum diameter of water pipes shall be six inches and submitted for review and approval by the county water department. 
(c)  Fire hydrants must be provided at not more 1,000 foot intervals whenever a community water system is used in the subdivision or a public water system is available to be used. 
(d)  If a public water supply system is not available to the subdivision at the time of development of the subdivision, then each lot shall be served by an individual well. The individual well for each lot in the subdivision shall be the responsibility of the individual lot owner. 
(e)  All tracts, lots, and parcels (collectively "lot") of land in a minor subdivision must front on a public road and have access from the lot to the public road or have an easement 20 feet in width from the lot to a public road for access to the public road. If the lot must have an easement to comply with this subsection (e), the conveyance of the lot must include a description of the easement. 
(Ord. No. 2003-16, § 4-8-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-16, § 1, adopted April 8, 2003, repealed § 74-238, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 74-238 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(806), adopted March 13, 2001. 
Sec. 74-239. - Sanitary sewers. 
If the sewage disposal facilities cannot be connected to a trunkline sewer at the time of the development of the subdivision, septic tanks, or another approved method of treatment of sanitary sewage shall be installed by and at the expense of the subdivider or lot purchaser for interim use, in conformity with the requirements of the county health department. 
(1)  Plan. A sanitary sewer plan shall be provided for those developments offering such service and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Location of all proposed and existing treatment facilities and information concerning present and projected capacities. 
b.  Location and size of all existing and proposed sewer lines in the development and tie points to other systems. Location of all sewer laterals. 
c.  Direction of flow of each sewer line and average slope as built. 
d.  Location of each manhole and other sewage system appurtenances, including lift stations and treatment plants. 
e.  Profile of sewage system. 
(2)  Sewage collection system certification. 
I, (developer's engineer), a registered engineer, certify that the sanitary sewer system shown on this drawing is properly designed; meets all local and state specifications; and, is adequate both in size and established depth to serve the drainage area whose sewage would normally be carried through this development or subdivision system, whether or not the total area to be served is within this subdivision. It is further certified that the information shown hereon is true and correct." 

 
(3)  Sewer system and sewage treatment facility. 
"I (Appropriate Official), hereby attest to the fact that this sewer system and treatment plant is satisfactory and meets all requirements of the State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division." 

 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(807), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-240. - Street pavement widths. 
Street pavement widths shall be 20 feet. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(808), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-241. - Street and alley improvements. 
(a)  Generally. Required streets shall be either public streets or public access streets, all platted with right-of-way specified in section 74-167. Public streets must be paved to meet specifications below in order to qualify for acceptance by the board of commissioners as public streets. 
(b)  Paving required. All streets must be prepared according to the following methods or by equivalent methods that are approved in writing by the planning commission: 
(1)  Base. The base shall consist of crushed stone or other approved material having a minimum thickness, after being thoroughly compacted, of six inches on all collector and residential streets and constructed on a prepared subgrade in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades, and typical cross section as shown on the drawings submitted to and approved by the planning commission. 
a.  Materials. All materials shall be secured from an approved source and shall generally conform to minimum acceptable standards of the state department of transportation, highway division, for this area. 
b.  Mixing of materials. All materials shall be mixed to the extent necessary to produce a thoroughly pulverized and homogeneous mixture. 
c.  Application of materials. As soon as the base material has been spread and mixed, the base shall be brought to approximate line, grade and cross section and then rolled with a sheepsfoot or other approved roller until full thickness of the base course has been compacted thoroughly and in accordance with state department of transportation specifications. The developer shall provide written evidence to the field representative that the base course has been compacted in accordance with state department of transportation roadway compaction specifications. All defects shall be remedied before paving. 
d.  Base course. The base course shall be maintained under traffic and kept free from ruts, ridge and dusting, true to grade and cross section until it is primed. 
e.  Deposit of base material during unfavorable weather conditions prohibited. No base material shall be deposited or shaped when the subgrade is frozen or thawing or during unfavorable weather conditions. 
(2)  Pavement. The pavement shall consist of at least two applications of plant mix (i.e., binder course and final course). The binder course shall be at least 1.5 inches (thickness) of plant mix Type B. The final course shall be at least one inch (thickness) of plant mix Type E or F. 
(3)  Joints. Care and precaution shall be taken that all joints between the surface mixture and such structures as manholes and curbs are well sealed. Subdivision streets shall be paved in accordance with the above specifications. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(809), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-242. - Guarantee of quality of improvements. 
Final acceptance of the right-of-ways and the streets located therein, the drainage and other improvements for maintenance by the county shall be in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The street system (includes right-of-ways, base pavement, grassing sidewalks, if any, cuts, fills, sub-grades, shoulders, storm water management, drainage, traffic signs and utilities) shall have been completed and in place for a period of one year and shall, upon inspection, following such period of time, be found to be free from defective workmanship or material and free from sinkholes or other settling or erosion and not in need of repair. The subdivider shall have the responsibility and duty to maintain and repair the street system until final acceptance by the county. 
(2)  At the time the final plat is submitted for approval, the subdivider shall furnish the planning commission the following: 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE AND DEDICATION 
The undersigned hereby certify that the undersigned is/are the owner(s) of and the only person(s)/entity having any right, title, or interest in the land shown on the plat of (name of subdivision), and the plat represents a correct survey of the above described property made with our consent, and that we hereby dedicate to the public the streets and street right-of-ways as shown on said plat. The easements as shown on the plat are created for the installation and maintenance of public utilities and the drainage easements as shown on the plat are for the benefit of the property owners and for the benefit of the public. We hereby represent, warrant and guarantee that there are no liens or encumbrances on the lands so dedicated. 
The undersigned acknowledge and agree to maintain the dedicated lands and the improvements thereon until such dedication is accepted by the Commissioners of Banks County, Georgia, pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of Banks County, Georgia. 
Witness the hand(s) and seal(s) of the undersigned this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 

 
(3)  At the time the final plat is submitted for approval, the subdivider shall furnish the planning commission the following: 
CERTIFICATION OF ENGINEER 
I hereby certify: (1) that I am a licensed civil engineer in the State of Georgia, (2) that I have inspected and performed such tests as I deem necessary to give this CERTIFICATION concerning the streets, including, without limitation, the base and pavement, the drainage, the utilities, and the other improvements in the (NAME OF SUBDIVISION), and (3) that the streets, including, without limitation, the base and pavement, the drainage, the utilities, and the other improvements in the (NAME OF SUBDIVISION) have been constructed and installed in a good workman-like manner and in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of Banks County, Georgia. 

 
(4)  At the time the final plat is submitted for approval, the subdivider shall post with the county a cash bond or a performance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit or escrow deposit (collectively the "bond") approved by the field representative or the chairman of the board of commissioners (form of bond provided by Banks County and included in this section) in an amount equal to 50 percent of the total cost of the street system, (the bond shall be based upon a total cost for the street system of $300,000.00 per mile) including grading, base, pavement, drainage and utility improvement costs as shown on the final plat for the subdivision and/or as required by the Banks County Subdivision Regulations. The bond will guarantee the county that the street, drainage and utilities have been installed in a good workman-like manner, that the improvements are free from defects caused by faulty material or workmanship or otherwise, that the improvements were constructed and installed in accordance with the Banks County Subdivision Regulations, that the improvements will remain in good condition for a period of at least one year from the date the final plat is approved and that the subdivider will repair and maintain the improvements for such one year period. At the end of such one year period, if the streets have settled, or grass not growing or drainage not working or be otherwise unacceptable because of faulty workmanship or material or otherwise, the defective conditions shall be repaired at the cost of the subdivider. Upon his failure or refusal to do so within 45 days after demand is made upon him by the county planning department, then the county shall make such repairs as are reasonably necessary, and recover the cost thereof from the subdivider after recovering on the bond. 
(5)  After the street system (includes right-of-ways, base pavement, grassing sidewalks, if any, cuts, fills, sub-grades, shoulders, storm water management, drainage, traffic signs and utilities) has been in place for one year from the date of the approval of the final plat for the subdivision, the street system will be inspected by the county planning department, at the request of the subdivider or as determined by the county planning department. If the street system is acceptable, the street system will be presented to the board of commissioners for acceptance into the county system. If the street system is not acceptable, the street system will not be submitted to the board of commissioners until all necessary repairs have been completed and paid for as provided in this Ordinance. 
(6)  Until the board of commissioners accepts the street system by signing the acceptance form, the street system will not be repaired and maintained by the county and the repair and maintenance of the street system shall be the sole responsibility of the subdivider. The form of acceptance is as follows: 
ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC DEDICATION 
The Board of Commissioners of Banks County, at a duly called public meeting, hereby accepts the dedication of the right-of-ways for the streets and the streets therein, and the drainage for the streets all as shown on the final plat, attached hereto, of the (Name of Subdivision). 
This ____________ day of ____________ , ____________ . 

 
ATTEST: 
____________  Clerk of County Commissioners 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, 2-11-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, adopted Feb. 11, 2003, repealed § 74-242, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 74-242 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 2001-32, § 1 adopted Oct. 9, 2001; and Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(810), adopted March 13, 2001. 
(Irrevocable Letter of Credit sample form. Note: Letter of Credit must be on bank letterhead and signature must be notarized) 
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT (Subdivision) 
Banks County Board of Commissioners  P.O. Box 130  Homer, GA 30547 
RE: (Subdivision name, Owner/Developer, Address, City, State, and Zip) 
To The Chairman Of The Banks County Board Of Commissioners: 
The purpose of this Irrevocable Letter of Credit is one of the following: 
To provide that all construction of the street system of ____________ Subdivision (the "Subdivision") will be completed and after completion maintained for twelve (12) months according to the terms and requirements as shown on the recorded Final Plat for the Subdivision and the Subdivision Regulations in force in Banks County, Georgia; and 
To provide funds for the completion and/or maintenance of the Subdivision if the Owner/Developer fails to comply with the Banks County Subdivision Regulations. 
             (Banking Institution hereinafter referred to as "Issuer") hereby establishes its Irrevocable Letter of Credit No. ____________ in favor of Banks County, Georgia, for the account of      . (Owner/Developer) up to the aggregate amount of      dollars * effective immediately and available by your draft(s) drawn at sight on the Issuer when accompanied by this Irrevocable Letter of Credit. 
The Owner/Developer responsibilities are as follows: 
All construction of the street system of the Subdivision shall be completed and after completion maintained for twelve (12) months ** according to the terms and requirements as shown on the recorded Final Plat of the Subdivision and of the Subdivision Regulations in force in Banks County, Georgia. The sidewalks, cuts, fills, sub-grades, shoulders, pavement, grassing, storm water management facilities, and traffic signs in the Subdivision must be properly maintained and free from faults in design, materials, and workmanship as shown on the recorded Final Plat of the Subdivision and as set out in the Subdivision Regulations in force in Banks County, Georgia. The Owner/Developer must make all necessary repairs and complete all construction within forty-five (45) days from the date of written notice from the Banks County Planning Department. If the Owner/Developer fails to comply with the notice from the Banks County Planning Department, Banks County shall have the right to draw up to the aggregate amount of this Letter of Credit. 
The condition of the obligation created hereunder is such that the Issuer hereby agrees that all drafts drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this Irrevocable Letter of Credit will be duly honored if drawn and presented for payment to the Issuer's office upon the failure of Owner/developer to meet the responsibilities as outlined in the preceding paragraph. Upon full compliance, this obligation shall be void; otherwise, it shall remain in full force and effect. 
This Irrevocable Letter of Credit is hereby issued on ____________ (Date) and expires on ____________ (Date, minimum 24 months from date of issuance), and the Issuer will have no more liability after that date. When the indicated expiration date falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, or for any reason the Issuer is not open for business, the expiration date shall be extended to the next succeeding business day. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Issuer has set its hand and affixed its seal on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 

 
*Fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of the street system for the Subdivision as determined by the Field Representative based upon a cost of $300,000.00 per mile of roadway. 
**Twelve (12) months from the date of approval by Planning Commission of Final Subdivision Plat. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, 2-11-2003) 
STATE OF GEORGIA,  COUNTY OF BANKS. 
ESCROW PERFORMANCE/MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT(Subdivision) 
THIS AGREEMENT made and entered into this ____________ day of ____________ , ____________ between              (owner/developer, hereinafter referred to as "Owner"), the Banks County Board of Commissioners (hereinafter referred to as "Banks County"), and ____________ (Banking Institution). 
WHEREAS,              is owner of Subdivision known as              Subdivision, (the "Subdivision") which subdivision is shown on a plat prepared by ____________ , Georgia Registered Surveyor Number ____________ , and 
WHEREAS,              (principal) wishes to induce the Banks County Planning Commission to approve the street system shown on the Final Plat of              Subdivision for recording purposes, and 
WHEREAS,              (principal) wishes to induce the Board of Commissioners of Banks County, Georgia, to accept the streets shown on the Final Plat of              Subdivision for public maintenance one year after the installation and construction thereof, ** 
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, the parties hereto mutually agree as follows: 
1. Owner agrees that all construction of the street system of ____________ Subdivision will be completed and after completion maintained for twelve (12) months according to the terms and requirements as shown on the recorded Final Plat for the Subdivision and the Subdivision Regulations in force in Banks County, Georgia. 
2. Owner has deposited the sum of $ ____________ * with the Banking Institution, and said sum shall be held in an escrow account by the Banking Institution subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(a) If either the sidewalks, cuts, fills, sub-grades, shoulders, pavement, grassing, storm water management facilities, or traffic signs in ____________ Subdivision are improperly maintained or are found to be defective from faults in design, materials, or workmanship as set shown on the recorded Final Plat of the ____________ Subdivision and as set out in the Subdivision Regulations in force in Banks County, Georgia, and the Owner does not repair the same within forty-five (45) days from the date of written notice from the Banks County Planning department, then upon written instruction from Banks County to Banking Institution, Banking Institution shall pay the sum held in escrow, or such portion thereof as is directed by Banks County, to Banks County or as Banks County may direct. Banks County may direct that disbursements to be made directly to any person, business, partnership or corporation which performs such maintenance, repairs, or construction as is necessary to comply with the Subdivision Regulations. 
(b) If the sidewalks, cuts, fills, sub-grades, shoulders, pavement, grassing, storm water management facilities, and traffic signs in ____________ Subdivision are properly maintained and remain free from defects caused by faulty design material or workmanship as set out in the Subdivision Regulations in force in Banks County, Georgia for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the completion of same or if the Owner makes all need repairs with the time period in the notice from the Banks County Planning Department, then Banks County shall direct Banking Institution to pay the funds held in escrow to Owner. No money held in escrow shall be paid out of escrow by Banking Institution without written authorization from Banks County. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, each of the parties hereto caused this instrument to be executed by their respective and proper officers and the corporate seal of each of the parties hereby affixed, the day and year above written. 

 
* Fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of the street system for the Subdivision as determined by the Field Representative based upon a cost of $300,000.00 per mile of roadway. 
**Twelve (12) months from the date of approval by Planning Commission of Final Subdivision Plat. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, 2-11-2003) 
STATE OF GEORGIA,  COUNTY OF BANKS. 
CASH BOND (Subdivision) 
THIS AGREEMENT made and entered into this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ , between                    (owner/developer, hereinafter referred to as "Owner"), the Banks County Board of Commissioners (hereinafter referred to as "Banks County"), and 
WHEREAS,              is owner of Subdivision known as            Subdivision, (the "Subdivision") which subdivision is shown on a plat prepared by            , Georgia Registered Surveyor Number ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , and 
WHEREAS,              (Owner) wishes to induce the Banks County Planning Commission to approve the street system shown on the Final Plat of              Subdivision for recording purposes, and 
WHEREAS,              (Owner) wishes to induce the Board of Commissioners of Banks County, Georgia, to accept the streets shown on the Final Plat of              Subdivision for public maintenance one year after the installation and construction thereof, 
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, the parties hereto mutually agree as follows: 
1. Owner agrees that all construction of the street system of              Subdivision will be completed and after completion maintained for twelve (12) months ** according to the terms and requirements as shown on the recorded Final Plat for the Subdivision and the Subdivision Regulations in force in Banks County, Georgia. 
2. Owner has deposited the sum of $ ____________ * with Banks County, and said sum shall be held in an account by Banks County subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(a) If either the sidewalks, cuts, fills, sub-grades, shoulders, pavement, grassing, storm water management facilities, or traffic signs in ____________ Subdivision are improperly maintained or are found to be defective from faults in design, materials, or workmanship as set shown on the recorded Final Plat of the Subdivision and as set out in the Subdivision Regulations in force in Banks County, Georgia, and the Owner does not repair the same within forty-five (45) days from the date of written notice from the Banks County Planning department, then Banks County will perform (or have performed) such maintenance, repairs, or construction as is necessary to comply with the Subdivision Regulations and deduct the costs from the cash deposit. 
(b) If the sidewalks, cuts, fills, sub-grades, shoulders, pavement, grassing, storm water management facilities, and traffic signs in ____________ Subdivision are properly maintained and remain free from defects caused by faulty design material or workmanship as set out in the Subdivision Regulations in force in Banks County, Georgia for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the completion of same or if the Owner makes all need repairs with the time period in the notice from the Banks County Planning Department, then Banks County shall refund the cash deposit to the Owner. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, each of the parties hereto caused this instrument to be executed by their respective and proper officers and the corporate seal of each of the parties hereby affixed, the day and year above written. 

 
*Fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of the street system for the Subdivision as determined by the Field Representative based upon a cost of $300,000.00 per mile of roadway. 
**Twelve (12) months from the date of approval by Planning Commission of Final Subdivision Plat. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, 2-11-2003) 
STATE OF GEORGIA,  COUNTY OF BANKS. 
PERFORMANCE BOND (Subdivision) 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that we,              (owner/principal, hereinafter referred to as "Principal"), and              (Surety), a company entitled and licensed to do business as a surety in the State of Georgia and Banks County, (hereinafter referred to as "Surety"), are held and bound unto Banks County, Georgia in the sum of $       * (hereinafter referred to as "bond amount") for payment of which we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators and assigns. 
WHEREAS,              (Principal) is owner of the Subdivision known as              Subdivision, which subdivision is shown on a plat prepared by              , Georgia Registered Surveyor Number ____________ , and 
WHEREAS,              (Principal) wishes to induce the Banks County Planning Commission to approve the street system shown on the Final Plat of              Subdivision for recording purposes, and 
WHEREAS,              (Principal) wishes to induce the Board of Commissioners of Banks County, Georgia to accept the streets shown on the Final Plat of              Subdivision for public maintenance one year after the installation and construction thereof, and              (Principal) and              (Surety) agree in consideration of the foregoing, 
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED,              (Principal) agrees that all construction of the street system of          Subdivision will be completed and after completion maintained for twelve (12) months according to the terms and requirements as shown on the recorded Final Plat for the Subdivision and the Subdivision Regulations in force in Banks County, Georgia. 
NOW, THEREFORE,            (Principal), and            (Surety) agree that if either the sidewalks, cuts, fills, sub-grades, shoulders, pavement, grassing, storm water management facilities, or traffic signs in        Subdivision are improperly maintained or are found to be defective from faults in design, materials or workmanship as shown on the recorded Final Plat for the Subdivision, or as set out in the Subdivision Regulations in force in Banks County, Georgia, and the Principal does not repair the defective conditions and/or workmanship within forty-five (45) days from the date of written notice from the Banks County Planning Department, then upon demand from Banks County,        (Surety) shall pay the bond amount to Banks County. 
Terms of Guaranty: 
             (Principal) and              (Surety) shall be bound by the provisions of this agreement until a properly authorized letter is received by          (Surety) from Banks County authorizing release of          (Principal) and (Surety) from this Performance Bond. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned have hereunto signed their names and affixed their seals, this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 

 
*Fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of the street system for the Subdivision as determined by the Field Representative based upon a cost of $300,000.00 per mile of roadway. 
**Twelve (12) months from the date of approval by Planning Commission of Final Subdivision Plat. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, 2-11-2003) 
Sec. 74-243. - Minimum access standards and prohibition of chain subdivisions in class I and class II subdivisions. 
(a)  All tracts and parcels of land in a class I subdivision must meet the required minimum lot size as set forth in this chapter and the minimum road frontage as provided in this chapter, except that in class I, a subdivision may be approved if such subdivision is created in its entirety for the purpose of the division of the tract of land among immediate family members, the division consisting of one tract per family member. "Immediate family members" consist of parents, children, grandchildren, brothers and sisters. 
(1)  This subdivision would not require a public or paved street provided the tracts or parcels of land access a public road by the provisions of a valid easement (unpaved), containing a minimum width of 20 feet. The easement must join all of the tracts in this subdivision and be owned jointly by all members of the immediate family. 
(2)  The tracts of land subdivided as a class I subdivision cannot be further subdivided as a class I subdivision for a period of three years from the date of the last subdivision as a class I subdivision. 
(b)  The easement allowed for a class I subdivision shall not be used to access any property not within the class I subdivision. The plat of the class I subdivision shall show the access easement and shall contain the following legend which shall be properly executed prior to approval by the county planning commission and recording by the clerk of court: 
"The undersigned owner hereby dedicates the private easement shown on this plat to the common use of the owner, or owners, of the lots within this subdivision. It is further acknowledged that such private easement shall not be accepted by Banks County, Georgia, but shall remain privately owned and maintained." 

 
(c)  All tracts and parcels of land in a class II subdivision must meet the required minimum lot size as set forth in this chapter and the minimum road frontage as provided in this chapter, except that in a class II subdivision up to two parcels of land may access a public road by the provisions of a valid easement (unpaved), containing a minimum width of 30 feet. 
(d)  No person shall develop portions of one tract, or contiguous tracts, one after the other, so that a succession of lower class subdivisions are affected instead of an initial, comprehensive, and proper development of a single subdivision as a class III. No person shall, therefore, develop more than one class II subdivision or combination thereof, from the same parcel or tract of land or on contiguous tracts. No person shall develop more than one class II subdivision, or combination thereof, or contiguous tracts, if such persons are engaged in a common development enterprise, if either one owns an interest in the other, or if the separate tracts were purchased one from the other or from a common grantor within two years prior to development. The development of contiguous subdivisions shall not be allowed if any class II subdivision is present and there is also present the extension of a street running through a subdivision or there is a street or way tying into a street in another subdivision. 
(e)  The applicant for approval of the development of any class of subdivision shall reveal in his application the fact and extent of any land owned by him, or in which he has any property interest, which abuts or adjoins the land for which subdivision approval is sought. The plat submitted to the planning commission showing the land to be subdivided shall also include a plat of all such abutting or adjoining land owned by the applicant. These plats shall show the conjunction of the land to be subdivided abutting and adjoining land owned by the applicant, and the owners of the land surrounding the applicant's lands. 
(f)  The easement allowed for a class II subdivision shall not be used to access any property not within the class II subdivision. The plat of the class II subdivision shall show the access easement and shall contain the following legend which shall be properly executed prior to approval by the county planning commission and recording by the clerk of court: 
"The undersigned owner hereby dedicates the private easement shown on this plat to the common use of the owner, or owners, of the lots within this subdivision. It is further acknowledged that such private easement shall not be accepted by Banks County, Georgia, but shall remain privately owned and maintained." 

 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(811), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 2003-19, § 1, 5-13-2003) 
Sec. 74-244. - Minor subdivisions. 
(a)  All tracts, lots and parcels of land in a minor subdivision must meet the required minimum lot sizes as set forth in this chapter and the county zoning ordinance. 
(b)  The tracts of land subdivided as a minor subdivision cannot be further subdivided as a minor subdivision for a period of three years from the date of the last subdivision as a minor subdivision. The filing date as stamped on the deed in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county conveying the property shall determine the date the property was subdivided as a minor subdivision and shall include, without limitation, a deed to secure debt or other conveyance of the property. 
(c)  The survey for a minor subdivision (only one of the two parcels must have a survey, unless both parcels are being conveyed to a third party) shall be approved by the county planning department. 
(d)  If a minor subdivision is further subdivided in compliance with subsection (b) of this section, the additional subdividing shall be in compliance with this chapter (i.e., more than two and up to four lots shall comply with the requirements for a class II subdivision and more than four lots shall comply with the requirements for a class III subdivision). 
(e)  All tracts, lots, and parcels (collectively "lot") of land in a minor subdivision must front on a public road and have access from the lot to the public road or have an easement twenty (20) feet in width from the lot to a public road for access to the public road. If the lot must have an easement to comply with this subsection (e), the conveyance of the lot must include a description of the easement. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(812), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 3-11-03) 
Secs. 74-245—74-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 74-271. - Hardship. 
Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with this chapter due to unusual topographic or other conditions beyond the control of the subdivider, upon due consideration, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, however, that such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the intent or purpose of the development regulations. Any variance thus authorized is required to be entered in writing in the minutes of the first planning commission meeting following issuance of the variance and the reason which justified the departure set forth. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(9.1), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-272. - Comprehensive group housing development. 
Plans for all such developments shall be submitted to be approved by the planning commission whether or not such plat is to be recorded. No sales permits shall be issued until such approval has been given. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(9.2), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-273. - Conditions. 
In granting variances, modifications, and approval for experimental subdivisions, the planning commission shall require such conditions as will, in its judgement, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied, modified or approved. These conditions shall include without being limited to: personal, surety, performance, or maintenance bonds; affidavits, covenants, or other legal instruments. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(9.3), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-274. - Justification for variances. 
The burden of proof and/or justification of a need for a variance from these standards shall be provided by the developer in the form of written documents and/or supporting graphics. The appropriate request for variance forms must be completed and attached. No variances shall be permitted which would nullify the intent of these standards and the adopted policies of the planning commission. Variance requests must be submitted before any work to accomplish variance related or noncompliance improvements begins. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(9.4), 3-13-2001) 
Secs. 74-275—74-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - JURISDICTION FOR ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 74-301. - Boundaries of jurisdictional area. 
The boundaries of the area of jurisdiction of this chapter shall be the boundaries of the county, excluding that land which lies within the boundaries of any municipality within the county. The land within these municipalities may be included under this chapter only after legal action is taken by the individual governing bodies of these municipalities to lawfully adopt this chapter. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1, 3-13-2001) 
Secs. 74-302—74-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 74-331. - Hearings; notice. 
This chapter may be amended. Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1, 3-13-2001) 
Secs. 74-332—74-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - REMEDIES 

Sec. 74-361. - Actions to stop violations. 
If any county land is used in violation of this chapter, the planning and zoning commission, the board of commissioners, the county attorney acting for either, or any adjacent property owners who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such land use. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1, 3-13-2001) 
Secs. 74-362—74-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 

Sec. 74-391. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted resolution of the county. Upon conviction of violation of any provision of this chapter the offender shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1, 3-13-2001) 
Secs. 74-392—74-420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 74-421. - Supplemental regulations. 
The county planning commission may supplement this chapter as necessary with administrative procedures so that the chapter may be more effectively and consistently applied. These administrative procedures must be explicitly recorded in the minutes of the county planning commission and entered into a booklet entitled "Administrative Procedures of the Banks County Planning Commission." 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1, 3-13-2001) 
Secs. 74-422—74-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - BOARD OF APPEALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-91 et seq. 

Sec. 74-451. - Establishment; jurisdiction. 
A board of appeals consisting of three members who shall be residents of the county is hereby established and it shall be known as the Banks County Planning Board of Appeals ("board of appeals"). The board of appeals shall be appointed by the board of commissioners for three-year terms or until their successors are appointed; and having been appointed, shall have full and complete jurisdiction as provided by law. Each member of the board of appeals in office shall continue in office for the remainder of his term. In all actions or decisions of the board of appeals, at least two members must concur. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(1601), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-452. - Meetings; officer to administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses; minutes required and filed as public record. 
Meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman, and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent, or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board of appeals and shall be a public record. The board of appeals may appoint a secretary who shall maintain all records and perform all services required by the board to fulfill its responsibilities. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(1602), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-453. - Appeal—Procedure. 
Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the county affected by any decision of the planning commission and/or the county planning department. Such appeals shall be taken within 30 days of the date of the decision being appealed, by notifying the person in charge of the county planning department. The notice of the appeal shall specify the grounds for the appeal. All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall be transmitted to the board of appeals members. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(1603), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-454. - Same—Notice of hearing. 
The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matters referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon a hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(1604), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-455. - Same—Stay of proceedings: exception. 
Any appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless an officer of the county planning department certifies to the board of appeals, after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a competent court: on application, on notice to the county planning department, and on due cause shown. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(1605), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-456. - Powers enumerated. 
The board of appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official and/or the planning commission in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which such board is required to pass under this chapter. 
(3)  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the chapter will in an individual case result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, to that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of appeals that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
b.  The application of the standards to this particular piece of property would create practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
(4)  In order to make a variance permissible, certain conditions shall be shown: 
a.  There must be a proven hardship by showing beyond a doubt the inability to make a reasonable use of the land if the development regulations were applied literally. 
b.  The hardship cannot be self-created; e.g., it cannot be claimed in terms of prospective sales, loss of time, economic losses due to market conditions, financial losses or gains, etc. 
c.  No variance shall be granted which would result in an increase in public cost for maintenance or damages in the foreseeable future. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(1606), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-457. - Use variance. 
No variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this chapter or other resolutions of this county. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(1607), 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-458. - Action on appeal. 
In exercising its powers, the board of appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer and/or the planning commission from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the approval of a subdivision or other land development proposal but only in accordance with this chapter. 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1(1608), 3-13-2001) 
Secs. 74-459—74-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - APPENDICES AND FIGURES 

Sec. 74-481. - List of appendices. 
APPENDIX A 
ITEMS TO BE SUBMITTED FOR REVIEW WHEN REQUESTING A CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL 
1.  Letter requesting review and check for review fees as assessed. 
2.  Sketch plan for total development of all holdings showing relationship of current development proposal being submitted. 
3.  Topographic map on all holdings to be developed: 
a.  Spot elevations at 500-foot intervals on all land averaging less than ten percent slope. 
b.  20 foot contours on all land with ten percent or more slope. 
4.  Plat conforming to preliminary or final plat specification as set out in this chapter. 
5.  Map showing all designated open space, parks and public areas within development if appropriate. 
6.  Name of recorded owners of all adjacent property. 
7.  Descriptive statement on roadway system discussing fully the construction standards to be followed. Map showing grades on both primary and secondary roads. 
8.  Profile on all streets having a grade greater than ten percent as requested by reviewing agency. 
9.  Typical cross section roads and local streets, showing right-of-way and paving widths. 
10.  All utilities to be provided, easements to be reserved. 
11.  Proposed drainage system for entire development. 
12.  Descriptive statement on all soil erosion and sediment control standards being followed. Letter from local soil conservation officer testifying to effectiveness of approach used. 
13.  All appropriate deed restrictions and/or covenants. 
APPENDIX B 
REQUIREMENTS FOR PLATS TO BE SUBMITTED  (List is not all inclusive) 

 
APPENDIX C 
PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL FORM  (list is not all inclusive) 

 
General Platting Requirements 

 
APPENDIX D—SPECIAL CERTIFICATES WHICH MAY BE REQUESTED 
FORM 1—OWNER'S CERTIFICATES 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE AND DEDICATION 
We, the undersigned (name of owner) do hereby certify that we are the owners of and the only person having any right, title, or interest in the land shown on the plat of (name of subdivision), and the plat represents a correct survey of the above described property made with our consent, and that we hereby dedicate to the public use all the streets as shown on said plat. The easements as shown on the plat are created for the installation and maintenance of public utilities. We hereby guarantee a clear title to all lands so dedicated from ourselves and our heirs or assigns forever, and have caused the same to be released from all encumbrances so that the title is clear, except as shown in the abstracter's certificate. 
RESTRICTIONS: (if any, follow here) 
Witness ____________ hand ____________ / ____________ / ____________ this ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 

 
FORM 2—CERTIFICATION OF THE APPROVAL OF WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS AND SEPTIC TANKS, IF APPLICABLE 
I hereby certify that the water supply and sewage disposal utility systems installed or proposed for installation in the subdivision plat entitled ____________ fully meet the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources, Health Division and are hereby approved as shown. 

 
FORM 3—CERTIFICATION OF THE APPROVAL OF STREETS AND UTILITIES 
I hereby certify:     (1) that streets, utilities, and other improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner according to Banks County specifications in the subdivision entitled ____________ . 
(Date) ____________ , ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 

 
FORM 4—PERFORMANCE BOND 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That we, ____________ , as Principal and the undersigned Surety, are held and firmly bound into Banks County, Georgia, hereafter called County, in the full sum ____________ DOLLARS ($ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ), for the payment of which, well and truly to be made, we, and each of us, bind ourselves jointly and severally, by these presents. 
Dated this ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ , ____________ . 
The conditions of this obligation are such that, 
WHEREAS, PRINCIPAL has submitted to the Banks County Planning Commission a preliminary plat for subdivision of a tract of land described as follows: 

 
AND WHEREAS, PRINCIPAL, pursuant to the subdivision regulations of the County of Banks, has filed this bond to insure the proper completion of improvements and utilities, including, without limitation, drainage improvements in the above subdivision. 
Now, THEREFORE, if the PRINCIPAL shall, within one year from the date of approval of the final plat of the subdivision, faithfully install complete improvements and utilities in the subdivision according to requirements or ordinances, approved plans, specifications, subdivision rules and regulations of the county and pay all bills for contractors, subcontractors, labor and materials incurred in completion thereof and shall hold harmless and indemnify the governing body and all interested property owners against liability, loss or damage by reason of failure of PRINCIPAL to faithfully perform the conditions hereof, then this obligation shall be null and void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect. Bond shall remain in effect until the field representative of the County inspects the subdivision and releases this Bond. Signed, sealed and delivered the day and year first above written. 

 
Approved by Field Representative this ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 

 
Approved by the Chairman, Banks County Board of Commissioners, this ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 

 
FORM 5—ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC DEDICATION 
Be it resolved by the Board of Commissioners of Banks County, Georgia, that the dedications (roads/streets, etc.) shown on the attached plat of (name of subdivision) are hereby accepted. 
Adopted by ____________ , Georgia, this ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 

 
FORM 6—SEPTIC TANK CERTIFICATION 
(Applicable only where septic tanks are to be used and no lots excluded.) 
I, ____________ , a registered engineer or district health officer in the State of Georgia, certify that a soil survey of each lot of subdivision has been completed by (name of testing laboratory) on (date) and that this test shows the soil to be sufficiently porous to permit septic tanks for each lot shown on the plat. 

 
FORM 7—SEPTIC TANK CERTIFICATION 
(Applicable only where septic tanks are to be used and certain lots excluded.) 
I, ____________ , a registered engineer or district health officer in the State of Georgia, certify that a soil survey of each lot of subdivision has been completed by (name of testing laboratory) on (date) and that this test shows the soil to be sufficiently porous to permit septic tanks for each lot shown on the plat, except for lots numbered ____________ . 

 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1, 3-13-2001) 
Sec. 74-482. - Figures. 

Figure 1, Sketch Plan 

Figure 2, Example of Open Space Allocation 

Figure 3 thru 5, Maximum Grade, Split Lanes of Travel, Contoured Road 

Figure 6, Flag & Pan Handle Lots 
(Res. No. 2001-08, § 1, 3-13-2001) 
Chapter 78 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The county adopted Resolution Number 98-8 on April 14, 1998, authorizing the county tax commissioner to commence tax foreclosures in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq. An official copy of the resolution is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein saved from repeal, § 1-6(14); administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1—78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— General assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, >Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c); local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 78-31. - Gross premiums tax on insurance other than life insurance. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). Gross direct premiums shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Res. No. 83-2, § 1, 9-6-1983) 
Secs. 78-32—78-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 

Sec. 78-61. - Exemption of certain property from ad valorem taxation. 
The county exempts the following properties from ad valorem taxation: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state. The exemption provided for in this article shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in this article shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the state from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for in this article shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. All property that is claimed to be exempt under the provisions of this subsection shall be designated as being "in transit" upon the official books and records of the warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, where such property is being stored. 
(Res. No. 84-6, 10-2-1984) 
Sec. 78-62. - Books and records. 
Such official books and records shall contain a full, true, and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the property, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse dock or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such in transit property, shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of this state and of any political subdivision of this state. 
(Res. No. 84-6, 10-2-1984) 
Sec. 78-63. - Amount of exemption. 
The exemption provided for in this article shall be 100 percent of the value of the property, as defined in the O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 
(Res. No. 84-6, 10-2-1984) 
Secs. 78-64—78-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 78-91. - Findings. 
(a)  The counties in the state are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51 et seq. to levy and collect an excise tax upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the county for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(b)  It has been determined by the board of commissioners that it is necessary and desirable to amend its written resolutions providing for the imposition, levy and collection of the excise tax and to reaffirm the rate of the excise tax to be charged and collected in the county upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to, the county for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(Res. No. 2001-19, 7-20-2001) 
Sec. 78-92. - Imposition of excise tax. 
There is hereby imposed and levied as of July 1, 1999, and each year thereafter, within the territorial limits of the special district located within the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51 et seq., an excise tax of five percent upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to, the county for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. (An excise tax of five percent is the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the county since July 1, 1999.) 
(Res. No. 2001-19, § 1, 7-20-2001) 
Sec. 78-93. - Liability for collection of tax. 
Every person or entity subject to the excise tax as provided in this article shall, except as provided in this article and except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51 et seq., be liable for the tax at the applicable rate on the lodging charges actually collected or, if the amount of taxes collected from a guest is in excess of the total amount that should have been collected, the amount actually collected must be remitted. 
(Res. No. 2001-19, § 2, 7-20-2001) 
Sec. 78-94. - Application of tax. 
The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty. The tax authorized by this article shall apply to the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations during the first 30 days of continuous occupancy and shall not apply to charges imposed for any continuous occupancy thereafter. The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to charges made for the use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or to any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge. 
(Res. No. 2001-19, § 3, 7-20-2001; Res. No. 2013-14, § 1, 9-10-2013, eff. 1-1-2014) 
Sec. 78-95. - Tax imposed on guest. 
Any tax levied as provided in this article is also imposed upon every guest who receives a room, lodging, or accommodation that is subject to the tax. Every such guest subject to the tax shall pay the tax to the person or entity providing the room, lodging, or accommodation. The tax shall be a debt of the person obtaining the room, lodging, or accommodation to the entity providing such room, lodging, or accommodation until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law by the entity providing such room, lodging, or accommodation in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts. The entity collecting the tax from the guest shall remit the tax to the county, and the tax remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this article. 
(Res. No. 2001-19, § 4, 7-20-2001) 
Sec. 78-96. - Exemptions. 
The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to the charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card, such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by the state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this article. 
(Res. No. 2001-19, § 5, 7-20-2001) 
Sec. 78-97. - Administration. 
This article shall be administered in conformity with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51 et seq. 
(Res. No. 2001-19, § 6, 7-20-2001) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 78-98. - Conflicts. 
All resolutions or ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict with the terms of this article or in conflict with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51 et seq., are hereby repealed, but it is hereby provided that any resolution, ordinances or law, which may be applicable hereto and aid in carrying out and making effective the intent, purpose and provisions hereof, which shall be liberally construed to be in favor of the county, is hereby adopted as part of this article. 
(Res. No. 2001-19, § 7, 7-20-2001) 
Secs. 78-99—78-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Article V, §§ 78-121—78-124 has been repealed by direction of the county, inasmuch as it appears to have been superseded by Ord. No. 95-10, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 1995, codified as ch. 22, art. II, §§ 22-31—22-99. Former art. V, "Financial Institutions Business License Tax" pertained to levy of tax, minimum tax, filing of return, and due date of taxes, and derived from Ord. No. 83-6, adopted Dec. 6, 1983. 

Secs. 78-121—78-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - JOINT COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL SALES AND USE TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Joint county and municipal sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-80 et seq. 

Sec. 78-151. - Tax levied. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-8-82 et seq., the board of commissioners levies a joint county and municipal sales and use tax of one percent within the special district whose boundaries are coterminous with the boundaries of the county and that the effective date of this article shall be April 1, 1981. 
(Res. No. 80-2, 11-21-1980) 
Editor's note— In a certificate of distribution executed November 21, 1980, the governing authorities for the qualifying municipalities and the county certified the distribution percentages of the proceeds generated by the joint county and municipal sales and use tax. The certificate of distribution and resolutions of the qualifying municipalities to levy such sales and use tax are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Secs. 78-152—78-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL PURPOSE LOCAL OPTION SALES TAX[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Special county one percent sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq. 

Sec. 78-181. - Tax levied. 
In order to finance the capital outlay projects which will be for the use and benefit of the citizens of the county, the citizens of the City of Homer and the citizens of the City of Maysville who live in the county, there is hereby authorized to be levied and collected within the county as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq. an additional sales and use tax in the amount of one percent on all sales and uses in the county. As required by O.C.G.A. § 48-8-111(a): 
(1)  The proceeds of such tax are to be used to finance (i) the capital outlay projects of the county, described in Exhibit "A" attached hereto and by this reference made a part hereof which are to be owned and operated by the county; (ii) the capital outlay projects of the City of Homer described in Exhibit "B" attached hereto and by this reference made a part hereof which are to be owned and operated by the City of Homer; and (iii) the capital outlay projects of the City of Maysville described in Exhibit "C" attached hereto and by this reference made a part hereof which are to be owned and operated by the City of Maysville; 
(2)  Such sales and use tax is hereby authorized to be imposed for a period of time not to exceed 20 consecutive calendar quarters (five years) commencing on the first day of the next succeeding calendar quarter which begins more than 80 days after the date of the election at which the imposition of such sales and use tax is approved except to the extent that a sooner time is permitted by law; 
(3)  The maximum cost of the capital outlay projects to be funded from the proceeds of such sales and use tax, and the maximum amount of the net proceeds to be raised by such sales and use tax, in the aggregate, is $15,000,000.00; 
(4)  The county general obligation debt is to be issued in conjunction with the imposition of the tax for the purpose of constructing a jail, constructing public safety facilities and purchasing fire trucks by the county but not for road, street and bridge purposes, and no part of the net proceeds from the tax received in any year shall be used for such other purposes until all debt service requirements of the general obligation debt for that year have first been satisfied from the account in which the proceeds of the tax are placed; 
(5)  If the county issues general obligation debt, the principal amount of the debt will not exceed $5,460,000.00, the maximum rate of interest on the debt will not exceed ____________ % and the amount of principal to be paid each year during the life of the debt is ____________ . 
(6)  The collection, allocation, disbursement and administration of the tax and the capital outlay projects for which the tax will be imposed will be subject to the agreement between the county and the City of Homer attached to these resolutions as Exhibit "D" and the agreement between the county and the City of Maysville attached to these resolutions as Exhibit "E." 
(Res. No. 2001-02, § 1, 1-9-2001; Res. No. 2001-21, 8-3-2001) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2001-21, adopted Aug. 3, 2001, held an election on March 20, 2001 to determine whether or not a special sales and use tax of one percent should be levied. Declaration of the election results authorized the levy of a special sales and use tax in accordance with § 48-8-110 et seq. An official copy of the resolution is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners.    Prior to that amendment Exhibits A, B, C, D, and E of Res. No. 2001-02 were omitted from the codification. Official copies of such exhibits are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Chapter 82 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 30; offenses, ch. 54; vehicles for hire, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Uniform Rules of the Road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Secs. 82-2—82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED ZONES 

Sec. 82-31. - Establishment of speed zones. 
The following speed zones are established based on a traffic engineering investigation: 
List of Roadways for Banks County 
ON-SYSTEM 

 
  
OFF-SYSTEM 

 
***School Zone Hours are Effective*** 
A.M.  from 45 minutes to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time—School days only 
P.M.  from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time—School days only 
(Ord. No. 97-11, 8-12-1997; Res. No. 2011-02, 5-10-2011; Ord. No. 2017-14 , 12-12-2017) 
Chapter 86 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes, ch. 50; planning, ch. 58; roads and bridges, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide for the development storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; waterwell standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Water line extensions. 
(a)  Any public or private waterworks company must request approval of the board of commissioners, designating by clearly defined drawings the area wherein they desire to run or extend water lines in the unincorporated limits of the county, before any construction shall commence. 
(b)  Any person, company or other public body who violates the provisions of the section shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-11 and may be required to disconnect any water lines installed in violation of this section in the county. 
(c)  The probate court shall have power and authority to impose fines and to determine if any lines should be disconnected pursuant to this section. 
(Res. No. 83-7, 12-6-1983) 
Sec. 86-2. - Not to serve any customers in Hall County out of the Banks County water line on West County Line Road. 
In consideration of Hall County's approval for Banks County to cross into Hall County's service area for the installation of a water line along West County Line Road, located on the border between Hall County and Banks County, Banks County will not serve any customers who reside in Hall County from the water line located along West County Line Road. 
(Res. No. 2003-01, § 1, 2-7-2003) 
Secs. 86-3—86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2. 

Sec. 86-31. - Definitions. 
(a)  Terms defined. When used in this article the following words and terms shall be interpreted as follows: 
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number shall include the plural and those in the plural number shall include the singular. 
Terms not defined in this resolution shall have their customary dictionary definitions unless the context indicates otherwise. 
(b)  Specific definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the existing sewer, ending five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Engineer means the engineer of the county water and sewerage department. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial process as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or body of surface or ground water. 
Person means any human being, firm, society, corporation, or other legal entity. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Properly shredded garbage means garbage that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which owners of abutting properties have access and which is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Storm sewer and storm drain mean a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Res. No. 98-3, ch. I, art. II, 3-10-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-32. - Deposit of excrement or garbage prohibited; exception. 
No person shall place, deposit, or permit to be deposited upon public or private property within the unincorporated area of the county, any human or animal excrement or garbage except in the sanitary landfill area operated by the county, provided that the deposit of animal excrement in the course of a farming, livestock, or agricultural operation shall not be a violation of this section. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 2-1.1, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-33. - Liquid waste disposal. 
No person shall discharge upon the ground or into any natural outlet within the unincorporated area of the county any suspended solid or garbage, sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other liquid, except when suitable treatment has been provided and approved by the county board of health or its authorized agent, provided, that no such discharge shall exceed the criteria for suspended solids and other pollutants, temperature, etc., set forth in this article. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 2-2.1, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-34. - Sewage connection mandatory. 
The owners of all buildings situated within the unincorporated area of the county and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way, or other area in which there is located now or in the future a public sanitary sewer shall install toilet facilities therein and connect such facilities directly with the public sewer within 60 days after official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is located within 100 feet of the property line. Such official notice shall be in writing and shall be signed by the department head of the county water and sewerage department. The water and sewerage department may grant an extension of this 60-day requirement not to exceed one year in length. No more than three such extensions totaling in the aggregate three years may be granted by the county water and sewerage department. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 2-3.1, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-35. - Application for extension of time to connect. 
No such extension can be granted unless proper application is made by the owner in writing to the water and sewerage department on a form to be furnished by the water and sewerage department. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 2-3.2, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-36. - Grant of extension. 
An extension may be granted only upon a finding by the water and sewerage department that connection to the public sewer is not possible because of the financial condition of the owner. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 2-3.3, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-37. - Certification for extension. 
(a)  No extension shall be granted without certification in writing from the planning department that the property in question contains the minimum square footage required by the particular use district. 
(b)  No extension shall be granted unless and until written certification is received from the county board of health or its authorized agent that any individual sewage disposal system on the subject property complies with all local and statewide laws and regulations. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 2-3.4, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-38. - Revocation of extension. 
An extension may be revoked by the water and sewerage department at any time. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 2-3.6, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-39. - Disconnection and abandonment of individual sewage disposal system upon connection to public sewer. 
When connection is made to the public sewer system, any septic tank, cesspools, and other individual sewage disposal facilities on the premises shall be disconnected and abandoned and the owner shall fill those structures with suitable material approved by the planning department and after issuance of the proper permit. Such disconnection, abandonment, and filling must be completed within 120 days of connection to the public sewer system. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 2-3.7, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-40. - Prohibited discharge of drainage waters. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 3-1.1, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-41. - Prohibited connections. 
No connection of combined sewers, i.e., sanitary sewer and storm sewer or storm drain, shall be made to the public sewer system. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 3-1.2, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-42. - Discharge of stormwater, unpolluted drainage and industrial cooling water. 
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated for storm waters, or to a natural outlet approved by the county board of health. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the state environmental protection division, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 3-1.3, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-43. - Prohibited discharges. 
Except as provided in this article, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, motor oil, mineral spirits, commercial solvent, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(2)  Waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or to constitute a hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; 
(3)  Waters or wastes having pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 8.5 or having other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; 
(4)  Water or wastes that contain more than ten parts per million, by weight, of the following gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, or nitrous oxide; 
(5)  Ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, straw shavings, metal, ground paper products, glass, rags, feathers, offal, plastics, wood, paunch, manure, hair, and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, beer or distillery slops, chemical residues, paint or ink residues, cannery waste, bulk solids, or other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works; and 
(6)  Wastes from hospitals containing radioactive materials and high BOD wastes from funeral parlors or other embalming facilities, milk and milk products processing plants, slaughter houses and similar industries or contributing waste products difficult to treat and assimilate in the receiving stream. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 3-2.1, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-44. - Specific discharge limitations. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, the following described substances, materials, water or wastes if it is determined by the water and sewerage department that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In making such determination, the water and sewerage department will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewers and other pertinent factors. The following substances listed in subsection (a)(1)—(11) of this section shall not be discharged into any public sewer without a written permit from the water and sewerage department: 
(1)  Liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius); 
(2)  Water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius); 
(3)  Garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (1.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the water and sewerage department; 
(4)  Waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(5)  Waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes found by the water and sewage department to exert an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree than any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the water and sewerage department for such materials, provided that in no event shall the following limits be exceeded: 
Fixed Upper Limits for Constituents (Parts per Million by Weight) 

 
(6)  Waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the water and sewerage department, state, federal, or other public agencies or jurisdictions; 
(7)  Noxious or malodorous gas or substance, capable of creating a public nuisance, or hazard to life, or preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance, inspection, and repair; 
(8)  Waters containing quantities of radium, naturally occurring, or artificially produced radioisotopes, in excess of presently existing or subsequently accepted limits for drinking water as established by the National Committee on Radiation Protection and Measuring; 
(9)  Waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 8.5; 
(10)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions); or 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; and 
(11)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge to the receiving waters. 
(b)  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand in excess of 300 parts per million by weight on a 24-hour composite basis, or having a BOD solids content for any sample period greater than five times the average influent value recorded at the affected sewage treatment plant during the previous calendar year, will be subject to review by the water and sewerage department. Where necessary in the opinion of the water and sewerage department, the owner shall provide and operate, at his own expense, such pretreatment as may be required to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand, pH, total solids, discoloration, toxic metals, etc., to meet the above requirements. 
(c)  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a suspended solids content in excess of 350 parts per million by weight on a 24-hour composite basis or having a suspended solids content for any sample period greater than five times the average influent value recorded at the affected sewage treatment plant during the previous calendar year, will be subject to review by the water and sewerage department. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 3-2.2, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-45. - Sand and oil/grease interceptors. 
(a)  Requirement. All users involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide oil/grease interceptors or traps. Additionally, any user who generates a wastewater which contains greater than the quantity of oil and grease regulated under sections 86-40 through 86-50, and provided that the excess oil and grease is floatable and can be effectively removed in an oil/grease interceptor or trap, then such user will be required to install an oil/grease interceptor. 
(b)  Design criteria. 
(1)  For restaurants and other eating establishments. All sand and oil/grease interceptors used in conjunction with restaurants or other eating establishments shall have a capacity of 15 gallons per seat, except that no grease trap shall be smaller than 750 gallons or larger than 3,000 gallons. Also oil/grease interceptors must be baffled and have an inspection station. 
(2)  For facilities other than eating establishments. All sand and oil/grease interceptors used in conjunction with facilities other than eating establishments shall have a capacity that will provide not less than ten minutes nor more than 30 minutes retention time at the peak eight-hour flow rate. Flow through velocities shall not exceed one foot per second at the peak eight-hour flow rate. 
(3)  Maintenance. All grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be maintained by the user at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured materials, and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the county. The frequency of removal shall be such as to ensure that no overflows of oil, grease or sand into the wastewater system ever result. 
(4)  Proper disposal of collected materials. Under no circumstances shall the collected materials ever be returned to the wastewater system. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 3-2.3, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-46. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Protection against. Each significant contributing industry shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Additionally, any person or industry which handles hazardous wastes, any priority pollutant as shown on the Environmental Protection Agency list, or any prohibited materials shall, upon the request of the board of commissioners, provide proof of protection from accidental discharge of hazardous wastes, priority pollutants, or prohibited materials. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the county for review, and shall be approved by the county before construction of the facilities. All existing users shall complete such a plan within 90 days after the effective date of the resolution from which this article is derived. Construction shall be completed within 180 days of approval of plans by the county. No significant contributing industry who commences contributing to the county wastewater system after the effective date of the resolution from which this article is derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures and facilities (if required) have been approved by the county. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Oral notice to county. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the county of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken. 
(c)  Written notice to county. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the county a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the county wastewater facilities, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(d)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of an accidental discharge and advising of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 3-2.4, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-47. - Discharge limitations. 
No person shall discharge into any public sewer any of the following liquids: 
(1)  Having a five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight; 
(2)  Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; 
(3)  Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in section 86-43; or 
(4)  Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the service area. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 3-2.5, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-48. - Submission of plans and specifications for preliminary treatment facility. 
No person shall construct any preliminary treatment facilities to meet the specifications of this article unless and until all plans, specifications, and other pertinent data is submitted to the water and sewerage department, the county board of health, and the planning department for approval in writing with the proper permits being obtained. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 3-2.6, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-49. - Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities. 
Preliminary treatment facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 3-2.7, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-50. - Control manhole. 
When required by the water and sewerage department of the county, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the water and sewerage department and by the planning department with the proper permit being obtained. The manhole shall be installed by the owner and shall be maintained so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 3-2.8, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-51. - Sewer construction and connection; permits. 
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or openings into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the water and sewerage department. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 4-1.1, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-52. - Permit requirements. 
No person, including the water and sewerage department, shall construct, or excavate for, any sewer, drain, or other construction without first having obtained from the planning department a building permit, grading permit, or any other permit required by the county, except in an emergency situation where danger to life, property, or integrity of the system exists. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 4-1.2, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-53. - Safety measures and inspections. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the public entity involved. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 4-2.1, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-54. - Notification and inspection of connections. 
Notification shall be made to the water and sewerage department when any building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the water and sewerage department. No connection shall be made to a public sewer without such inspection and supervision. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 4-2.2, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-55. - License and bond requirements. 
When installing sewer service connections for hire in unincorporated areas of the county, before cutting any street, sidewalk or public property, and before connecting any service line to the public sewer, a plumber's license must be obtained and must be in compliance with all regulations of the county including those enforced by the planning department. Plumbers shall furnish to the county good and sufficient bond to save the county harmless from liability arising from any excavation; cut-in or other work performed along or across any public right-of-way before a permit is issued. Such bond shall be in the form approved by the county attorney and in the amount which the board of commissioners may, from time to time, require. 
(Res. No. 98-3, § 4-2.3, 3-10-1998) 
Sec. 86-56. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the processes of the superior court of the county or the state court of the county and, upon conviction of such misdemeanor, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Res. No. 98-3, ch. V, 3-10-1998) 
Chapter 90 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; roads and bridges, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 90-1—90-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WRECKER SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2009-08, § 1, adopted April 14, 2009, repealed §§ 90-31—90-38, which pertained to introduction; qualifications; renewals; operation; response time; storage lots; complaints; and grounds for removal from rotating list, investigation, hearing notification, and appeal; and derived from Res. No. 2007-36, adopted Dec. 11, 2007 and Res. No. 95-3, adopted April 11, 1995.  Section 2 of Res. No. 2009-08 states "The Sheriff of Banks County shall establish the procedure, qualifications, and requirements for wrecker companies to be on a rotating list to provide wrecker service in Banks County." 
State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

Secs. 90-31—90-38. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the county's zoning resolution as adopted by the board of commissioners on March 11, 1997. Amendments to the resolution are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original resolution. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statute, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-6(10); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; planning, ch. 58; signs, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the 1983 Georgia State Constitution, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Banks County and the State of Georgia, including among other purposes the lessening of congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, flood, panic, environmental hazards, and other dangers; promoting health and the general welfare; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land and avoiding both undue concentration of population and urban sprawl; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage service, schools, parks, and other public requirements; promoting such distribution of population, classification of land uses, distribution of land uses and distribution of land development and utilization as will tend to facilitate and promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; preserving buildings, structures and uses in areas having national, regional, state or local historic or environmental significance; protecting property against blight and depreciation; protecting persons and property against environmental hazards; securing economy in governmental expenditures; conserving the value of buildings and other property; and encouraging the most appropriate use of land, buildings and structures throughout Banks County, all in accordance with a land use plan for the development of the county, the board of commissioners hereby ordains and enacts into law the following articles and sections. 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE 
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Resolution of Banks County, Georgia." 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS OF TERMS 

Section 301. - Definitions. 
When used in these regulations, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this article. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. The term "shall" is mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. 
Accessory building or use: A building or use which is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or use served; contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use; and is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use. 
Adult dog means a dog at least one year of age. 
Agriculture: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including the raising of crops and livestock, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, forestry and other similar enterprises or uses. 
Airport: Any area of land, water or mechanical structure which is used for the landing and take-off of aircraft, including any appurtenant structures and areas which are used or intended to be used for airport buildings, other airport facilities, rights-of-way or easements. 
Alteration: Any change in the structural components of a building, any modification or change in construction, any addition that changes the area or height, any change in use of or movement of a building from one location to another, or any change in the amount or volume of space used for any activity. 
Ambient noise: The all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources, near and far. 
Barn: A farm building used to store farm products or shelter livestock. 
Bed and breakfast inn: A building wherein lodging or lodging and breakfast are provided to guests for compensation and where the operator of the bed and breakfast lives on the premises. 
Boardinghouse: A building where, for compensation, both lodging and meals are provided for persons, provided that a single-family dwelling shall not be deemed to be a boardinghouse by reason of a contribution to or expense sharing arrangement with the owner or tenant occupying the dwelling by a person related by blood or marriage. 
Buffer, opaque vegetative: An evergreen buffer of shrubbery, such as Holly or Leyland Cypress that when mature, has a minimum height of six feet. When planted, the distance between the shrubs shall be sufficient to create a solid opaque barrier when mature. Plants must reach a height of six feet within two years of planting. The owner shall be responsible for all maintenance of the vegetative buffer, to include replacement of plants if necessary, and to ensure continual compliance with height requirements. 
Buffer, opaque fence: An opaque fence shall be a wall or fence, solid in appearance of either wood, stone, brick, vinyl or stucco. Neither a chain-link fence nor a chain-link fence with metal slats, qualifies as an opaque fence. The fence or wall must have a minimum height of six feet. The owner shall be responsible for all maintenance of the fence or wall. 
Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, property, or waste of any kind, or similar structures used for purposes of a building as defined herein. 
Building official: The primary employee or his/her designee who is designated by the board of commissioners to administer and enforce its building code and related regulations. 
Building, principal: A building or structure in which is conducted the primary use of the property on which the building or structure is located. 
Building setback line: A line establishing a minimum allowable distance between the wall of a building, including any covered porches, and the street right-of-way or property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. In the case of corner lots or double frontage lots, front yard requirements shall be observed for those areas adjacent to street rights-of-way. 
Bulk: A term used to describe the size and shape of a building or structure and its relationship to other buildings, to the lot area for a building and to open spaces and yards. 
Cemetery—Family plots: Family plots are burial grounds restricted to members of the family owning the lot on which the cemetery is located. Family plots shall be located only on lots of two acres or greater. For the purposes of this section, "family" shall be defined as family within the fourth degree of civil reckoning from the property owner. 
Cemeteries: Cemeteries are burial grounds, generally where multiple burial plots are sold or provided for burial of persons beyond the immediate family. All cemeteries must be located on a lot of at least five acres. 
Certificate of occupancy: A legal statement or document issued by the building official indicating that the building and use or reuse of a particular building or land is in conformity with all applicable codes and regulations, and that such building or land may be occupied for the purpose stated therein. 
Club: A building or facility owned or operated for social, educational, or recreational purposes, but not for profit or other purposes that is customarily undertaken for monetary gain. 
Commercial kennel means an enclosed structure with sound proof walls used for the raising, housing, breeding, boarding or training of more than four adult dogs primarily for the purpose of generating income or revenue; or an enclosed structure with sound proof walls used for the raising, housing, breeding, boarding or training of more than 12 adult dogs, and not primarily used for the purpose of generating income or revenue. 
Compatibility: The characteristics of different uses or activities that permit such uses or activities to be located near each other or otherwise co-exist in harmony and without conflict. Some elements affecting compatibility include but are not limited to: intensity of occupancy as measured by dwelling units per acre or gross square footage per acre; pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated; volume of goods handled, such environmental effects as noise, vibration, odor, glare, air pollution, water pollution or radiation; and the effects of uses on the value of other property. 
Comprehensive plan: Those coordinated plans or portions thereof which have been or may hereafter be prepared by or for the governing body for the physical development of the jurisdiction; or any plans that designate plans or programs to encourage the most appropriate use of the land in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
Conditional use: A use that would be appropriate only with specified restrictions throughout a zoning district and that is not automatically permitted by right within a zoning district, but that may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions contained in these regulations or otherwise required by the governing body. Such uses shall be permitted only if approved in advance by the governing body in accordance with the regulations established herein as evidenced by the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Conditional use permit: The permit issued as a precondition to allowing any conditional use in a zoning district. 
Conditional zoning: The granting or adoption of zoning for property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, density or actions stipulated by the governing body to mitigate adverse impacts that are anticipated without imposition of such conditions. 
Condominium (residential building): A building or complex of multiple-dwelling units in which each unit is owned individually by separate owners with the common areas jointly owned by the owners of the units. 
Contractor's establishment: A building, structure or use involved in construction activities, including but not limited to, plumbing, electrical work, building, paving, carpentry and other such activities, including the storage of materials and the overnight parking of vehicles related to such establishments. 
Convenience store: A retail store, which sells convenience items. A convenience store may include the sale of gasoline, propane, kerosene and diesel fuel. 
Conversion: Any change in the original use or purpose of a building or lot to a different use. 
Day care center: A child care facility, pre-kindergarten, play or other special school for young children (other than at public or private elementary schools) providing, for compensation, care and maintenance to seven or more children under age 17 for a period of 12 hours or less, typically during normal daytime hours. A day care center of six children or less is considered to be a home occupation. 
Density: The number of dwelling units developed, or to be developed, per gross acre of land, or the gross square footage of a building, other structure or use per acre of land. 
Development: Any manmade change of improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
District, zoning: A geographical area or areas, designated with the use of symbols on the official zoning map, wherein uses of land are restricted in type, size, height and other limitations as established in these regulations. 
Dormitory: A building that is owned and/or operated by an educational institution, the primary purpose of which is to provide living accommodations for individuals associated with the institution, but which does not include individual kitchen facilities. 
Dwelling: A building designed, arranged or used for permanent living, and/or sleeping quarters for persons. 
Dwelling unit: A building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit using the same cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residence. 
Dwelling, multifamily: A structure under single ownership designed for or occupied by three or more dwelling units. Multi-family dwellings do not include motels, hotels, lodging houses, hospitals, nursing homes, or public institutions such as prisons and mental institutions. 
Dwelling, single-family: A completely free-standing residential building, occupying its own structure from ground to roof, designed for or occupied exclusively by one family and meeting or exceeding the local building code for on-site construction, and separated from other single-family detached dwellings by yards. For regulatory purposes, a single-family dwelling is not to be construed to include manufactured homes or mobile homes or portable housing for recreational or other temporary use or a single-family attached dwelling. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex): A dwelling designed or arranged to be occupied by two single housekeeping units living independently of each other. 
Family: An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than four unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit and using the same cooking facilities. For purposes of this ordinance, family may include five or fewer foster children placed in a family foster home licensed by the State of Georgia, but shall not include fraternities, sororities, rooming houses or boardinghouses, nursing homes, or rest homes. 
Farm: An area of land principally devoted to agriculture. 
Farm supply store: An establishment engaged in the retail sale of animal feeds, fertilizers, agricultural chemicals, pesticides, seeds and other such farm supplies. 
Flea market: The use of land, structures or buildings for the sale of goods which are principally used or second-hand goods. 
Garage: An accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles and other personal property as an accessory use. 
Governing body: The Board of Commissioners of Banks County, duly elected by the citizens within the jurisdiction. 
Grade is defined as the average elevation of the ground on all sides of a building. 
Guest house: A lodging unit for temporary guests in an accessory building. No such lodging unit shall contain independent cooking or kitchen facilities and shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Height, building: The vertical distance measured from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof; to the decklines of a mansard roof; or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
Home occupation: Any use, occupation or activity conducted on the same lot as a dwelling by the residents thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residence purposes and does not change the character thereof, and in connection with which there is no display, no stock-in-trade nor commodity sold or stored on the premises; and where only those persons residing on the premises and not more than one outside employee are employed specifically in connection with the home occupation. 
Inoperable vehicle: Any motorized vehicle, other than those vehicles temporarily disabled, incapable of immediately being driven. Any motorized vehicle designed for use on a public road without a current vehicle registration tag shall be considered an inoperable vehicle. 
Junk/salvage yard: Any property involving the abandonment, parking, storage or disassembly of junked or inoperable vehicles or junked machinery, or the abandonment, storage, sale, or resale of used auto parts, tires, scrap iron, metal, used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, refrigerators and other old household appliances, used brick, wood, or other building/structural materials, used paper, rags or other scrap materials. 
Kennel means a structure or enclosure used for the raising, housing, breeding, boarding or training of more than four adult dogs, but not more than 12 adult dogs, and not primarily used for the purpose of generating income or revenue. 
Lagoon, animal waste: A shallow body of liquid waste material. 
Landfill, construction and demolition waste: A landfill accepting only waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such waste include, but are not limited to wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Landfill, inert waste: A landfill accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed above. 
Landfill, solid waste: A landfill accepting any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials or hazardous waste; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). 
Livestock: All animals of the equine, bovine, or swine class, including but not limited to goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle, and other grazing animals, and all ratities, including, but not limited to, ostriches, emus, and rheas, and non-traditional livestock including, but not limited to, bison, deer, buffalo, llamas, and alpacas. 
Lodginghouse: A fraternity house, sorority house, dormitory, or other such building designed and occupied, with or without separate kitchen or housekeeping facilities for each unit. 
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied for a use, by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same, and having frontage on a street; or a developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
Lot area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public street right-of-way. 
Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more public streets at their intersection. 
Lot, double frontage: Any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two public streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
Lot frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the county superior court clerk; or a parcel of land, the deed, plat or other designation (as a separate lot of record) of which has been recorded in the same office. 
Lot width: The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum required front yard (regulatory front building setback) line. 
Manufactured home: A detached, single-family dwelling unit designed for long-term occupancy and constructed in one or more units made to be transported after fabrication on wheels and when connected to required utilities to include plumbing and electrical systems. Such a dwelling shall be constructed in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, which came into effect on June 15, 1976, as amended, and shall bear the insignia issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Removal of the wheels and placement on a foundation does not change its classification. Travel trailers and recreational vehicles are not manufactured/mobile homes. 
Manufacturing, processing and assembling: The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. The land uses engaged in these activities are usually described as plants, factories or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Establishments engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered under this definition if the new product is neither a fixed structure nor other fixed improvement. Also included is the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastic resins or liquors. 
Mini-warehouse: A building or group of buildings in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers used for storage, including accessory office and/or night watchman's residence, but not including retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any other commercial use. 
Mobile home: A residential structure transportable on wheels after fabrication in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a permanent dwelling when connected to the required utilities and constructed prior to June 15, 1976. (See the definition of "manufactured home" for all factory-fabricated structures built to the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code) since June 15, 1976. 
Mobile home/manufactured home park: A parcel of land or any portion thereof under single ownership which has been designed, planned, or improved for the placement of more than four mobile homes/manufactured homes for residential use, including land, buildings, and facilities used by the occupants of such homes on the property. 
Mobile/manufactured home space: A parcel of land within a mobile/manufactured home park which is reserved or leased for the placement of an individual mobile/manufactured home, accessory structures and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Modular home: A dwelling unit composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation in accordance with applicable codes. 
Nonconforming lot: A lot, the area, width, or other characteristic of which fails to comply with applicable regulations and which was of record and in full compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations prior to the enactment of these or other regulations applicable thereto, but which does not comply with the requirements of these regulations. 
Nonconforming structure: Any building or structure which does not conform to applicable regulations hereunder governing the type, bulk, location, height or size of buildings or structures permitted in the district, which building or structure was lawfully in existence and in full compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations, and for which all required federal, state and local permits had been issued, prior to the adoption of these or other regulations applicable thereto, but which does not comply with the requirements of these regulations. 
Nonconforming use: Any use of any land, building or other structure which was existing and in full compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations, and for which all required federal, state and local permits had been issued, prior to the adoption of these or other regulations applicable thereto, but which does not comply with the requirements of these regulations. 
Nuisance: Anything that substantially interferes with the use or enjoyment of property, creates a risk of endangering the public health or safety, or is offensive to the senses. 
Office: A building or portion thereof wherein services are performed involving predominantly administrative, professional or clerical operations and not involving retail sales or other sales of any kind on the premises. 
Official zoning map: The "Official Zoning Map of Unincorporated Banks County" described in Section 402 of these regulations. 
Open air business: Any commercial establishment that displays products in nonenclosed area. 
Open space: An area that is permanently set aside through dedication, designation, or reservation and is available to all occupants of a development and that is not used for or occupied by a public right-of-way, driveway, an off-street parking area, a loading space, a refuse storage space, or a building. 
Outdoor storage: The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or commercial vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
Outdoor storage yards: The keeping within an unroofed and unenclosed area of any goods, material, merchandise or vehicles, not for sale at retail, in the same area for more than 24 consecutive hours. This term also includes an unroofed or unenclosed area used for the performance of work or other such activities necessary in the operation of a business. 
Parking space: An area having dimensions of not less than nine feet by 20 feet and 300 square feet including maneuvering space within a parking lot, to be used exclusively as a temporary storage space for a motor vehicle. 
Permitted use: A use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
Person: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or institution, including any trustee, assigns or other representative. 
Planning commission: The Banks County Planning Commission. 
Plat: A map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, section or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of properties. 
Policies and procedures ordinance: The "Land Use Public Hearing Policies and Procedures Ordinance of Banks County" as amended from time to time. 
Principal building: A building in which is conducted a principal use. 
Property owner: The person or persons who own property being considered under these regulations. 
Public use: Any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by the federal government, State of Georgia, Banks County or other county, or any municipality, or any authority, agency, board or commission of the above governments, which is necessary to serve a public purpose, such as but not limited to the following: government administrative buildings, police and fire stations, public health facilities and hospitals, public works camps, parks and community centers, public roads and streets, airports, water and sanitary sewerage storage, intake, collection and treatment and pumping facilities, public housing facilities, jails and correctional centers. 
Recreational vehicle: A vehicular-type portable structure which can be towed, hauled or driven and is primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping and travel uses. 
Recreational vehicle (RV) park (travel trailer park): Any lot of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy on a temporary basis by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters by campers, vacationers or travelers. 
Restaurant: Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverages. 
Restaurant, drive-in: Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverage to person(s) in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may eat or drink on the premises. 
Right-of-way: That area, distinguished from an easement, which is owned in fee-simple title by the governing body or other government, for the present or future use of roads, streets, and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
Roominghouse: A building where, for compensation, lodging only is provided. 
School: A facility that provides curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction. A school is considered public if operated by the county board of education. 
Screening: A method of shielding, obscuring or buffering one use or building from another use or building by fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, natural vegetation or other means; a visual and acoustical barrier which is of such nature and density that provides year-round maximum capacity from the ground to a height of at least six feet or that screens structures and activities from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot. 
Semi-public use: Any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by private utilities for the purpose of providing utilities to the public, or which is reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities, such as but not limited to the following: underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water distribution or transmission lines or systems, electric power substations, wires, towers, cables, and poles. 
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between the property boundary lines of a lot and the front, rear, or side lines of a building, other structure or activity located on that lot. 
Site plan: A two-dimensional graphic illustration, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning the boundaries of a lot or tract and the location of all buildings, structures, uses and principal site development features proposed for a specific lot or tract of land. 
Street: A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on or in the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on or in the ground, including, without limitation, wells, signs, tiles, liners, and any other tangible property placed on or in the ground to facilitate any use. 
Townhouse: A single-family dwelling in a row of at least three attached units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls. A townhouse shall have at least two stories. 
Trade shop: An enclosed structure used for the commercial operation of a skilled trade, including but not limited to, cabinet making and carpentry, sheet metal, roofing, upholstering, electrical and plumbing. 
Truck stop: An area principally devoted to the service, refueling, temporary storage or parking of trucks, including accessory buildings, structures and uses such as restaurants. 
Truck terminal: An area where cargo is stored for routing or reshipment and where trucks load and unload cargo on a regular basis, or an area in which semi-trailers and/or trucks are parked and stored. 
Use: Any purpose for which a building, structure or a tract of land is actually being utilized at a particular point in time; or any activity, occupation, business, or operation actually being carried on in a building or structure or on a tract of land at a particular point in time. 
Variance: A minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading regulations as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
Yard: A space on the same lot with a principal building, which is open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. A yard may contain a parking and/or loading area and fencing unless otherwise specified by these regulations. 
Yard, front: A space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, both spaces with street frontage shall be considered front yards. In the case of double frontage lots, the spaces as defined above shall both be considered front yards. 
Yard, rear: A space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side: A space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot line and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zoning: A police power measure in which the county is divided into districts or zones within which permitted uses, and in some cases conditional uses, are established as well as regulations governing lot size, bulk, height and other development requirements. 
Zoning administrative officer: The field representative of the Banks County Planning Commission or any other representative designated by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2006-09, §§ 1—3, 5-9-2006) 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 401. - Establishment of districts. 
(a)  For the purposes of these regulations, unincorporated Banks County is hereby divided into seven zoning districts as follows: 
(1)  CAD, Consolidated Agricultural District-Intensive; 
(2)  ARR, Agricultural Rural Residential District; 
(3)  R-1, Single Family Residential District; 
(4)  R-2, Residential Multifamily District; 
(5)  C-1, Neighborhood Commercial District; 
(6)  C-2, General Commercial District; 
(7)  M-1, Industrial District 
(b)  All references to the former CAD, Commercial Agricultural District shall be immediately replaced by CAD, Consolidated Agricultural District-Intensive. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § 1, 1-11-2005) 
Section 402. - Official zoning map. 
The location and boundaries of the above listed districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of Unincorporated Banks County, Georgia." Said map, together with any explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1, 5-9-2006) 
Section 403. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
403.1 Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets or highways, street right-of-way lines or railroad right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerline, street right-of-way lines, or railroad right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
403.2 Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the corporate limit line of a city or county, such corporate limit line shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
403.3 Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines or such lines extended, such property lines or such lines extended, as indicated by boundary survey, deed or legal description maintained in the official file of said zoning adoption or amendment, if available, shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
403.4 Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of stream beds or river beds, such centerline shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
403.5 In the case where the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the governing body shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
Section 404. - Nonconforming uses. 
404.1 Subject to the provisions of section 404.2 through 404.5 hereof, the use of any building, structure or land which was actually in existence at the time of enactment of these regulations or any amendment hereto which may prohibit, restrict or regulate such use, which use was at that time, in full compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations, and for which use all required federal, state or local permits or authorizations were then, and continue to be, in existence, may be continued even though the use of such building, structure, or land does not conform with the provisions of these regulations or any amendment hereto which may prohibit, restrict or regulate such use, unless specifically provided otherwise in these regulations. 
404.2 A nonconforming use may not be changed to another use without compliance with these regulations. 
404.3 A nonconforming use may not be expanded, extended or enlarged or have its value increased or enhanced, but may be repaired or rebuilt if wholly or partially damaged or destroyed by fire or other casualties beyond the control of the property owner or other person engaged in the use. 
404.4 A non-conforming use may not be reestablished after discontinuance for three years or more. 
404.5 Nothing herein shall prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any part of any building which is part of a nonconforming use which has been declared by any public authority having jurisdiction thereof to be unsafe. 
404.6 Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 404.1 through 404.5, the replacement of a mobile/manufactured home that is a nonconforming use shall not be a violation of section 404, if the replacement mobile/manufactured home complies with the Banks County Mobile/Manufactured Home Ordinance and if the existing mobile/manufactured home is removed from the property. 
404.7 Notwithstanding paragraph 404.4, if there are two or more buildings or structures on the land and if one or more of the buildings or structures do not conform to the provisions of these regulations or any amendment hereto, and if the same business activity has been continued, not abandoned for three years or more, in at least one of the buildings or structures on the land, and if the other building(s) or structure(s) on the land has not been used for three or more years, then, in such event, all of the buildings or structures on the land may be reestablished as nonconforming uses under these regulations and used for the same business use for which they were previously being used. 
(Res. No. 2000-25, § 1, 10-18-2000; Ord. No. 2002-10, §§ 1, 2, 6-11-2002) 
Section 405. - Use, occupancy and erection. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in these regulations, no building, structure, development, land, open space or water shall hereafter be used or occupied; no building, structure or development or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or maintained, and no new use or change of any building, structure, development, land, open space or water shall be made or maintained unless in conformity with all of these regulations, including, without limitation, those for the district in which it is located. 
Section 406. - Minimum requirements. 
Within each district, the regulations set forth shall be minimum requirements which shall apply to each class or kind of building, structure, development or land. 
Section 407. - General building heights and areas. 
[Adopted. The general building heights and areas of the 2000 International Building Code is adopted to read as follows:] 
CHAPTER 5  GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS 
SECTION 501 GENERAL 
501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter control the height and area of structures hereafter erected and additions to existing structures. 
501.2 Premises identification. Approved numbers or addresses shall be provided for new buildings in such a position as to be clearly visible and legible from the street or roadway fronting the property. Letters or numbers shall be a minimum 3 inches (76 mm) in height and stroke of minimum 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) of a contrasting color to the background itself. 
SECTIONS 502 DEFINITIONS 
502.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown herein. 
AREA, BUILDING. The area included within surrounding exterior walls (or exterior walls and fire walls) exclusive of vent shafts and courts. Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the building area if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. 
BASEMENT. That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade plane (See "Story above grade plane"). A basement shall be considered as a story above grade plane where the finished surface of the floor above the basement is: 
1.  More than 6 feet (1829 mm) above grade plane; 
2.  More than 6 feet (1829 mm) above the finished ground level for more than 50 percent of the total building perimeter; or 
3.  More than 12 feet (3658 mm) above the finished ground level at any point. 
GRADE PLANE. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than 6 feet (1829 mm) from the building, between the building and a point 6 feet (1829 mm) from the building. 
HEIGHT, BUILDING. The vertical distance from grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface. 
HEIGHT, STORY. The vertical distance from top to top of two successive finished floor surfaces; and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters. 
INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT PLATFORM. An unoccupied, elevated platform in an industrial occupancy used exclusively for mechanical systems and/or industrial process equipment, including the associated elevated walkways, stairs and ladders necessary to access the platform (see Section 505.5). 
MEZZANINE. An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of any story with an aggregate floor area of not more than one-third of the area of the room or space in which the level or levels are located (See Section 505). 
STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above (also see "Basement" and "Mezzanine"). 
SECTION 503 GENERAL HEIGHT AND AREA LIMITATIONS 
503.1 General. The height and area for buildings of different construction types shall be governed by the intended use of the building and shall not exceed the limits in Table 503 except as modified hereafter. Each part of a building included within the exterior walls or the exterior walls and fire walls where provided shall be permitted to be a separate building. 
503.1.1 Basements. Basements need not be included in the total allowable area provided they do not exceed the area permitted for a one-story building. 
503.1.2 Special industrial occupations. Buildings and structures designed to house low-hazard industrial processes that require large areas and unusual heights to accommodate craneways or special machinery and equipment, including among others, rolling mills; structural metal fabrication shops and foundries; or the production and distribution of electric, gas or steam power, shall be exempt from the height and area limitations of Table 503. 
TABLE 503  ALLOWABLE HEIGHT AND BUILDING AREAS 
Height limitations shown as stories and feet above grade plane. 
Area limitations as determined by the definition of "area, building", per floor. 

 
For SI: 1 foot = 305 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m 2 . 
UL = Unlimited 
a.  As applicable in Section 101.2. 
503.1.3 Buildings on same lot. Two or more buildings on the same lot shall be regulated as separate buildings or shall be considered as portions of one building if the height of each building and the aggregate area of buildings are within the limitations of Table 503 as modified by Sections 504 and 506. The provisions of this code applicable to the aggregate building shall be applicable to each building. 
503.1.4 Type I construction. Buildings of Type I construction permitted to be of unlimited tabular heights and areas are not subject to the special requirements that allow unlimited area buildings in Section 507 or unlimited height in Sections 503.1.2 and 504.3 or increased height and areas for other types of construction. 
503.2 Party walls. Any wall located on a property line between adjacent buildings which is used or adapted for joint service between the two buildings, shall be constructed as a fire wall in accordance with Section 705, without openings and shall create separate buildings. 
503.3 Area determination. The maximum area of a building shall be determined by multiplying the allowable area per floor ( A a ), as determined in Section 506.1 by the number of stories up to a maximum of three stories. 
Exception: Unlimited area buildings in accordance with Section 507. 
SECTION 504 HEIGHT MODIFICATIONS 
504.1 General. The heights permitted by Table 503 shall only be increased in accordance with this section. 
Exception: The height of one-story aircraft hangars, aircraft paint hangars and buildings used for the manufacturing of aircraft shall not be limited if the building is provided with an automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Chapter 9 and is entirely surrounded by public ways or yards not less in width than one and one-half times the height of the building. 
504.2 Automatic sprinkler increase. For buildings protected throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the value specified in Table 503 for maximum height is increased by 20 feet (6096 mm) and the maximum number of stories is increased by one story. For Group R buildings protected throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2, the value specified in Table 503 for maximum height is increased by 20 feet (6096 mm) and the maximum number of stories is increased by one story, but shall not exceed four stories or 60 feet (18 288 mm), respectively. These increases are permitted in addition to the area increase. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Group I-2 of Type IIB, III, IV or V construction. 
2.  Group H-1, H-2, H-3 or H-5. 
504.3 Roof structures. Towers, spires, steeples and other roof structures shall be constructed of materials consistent with the required type of construction of the building except where other construction is permitted by Section 1509.2.1. Such structures shall not be used for habitation or storage. The structures shall be unlimited in height if of noncombustible materials and shall not extend more than 20 feet (6096 mm) above the allowable height if of combustible materials. See Chapter 15 for additional requirements. 
SECTION 505 MEZZANINES 
505.1 General. A mezzanine or mezzanines in compliance with this section shall be considered a portion of the floor below. Such mezzanines shall not contribute to the building area as regulated by Section 503.1. Such mezzanines shall not contribute to the number of stories as regulated by Section 503.1. The area of the mezzanine shall be included in determining the fire area defined in Section 702. The clear height above and below the mezzanine floor construction shall not be less than 7 feet (2134 mm). 
505.2 Area limitation. The aggregate area of a mezzanine or mezzanines within a room shall not exceed one-third of the area of that room or space in which they are located. The enclosed portions of rooms shall not be included in a determination of the size of the room in which the mezzanine is located. In determining the allowable mezzanine area, the area of the mezzanine shall not be included in the area of the room. 
Exception: The aggregate area of mezzanines in buildings and structures of Type I or II construction for special industrial occupancies in accordance with Section 503.1.2 shall not exceed two-thirds of the area of the room. 
505.3 Egress. Each occupant of a mezzanine shall have access to at least two independent means of egress where the common path of egress travel exceeds the limitations of Section 1004.2.5. Where a stairway provides a means of exit access from a mezzanine, the maximum travel distance includes the distance traveled on the stairway measured in the plane of the tread nosing. 
Exception: A single means of egress shall be permitted in accordance with Section 1004.2.1. 
505.4 Openness. A mezzanine shall be open and unobstructed to the room in which such mezzanine is located except for walls not more than 42 inches (1067 mm) high, columns and posts. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Mezzanines or portions thereof are not required to be open to the room in which the mezzanines are located, provided that the occupant load of the aggregate area of the enclosed space does not exceed 10. 
2.  A mezzanine having two or more means of egress is not required to be open to the room in which the mezzanine is located, if at least one of the means of egress provides direct access to an exit from the mezzanine level. 
3.  Mezzanines or portions thereof are not required to be open to the room in which the mezzanines are located, provided that the aggregate floor area of the enclosed space does not exceed 10 percent of the mezzanine area. 
4.  In industrial facilities, mezzanines used for control equipment are permitted to be glazed on all sides. 
5.  In Group F occupancies of unlimited area, meeting the requirements of Section 507.2 or Section 507.3, mezzanines or portions thereof are not required to be open to the room in which the mezzanines are located, provided that an approved fire alarm system is installed throughout the entire building or structure and notification appliances are installed throughout the mezzanines in accordance with the provisions of NFPA 72. In addition, the fire alarm system shall be initiated by automatic sprinkler water flow and manual activation. 
505.5 Industrial equipment platforms. Industrial equipment platforms in buildings shall not be considered as a portion of the floor below. Such equipment platforms shall not contribute to the building area as regulated by Section 503.1. Such equipment platforms shall not contribute to the number of stories as regulated by Section 503.1. The area of the industrial equipment platform shall not be included in determining the fire area. Industrial equipment platforms shall not be a part of any mezzanine, and such platforms and the walkways, stairs and ladders providing access to an equipment platform, shall not serve as a part of the means of egress from the building. 
505.5.1 Area limitations. The aggregate area of all industrial equipment platforms within a room shall not exceed two-thirds of the area of the room in which they occur. Where an equipment platform is located in the same room as a mezzanine, the area of the mezzanine shall be determined by Section 505.2, and the combined aggregate area of the equipment platforms and mezzanines shall not exceed two-thirds of the room in which they occur. 
505.5.2 Fire suppression. Industrial equipment platforms shall be fully protected by an automatic sprinkler system above and below the platform, installed in accordance with Section 903.3. 
505.5.3 Guards. Equipment platforms shall have guards where required by Section 1003.2.12. 
SECTION 506 AREA MODIFICATIONS 
506.1 General. The areas limited by Table 503 shall be permitted to be increased due to frontage ( I f ) and automatic sprinkler system protection ( I;sub§ \ sub; ) in accordance with the following: 
Equation 5-1 
where: 
A a = Allowable area per floor (square feet). 
A t = Tabular area per floor in accordance with Table 503 (square feet). 
I f = Area increase due to frontage (percent) as calculated in accordance with Section 506.2. 
I;sub§ \ sub; = Area increase due to sprinkler protection (percent) as calculated in accordance with Section 506.3. 
506.1.1 Basements. A single basement need not be included in the total allowable area provided such basement does not exceed the area permitted for a one-story building. 
506.2 Frontage increase. Every building shall adjoin or have access to a public way to receive an area increase for frontage. Where a building has more than 25 percent of its perimeter on a public way or open space having a minimum width of 20 feet (6096 mm), the frontage increase shall be determined in accordance with the following: 
Equation 5-2 
where: 
I f = Area increase due to frontage (percent). 
F = Building perimeter which fronts on a public way or open space having 20 feet (6096 mm) open minimum width. 
P = Perimeter of entire building. 
W = Minimum width of public way or open space. 
506.2.1 Width limits. W must be at least 20 feet (6096 mm) and the quantity W divided by 30 shall not exceed 1.0 except that for buildings which are permitted to be unlimited in area by Section 503.1.2, Section 507 or Section 508, the quantity W divided by 30 shall not exceed 2.0. 
506.2.2 Open space limits. Such open space shall be either on the same lot or dedicated for public use and shall be accessed from a street or approved fire lane. 
506.3 Automatic sprinkler system increase. Where a building is protected throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the area limitation in Table 503 is permitted to be increased by 200 percent ( I;sub§ \ sub; = 200 percent) for multi-story buildings and 300 percent ( I;sub§ \ sub; = 300 percent) for single-story buildings. 
Exception: Group H-1, H-2 or H-3. 
SECTION 507 UNLIMITED AREA BUILDINGS 
5 07.1 Unsprinklered, one-story. The area of a one-story, Group F-2 or S-2 building shall not be limited when the building is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width. 
507.2 Sprinklered, one-story. The area of a one-story, Group A-4, B, F, M or S building shall not be limited when the building is provided with an automatic sprinkler system throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Buildings and structures of Types I and II construction for rack storage facilities, which do not have access by the public shall not be limited in height provided that such buildings conform to the requirements of Section 507.1 and NFPA 231C. 
2.  The automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in areas occupied for indoor participant sports, such as tennis, skating, swimming and equestrian activities, in occupancies in Group A-4, provided that: 
2.1.  Exit doors directly to the outside are provided for occupants of the participant sports areas, and 
2.2.  The building is equipped with a fire alarm system with manual fire alarm boxes installed in accordance with Section 907. 
507.3 Two-story. The area of a two-story, Group B, F, M or S building shall not be limited when the building is provided with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 throughout, and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width. 
507.4 Reduced open space. The permanent open space of 60 feet (18 288 mm) required in Sections 507.1, 507.2 and 507.3 shall be permitted to be reduced to not less than 40 feet (12 192 mm) provided the following requirements are met: 
1.  The reduced open space shall not be allowed for more than 75 percent of the perimeter of the building. 
2.  The exterior wall facing the reduced open space shall have a minimum fire-resistance rating of 3 hours. 
3.  Openings in the exterior wall, facing the reduced open space, shall have opening protectives with a fire-resistance rating of 3 hours. 
507.5 High-hazard use groups. Groups H-2, H-3 and H-4 fire areas shall be permitted in unlimited area buildings having occupancies in Use Groups F and S, in accordance with the limitations of this section. Fire areas located at the perimeter of the unlimited area building shall not exceed 10 percent of the area of the building nor the area limitations specified in Table 503 as modified by Section 506.2, based upon the percentage of the perimeter of the fire area that fronts on a street or other unoccupied space. Other fire areas shall not exceed 25 percent of the area limitations specified in Table 503. Fire-resistance rating requirements of fire barrier assemblies shall be in accordance with Table 302.3.3. 
507.6 Aircraft paint hangar. The area of a one-story, Group H-2 aircraft paint hangar shall not be limited where such aircraft paint hangar complies with the provisions of Section 412.4 and is entirely surrounded by public ways or yards not less in width than one and one-half times the height of the building. 
507.7 Group E buildings. The area of a one-story Group E building of Type II, IIIA or IV construction shall not be limited when the following criteria are met: 
1.  Each classroom shall have not less than two means of egress, with one of the means of egress being a direct exit to the outside of the building complying with Section 1005. 
2.  The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
3.  The building is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width. 
507.8 Motion picture theaters. In buildings of Type I or II construction, the area of one-story motion picture theaters shall not be limited when the building is provided with an automatic sprinkler system throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width. 
SECTION 508 SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
508.1 General. The provisions in this section shall permit the use of special conditions that are exempt from, or modify, the specific requirements of this chapter regarding the allowable heights and areas of buildings based on the occupancy classification and type of construction, provided the special condition complies with the provisions specified in this section for that special condition and other applicable requirements of this code. 
508.2 Group S-2 enclosed parking garage with Groups A, B, M or R above. A basement first story above grade plane of a building shall be considered as a separate and distinct building for the purpose of determining area limitations, continuity of fire walls, limitation of number of stories and type of construction, when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The basement first story above grade plane is of Type IA construction and is separated from the building above with a horizontal assembly having a minimum 3-hour fire resistance rating. Openings in the horizontal assembly having a minimum 3-hour fire-resistance rating shall be protected by shaft, stairway, ramp or escalator enclosures extending above and below such openings. The walls of such enclosures shall have not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating and openings therein shall be protected by opening protectives having a minimum 1 ½-hour fire-protection rating. 
Exception: Where the walls of such enclosures extending below the horizontal assembly having a minimum 3-hour fire-resistance rating to the foundation are provided with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 3 hours with openings therein protected as required for walls forming a 3-hour fire barrier, the enclosure walls extending above such floor used as the horizontal assembly having a minimum 3-hour fire-resistance rating shall be permitted to have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating provided: 
1.  The building above is not required to be of Type I construction; and 
2.  The enclosure walls do not enclose an exit stairway, a ramp or an escalator required to have enclosure walls with not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating. 
3.  The building above the horizontal assembly having a minimum 2-hour fire-resistance rating contains only Groups A having an assembly room with an occupant load of less than 300, B, M or R and 
4.  The building below the horizontal assembly having a minimum 3-hour fire-resistance rating is a Group S-2 enclosed parking garage, used exclusively for the parking and storage of private motor vehicles. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Entry lobbies, mechanical rooms and similar uses incidental to the operation of the building shall be permitted. 
2.  Groups A having an assembly room with an occupant load of less than 300, B and M shall be permitted in addition to those uses incidental to the operation of the building (including storage areas), provided that the entire structure below the horizontal assembly having a minimum 3-hour fire-resistance rating is protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
4.  The maximum building height in feet shall not exceed the limits set forth in Table 503 for the least restrictive type of construction involved. 
508.3 Group S-2 enclosed parking garage with Group S-2 open parking garage above. A Group S-2 enclosed parking garage located in the basement or first story below a Group S-2 open parking garage shall be classified as a separate and distinct building for the purpose of determining the type of construction when the following conditions are met: 
1.  The allowable area of the structure shall be such that the sum of the ratios of the actual area divided by the allowable area for each separate occupancy shall not exceed 1.0. 
2.  The Group S-2 enclosed parking garage is of Type I or II construction and is at least equal to the fire-resistance requirements of the Group S-2 Open Parking Garage. 
3.  The height and the number of the floors above the basement shall be limited as specified in Table 406.3.1. 
4.  The floor assembly separating the Group S-2 enclosed parking garage and Group S-2 open parking garage shall be protected as required for the floor assembly of the Group S-2 enclosed parking garage. Openings between the Group S-2 enclosed parking garage and Group S-2 open parking garage, except exit openings, shall not be required to be protected. 
5.  The Group S-2 enclosed parking garage is used exclusively for the parking or storage of private motor vehicles, but shall be permitted to contain an office, waiting room and toilet room having a total area of not more than 1,000 square feet (93 m 2 ), and mechanical equipment rooms incidental to the operation of the building. 
508.4 Special unlimited height for Groups B, M and R. The height of Group B, M and R buildings of Type IB construction shall not be limited, provided the fire resistance of columns shall be not less than 3 hours and the other structural members, including floors, shall be not less than that shown in Chapter 6, but in no case less than 2 hours, except that roofs and their supporting beams, girders, trusses and arches shall be not less than 1 ½ hours. 
508.5 Parking beneath Group R. Where a maximum one-story above grade plane Group S-2 parking garage, enclosed or open, or combination thereof, of Type I construction or open of Type IV construction, with grade entrance, is provided under a building of Group R, the number of stories to be used in determining the minimum type of construction may be measured from the floor above such a parking area. The floor assembly between the parking garage and the Group R above shall comply with the type of construction required for the parking garage and shall also provide a fire-resistance rating not less than the mixed occupancy separation required in Section 302.3.3. 
508.6 Group R-2 buildings of Type IIIA construction. The height limitation for buildings of Type IIIA construction in Group R-2 shall be increased to six stories and 75 feet (22 860 mm) where the first floor construction above the basement has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 3 hours and the floor area is subdivided by 2-hour fire-resistance-rated fire walls into areas of not more than 3,000 square feet (279 m 2 ). 
508.7 Group R-2 buildings of Type IIA construction. The height limitation for buildings of Type IIA construction in Group R-2 shall be increased to nine stories and 100 feet (30 480 mm) where the building is separated by not less than 50 feet (15 240 mm) from any other building on the lot and from property lines, the exits are segregated in an area enclosed by a 2-hour fire-resistance-rated fire wall and the first floor construction has a fire resistance rating of not less than 1½ hours. 
508.8 Open parking garage beneath Groups A, I, B, M and R. Open parking garages constructed under Groups A, I, B, M and R shall not exceed the height and area limitations permitted under Section 406.3. The height and area of the portion of the building above the open parking garage shall not exceed the limitations in Section 503 for the upper occupancy. The height, in both feet and stories, of the portion of the building above the open parking garage shall be measured from grade plane and shall include both the open parking garage and the portion of the building above the parking garage. 
508.8.1 Fire separation. Fire separation assemblies between the parking occupancy and the upper occupancy shall correspond to the required fire-resistance rating prescribed in Table 302.3.3 for the uses involved. The type of construction shall apply to each occupancy individually, except that structural members, including main bracing within the open parking structure, which is necessary to support the upper occupancy, shall be protected with the more restrictive fire-resistive assemblies of the use groups involved as shown in Table 601. Means of egress for the upper occupancy shall conform to Chapter 10 and shall be separated from the parking occupancy by fire barriers having at least a 2-hour fire-resistance rating as required by Section 706, with self-closing doors complying with Section 714. Means of egress from the open parking garage shall comply with Section 406.3. 
(Ord. No. 2002-13, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 2, 9-14-2004) 
Section 408. - Every use must be upon a lot. 
No building or structure shall be erected and no use shall be established unless upon a lot of record as defined by these regulations except as otherwise provided herein. 
Section 409. - One principal building on a lot. 
Only one principal building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any one lot of record; provided, however, that more than one multiple dwelling, office, institutional, commercial or industrial building may be located upon a lot, subject to setbacks and separation as provided in these regulations. 
Section 410. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-13, § 2, adopted July 9, 2002, repealed Section 410, in its entirety. Former Section 410 pertained to separation between principal buildings and derived from a Res. adopted March 11, 1997. 
Section 411. - Building setbacks. 
(a)  In the general commercial district and the industrial district, no building or structure other than driveways, parking lots, fences and signs shall hereafter be erected which is located closer than 30 feet to any public right-of-way or closer than ten feet to any property line. 
(b)  In all zoning districts, except the general commercial district and the industrial district, no building or structure other than driveways, parking lots or fences shall hereafter be erected which is located closer than 30 feet to the rear and side property lines. 
(c)  Except as provided in (d) below, in all zoning districts, except the general commercial district and the industrial district, no building or structure other than driveways, parking lots or fences shall hereafter be erected which is located closer than 70 feet to the centerline of any road right of way, or 30 feet from the front property line, whichever is greater. 
(d)  In all zoning districts, except the general commercial district and the industrial district, if the property fronts on a paved roadway with a dedicated road right of way of 60 feet or more, no building or structure other than driveways, parking lots or fences shall hereafter be erected which is located closer than 30 feet from the front property line. 
(Res. No. 2000-05, § 1, 2-8-2000; Ord. No. 2003-12, § 1, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 1, 9-14-2004) 
Section 412. - Accessory buildings and structures. 
Accessory buildings and structures shall be located only in side or rear yards. 
Section 413. - Minimum lot size and proportions. 
No lot shall hereafter be created which does not contain a minimum lot size of one acre; provided, however, that lots for nonresidential development may be less than one acre subject to the approval of the Banks County Health Department. These requirements shall be in addition to any requirements contained in any Banks County subdivision regulations. For additional regulations regarding lot size, reference should be made to each individual zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2002-13, § 3, 7-9-2002) 
Section 414. - Reduction in lot size prohibited. 
No lot shall be reduced, divided or changed in size so that lot width, size of yards, lot area per dwelling unit or any other requirement of these regulations, or any other regulations applicable thereto, is not maintained, unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is acquired for a public purpose. 
Section 415. - Appeals. 
The governing body is empowered to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made in the interpretation or enforcement of these zoning regulations or the policies and procedures ordinance; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to decisions on applications for rezoning, conditional use permits or variances. The governing body is empowered to hear an appeal made by any person, firm, or corporation, or by any officer, department, board or bureau affected by any decisions of any employee based on these regulations or the policies and procedures ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within 60 days after the date of the action to which the appeal relates, and as provided by any rules of the governing body by filing with the zoning administrative officer notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. All papers constituting the record upon which the action to which the appeal relates was taken shall forthwith be transmitted to the governing body. The governing body shall select a reasonable time and place of the hearing of the appeal, shall give at least 15 days of public notice thereof, and shall render a decision on the appeal within a reasonable time. The appeal procedures set out herein are mandatory in regard to all matters to which they apply, and no person shall bring any action in any court relating to the validity, interpretation or enforcement of these regulations or the policies and procedures ordinance without first resorting to these administrative procedures, if applicable. 
Section 416. - Variances. 
The governing body is hereby empowered to authorize upon application in specific cases such variance from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of a nonconforming use or conditional use of neighboring land, buildings or structures in the same zoning district or of permitted uses, conditional uses or nonconforming uses in other zoning districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship, after appropriate application and public hearings in accordance with the policies and procedures ordinance, upon specific findings that all of the following conditions exist, with the absence of any one of the conditions being grounds for denial of the application for variance: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other land or structures in the same district; and 
2.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of these regulations would create an unnecessary hardship and would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners within the district in which the property is located; and 
3.  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located; and 
4.  Relief, if granted, will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or the health or general welfare of the public in such a manner as will interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of other property or unreasonably affect its value; and 
5.  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; and 
6.  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building, or structure; and 
7.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building or structures which are not permitted by right in the district involved. 
Section 417. - Home occupations. 
A home occupation as defined by these regulations shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  A maximum of one person not residing in the dwelling may be employed in connection with the home occupation. There is no limit on the number of other employees, provided that they reside within the dwelling on the premises. 
2.  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and lot and shall not change the residential character of the building, lot, or neighborhood. 
3.  No storage or display of products, equipment, customer vehicles or other items or other materials shall be visible from the adjoining street or adjacent properties. 
4.  Vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of a home occupation, but only one commercial vehicle is permitted to be used per home occupation. 
5.  No external alterations of the dwelling solely for the accommodation of a home occupation are permitted. No home occupation shall be conducted in a separate garage, barn, shop or other accessory building unless the home occupation is approved as a conditional use by the county commissioners. 
6.  No chemical, electrical, or mechanical equipment shall be used in connection with the home occupation if it generates any noise, odor, environmental hazard or other nuisance which is detectible to any extent at the common boundary of the property and any neighboring properties. No such equipment shall be placed so as to be visible to any neighboring property or any public road. 
7.  No business identification sign for a home occupation business shall be allowed in a R-1 or R-2 zoning district but in all other districts one non-illuminated business identification sign not exceeding 12 square feet shall be permitted. 
8.  Use of a dwelling for a home occupation shall not exceed 25 percent of one floor of the principal dwelling. In addition to the other requirements of this section, home occupations shall be permitted, in whole or part, within accessory buildings only on lots of at least two acres and if a setback of 50 feet is maintained from each property line. 
9.  A business license shall be obtained from Banks County prior to the operation of any home occupation. Said business license shall require approval by the zoning administrative officer. 
10.  The following uses are allowable as home occupations (not all inclusive): tutoring, consultation and instruction in music, dance, arts, crafts and similar subjects limited to two students at one time; day care centers serving six or less persons; professional services (i.e., attorneys, architects, accountants, realtors, insurance and travel agents); secretarial services and answering services; mail order and general offices not involving storage of equipment, materials, products or vehicles; phone solicitations, beauty salons and barber shops limited to two operators/chairs; food catering). 
11.  The following are conditional uses: cabinet shops and/or metal cutting; doctors, dentists or other medical professions; automobile body work; automobile repair or related work, and any other home occupation where an accessory building is to be built on or moved to the property for such use. 
The failure of a home occupation licensee to comply with any of the above conditions shall be reasonable grounds for revocation of a home occupation business license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1, 6-8-2004) 
Section 418. - Visibility at intersections. 
No fence, wall, sign, hedge or planting which obstructs the sight lines at elevations between two and 12 feet above any roadway shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines, or such lines extended, and a line connecting such right-of-way lines at points 25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
Section 419. - Abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles and materials. 
Except as otherwise expressly permitted, it shall be prohibited in all districts to park or continuously store abandoned, wrecked, junked or inoperable vehicles, power-driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, or any other miscellaneous scrap material in quantity that is visible from a public street or adjacent or surrounding property. Said prohibition shall not be construed so as to prohibit the temporary repair or maintenance of automobiles owned by the property owner or the storage of such vehicles, equipment or other materials within an enclosed building, provided that such vehicles, equipment or materials are not for commercial sale. This section shall be construed to permit such vehicles or equipment, unless such use can be construed to be a junk/salvage yard or wrecked motor vehicle compound, if such vehicles and/or materials are not visible from a public street or surrounding property; that is, if 
screening is provided as defined by this Resolution. Existing junk/salvage yards and wrecked motor vehicle compounds qualifying as nonconforming uses shall have until July 1, 1992, to comply with the screening provisions of this section. 
Section 420. - Noise control regulations. 
The ambient noise level of any given activity in any zoning district emanating from a given property shall not exceed the following maximum permitted decibels as measured from the closest property line of property located within an ARR or R-1 zoning district: 

 
Note: The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level meter and octave band analyzer meeting the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association which is maintained in calibration and good working order. 
Existing facilities and activities which exceed the permitted maximum sound pressure specified above shall, no later than July 1, 1992, institute or install suitable noise attenuation measures (reduction of activity, erection of barriers, etc.) so that noise levels no longer exceed the maximums herein established. 
In cases where noise studies have been prepared by or for the governing body which document that a given facility or activity exceeds the maximum permitted sound pressure specified in this section on two or more separate days of measurement, and the period of conformity described above has elapsed, the governing body may institute whatever legal proceedings and remedies as may be provided by law to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. 
TITLE V. - CAD, CONSOLIDATED AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT-INTENSIVE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-02, § 2, adopted Jan. 11, 2005, renamed title V to read as herein set out. Formerly, said title pertained to the CAD, Commercial Agricultural District. 

Section 501. - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The CAD, Consolidated Agricultural District-Intensive is established to provide areas for the maintenance and expansion of agricultural production on large areas (minimum of 20 acres) in the area of food crops, fiber crops, animal feed, poultry, livestock and timber production. 
B.  Agricultural districts are most appropriately located in areas where intensive agricultural operations already exist and in those areas removed from residential or other development such that nuisances affecting other properties are minimized. 
C.  In order for a parcel or tract of land to be considered for rezoning to CAD, the parcel or tract of land must consist of at least 20 acres of contiguous property (property divided by a public road shall be contiguous property.) 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  Land zoned CAD should be in use for good faith farming or agricultural uses worthy of protection and preservation. If, after a tract or parcel of land is zoned or rezoned to CAD, the land is not actively used for intensive commercial agricultural purposes or if the tract or parcel of land consists of less than 20 acres, the county may, at its discretion, initiate procedures for a zoning review and possible rezoning of the property. 
F.  The siting of private landfills in this district is inconsistent with the intent of this district. 
(Res. No. 98-20, § 1(501), 12-9-1998; Res. No. 2000-06, § 1, 2-8-2000; Ord. No. 2005-02, § 2, 1-11-2005; Ord. No. 2005-16, § 1, 6-14-2005) 
Section 502. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Farm buildings, (not housing poultry or livestock) including barns, grain storage facilities, implement sheds and structures accessory to agricultural uses, but located no closer than 50 feet from any adjacent property line. 
2.  Commercial kennels, provided such structures shall be located a minimum of 400 feet from any adjacent property line and 800 feet from any residence on adjacent property. 
3.  Home occupations, as defined in article III and limited in section 417. 
4.  Produce stands, provided products sold are those grown or produced on the premises, provided such stands are located outside of any public right-of-way and provide off-street/road right-of-way parking. 
5.  Public buildings and uses. 
6.  Single-family dwellings which serve as the principal dwelling for the owner or operator of the agricultural activity. 
7.  Individual manufactured homes, mobile homes, or industrialized buildings which serve as the principal dwelling for the owner or operator of the agricultural activity. 
8.  Agricultural uses (excluding animal waste lagoons) including forestry, commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries (wholesale and retail), livestock (except dairies, hog parlors, and feed lots), and poultry [except turkey ranges and commercial egg operations (caged layers)], provided that no structure housing poultry or other livestock as permitted herein or containing manure or other dust producing substances is located closer than 400 feet from an existing dwelling unit other than that of the property owner and 200 feet from any common property line (100 feet if the adjacent property is zoned CAD), provided, however, if an adjoining property owner constructs a dwelling unit within 200 feet of a property line that is adjacent to property zoned CAD, then the setback for structures housing poultry or other livestock as permitted herein or containing manure or other dust producing substances shall be 200 feet and not 400 feet from an existing dwelling unit. A fence erected for the purpose of containing livestock or for delineating agricultural properties is exempt from the 400-foot requirement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the structures located on the land housing the poultry and livestock shall not exceed ten percent of the land area. 
9.  Commercial timber production. To qualify as a commercial timber tract the tract must be under a forestry management plan. 
10.  Signs, provided the requirements of section 407 are met. 
11.  Public utilities. 
12.  Temporary sawmills and planing mills used for the removal and processing of timber located thereon. All mills and machinery, including storage areas, must be at least 400 feet from any residence other than that of the property owner and 100 feet from any adjacent property line. 
13.  Barns which house animals that are not being raised for commercial purposes, except for isolated sales not in the ordinary course of business, including, without limitation, poultry, cats, livestock, horses, goats, sheep, mules and donkeys, located no closer than 50 feet from any adjacent property line. 
14.  Riding stables and academies, including any place that regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells, trades or lets for hire any horse, donkey, burro or mule, provided that no structure or corral housing such animals is located closer than 400 feet from an existing dwelling other than that of the property owner and 200 feet from any adjacent property line. 
15.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to one or more principal permitted uses, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
16.  One caretaker or employee residence. At least one of the occupants of such residence must be employed on the farm. 
17.  Kennels which are located 50 feet or more from any adjacent property line and 200 or more feet from any existing residence on adjacent property. 
18.  Television, land mobile, communication, broadband, microwave, and radio transmission antennae and towers, (collectively "towers and antennae") not including studios or offices, provided the height of such towers and antennae exceed 70 feet in height and do not exceed 150 feet without specific authorization from the Federal Aviation Administration and the Federal Communications Commission. All towers and antennae must be set back a distance equal to the full height of the tower from all property lines. The applicant at the time of filing the application shall provide a site plan and information regarding topography, coverage zone, tower height and a signed tower easement to the planning and development office along with applicable fees. Accessory structures shall be limited to usages associated with the operation of the antennae or towers and shall be appropriate in scale and intensity. Upon approval of the application by the building official, a notice to proceed shall be granted to the applicant. After the tower is erected and before a tower is permitted for operation, the building official shall issue a certificate of completion. All towers and antennae not used to transmit signals or communications for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be removed from the property where the towers and antennae are located. 
(Res. No. 98-20, § 1(502), 12-9-1998; Res. No. 2000-06, § 1, 2-8-2000; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 2, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2015-12 , § 2, 7-14-2015) 
Section 503. - Conditional uses. 
1.  More than one caretaker or employee residence, only one per five acres of land. At least one of the occupants of the residence must be employed on the farm. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  Family residences other than the primary residence of the owner (residences for family members), one per two acres of land. The tract or parcel cannot be subdivided if the tract is to be conveyed to a new owner and the original tract or parcel will have less than 25 acres after being subdivided. 
4.  Hog farms (hog parlors) of 3,000 hogs or less; dairy farms (300 cows or less); feed lots for 500 cows or less, commercial egg operations (cage layers); provided that no structure housing such poultry or livestock is located closer than 600 feet from an existing dwelling other than that of the property owner or 400 feet from any common property line. 
5.  Turkey ranges provided that no structure housing such poultry is located closer than 600 feet from an existing dwelling other than that of the property owner or 400 feet from any common property line. 
6.  Animal waste lagoons provided they are not located any closer than 600 feet from an existing dwelling other than that of the property owner or 400 feet from any common property line. 
7.  Uses and structures permitted under section 502, paragraph 8, when the structures housing the poultry and/or livestock do not meet the minimum setback requirements from existing dwellings and common property lines as set forth therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the structures located on the land housing the poultry or livestock shall not exceed ten percent of the land area. 
8.  Farm supply stores and agricultural-related businesses, including agricultural implement sales and service, auction facilities, feed and grain stores and other businesses not involving sales or services to the general public. 
9.  Livestock sales pavilion. 
10.  Barns and/or corrals and/or kennels, which house small numbers of animals that are not being raised for commercial purposes, except for isolated sales not in the ordinary course of business, including, without limitation, poultry, livestock, horses, goats, sheep, mules, dogs, cats, and donkeys, located closer than 50 feet from any adjacent property line. 
11.  Riding stables and academies, including any place that regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells, trades or lets for hire any horse, donkey, burro or mule, provided that no structure or corral housing such animals is located closer than 200 feet from an existing dwelling other than that of the property owner and 100 feet from any adjacent property line. 
12.  Septage handling facilities and direct land application but only as a Conditional Use in the Commercial Agricultural District, subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Septage removal permits. Any person engaged in the business of septage removal in Banks County, Georgia, shall furnish the Planning Department of Banks County with a copy of its Application for Septage Removal Permit (the "Application") and its Septage Removal Permit issued by the Banks County Board of Health. No person shall operate a septage removal business in Banks County without a Septage Removal Permit. All septage removal shall be in compliance with Chapter 290-5-26 of the Rules of the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia and the following: 
Standards for septage removal—The following requirements shall be met by individuals permitted for septage removal. 
a)  The manner in which septage will be disposed of, shall be included on the application for septage removal. Written authorization shall be submitted with the application from wastewater treatment plants, separate septage handling facilities or land owners of land application sites. 
b)  The manner in which septage will be removed and transported shall be included on the application for septage removal. 
c)  Access to the septic tank contents shall be by removal of the lids or access ports. Individuals breaking holes in the septic tank or lids will be subject to permit suspension or revocation. 
d)  Septage removal means the complete removal of the contents including the liquid, sludge and scum. 
e)  The inlet and outlet "T"s will be inspected for blockage and damage. If "T"s are missing or damaged, the owner will be notified in writing. Missing or damaged "T"s should be replaced. 
f)  Excavated soil will be replaced. 
g)  Written documentation shall be provided to the septic tank owner, noting the condition of the septic tank. This shall include any damage or missing components observed, and a copy will be provided to the Banks County Planning Department. 
B.  Septage disposal: 
a)  Septage handling facilities shall comply with the ordinances and codes of Banks County. 
b)  Direct land application: 
(i)  Land application of domestic septage shall be in accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations ("CFR"), Title 40, Part 503. 
(ii)  Disposal of domestic septage by land application shall only be applied to land with a low potential for public exposure. This is land that the public uses infrequently which includes but is not limited to: agriculture land, forests and reclamation sites located in unpopulated areas. 
(iii)  The two approved land application methods for the disposal of domestic septage are subsurface application and surface spreading. 
C.  Locations of land disposal sites: 
a)  Approval in writing shall be obtained from the Banks County Planning Department for each site at which a person plans to dispose of domestic septage after review of the Application. 
b)  Sandy soils overlaying an unconfined aquifer, which is used or may be used as a principal source of potable drinking water, shall not be utilized as land disposal sites for septage. 
c)  Land disposal sites for surface application of septage shall not be located in the watershed of a reservoir or a potential reservoir of a watershed or a stream extending from a reservoir or potential reservoir which is upstream of an intake for drinking water supply. 
d)  Sites shall be well drained and are not to be used where soil surveys, soil studies, soil types, areas of Karst, or other geological data indicate the existence of soil conditions which would preclude safe and proper disposal. 
e)  Property of less than fifty (50) contiguous acres (separated by a County maintained public road is not contiguous) shall not be used for the disposal of domestic septage. 
f)  Land disposal sites shall not be located within 500 feet of an individual water supply source. 
g)  Land disposal sites shall not be located within 500 feet of a public water supply well, residence or other facility used or frequented by the public. 
h)  No land disposal site shall be located within 500 feet of any water impoundment, lake, stream, pond, reservoir, marsh, sinkhole, coastal waters or any permanent or intermittent waterbody considered waters of the State. 
i)  Disposal sites with slopes exceeding 15% are considered unsuitable for land disposal of septage. 
j)  No disposal of domestic septage by land application within five hundred (500) feet of a residential dwelling. 
k)  No disposal of domestic septage by land application within one hundred (100) feet of a site's boundary lines. 
l)  No disposal of domestic septage by land application within two hundred (200) feet of a structure that houses animals, poultry or live stock. 
D.  Management of land disposal sites. 
a)  Each land disposal site entrance shall be posted with "No Trespassing" signs, identified as a land application disposal site for domestic septage and facilities shall be fenced by a six-feet security fence around the perimeter of the disposal site. 
b)  No industrial, solid or hazardous wastes shall be deposited on the site. 
c)  The pH of the soil/septage mixture is to be maintained at 6.5 or greater at all times. 
d)  The pH of the soil in the land disposal area is not to go below 6.5 as measured by annual soil tests. 
e)  The annual cadmium (Cd) levels are not to exceed 0.5 Kg/Hectare/year. The following formula can be used to convert ppm to Kg/Hectare: ppm × 1.12 = Kg / Hectare. 
E.  Pathogen control management. The following management practices, found in 40 CFR Part 503-32(b)(5), must be met for compliance with pathogen control requirements: 
a)  Septage shall not be applied to any portion of a site that is within 300 feet of any lake, stream, pond, reservoir or any permanent or intermittent waterbody considered waters of the state; 
b)  Food crops with harvested parts that touch the land surface shall not be harvested for 14 months after septage application; 
c)  Food crops with harvested parts that develop above the land surface, feed crops, or fiber crops shall not be harvested for 30 days after application of septage; 
d)  Food crops with harvested parts below the land surface shall not be harvested for 38 months after application of septage; 
e)  Animals shall not be allowed to graze on the land for 30 days after application of septage; 
f)  Turf grown on land where septage is applied shall not be harvested for one year after application of septage; and 
g)  Public access shall be restricted for 30 days after application of septage. 
F.  Vector reduction management. The following management practices, found in 40 CFR Part 503.33, must be met for compliance with vector reduction requirements. 
a)  Septage shall be injected below the surface of the land and no significant amount of septage shall be present on the land surface within one hour after the septage is injected. Injection may be accomplished by any device(s) that places the septage beneath the soil surface in a narrow trench at a depth of no greater than 18 inches and promptly replaces the cover soil in the same action of trenching and placing septage. Excavation of a trench followed by placement of septage and later covering of the trench is not considered injection. 
b)  Septage applied to the surface of the land shall be incorporated into the soil within six hours after septage application or 
c)  The pH of domestic septage shall be raised to 12 or higher by alkali addition and, without the addition of more alkali, shall remain at 12 or higher for 30 minutes. Septage is to be applied in a manner which will prevent any ponding standing of liquid on the land surface twenty four hours after application. 
Note: Each container of domestic septage must be monitored for compliance with 503.33(b)(12). 
G.  Application rate. The annual application rate for septage applied to a land application site shall not exceed 40,000 gallons per acre per year. The septage must be spread or injected as evenly as possible over the entire acreage where the crop or vegetation is grown. This rate is calculated assuming a value of 100 pounds per acre per year of nitrogen required by the crop or vegetation grown on the land. The formula is found as equation 1, in 40 CFR Part 503.13(c) 
H.  Record keeping. Individuals involved in land application of domestic septage shall maintain the following information for five years and that information shall be available for inspection by the Banks County Planning Department. 
a)  The location, by either street address or latitude and longitude, of each site on which domestic septage is applied. 
b)  The number of acres of each site on which domestic septage is applied. 
c)  The date, time, and quantity of domestic septage applied to each site. 
d)  The crop or vegetation grown on each site. 
e)  The rate in gallons per acre per year at which septage is applied to each site. 
f)  The following certification statement: "I certify, under penalty of law, that the pathogen requirements in section 503.32(c)(1) and the vector attraction requirements in section 503.33(b)(9) or (b)(10) have been met. This determination has been made under my direction and supervision in accordance with the system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information used to determine that the pathogen requirements and vector attraction reduction requirements have been met. I am aware that there are significant penalties for false certification including the possibility of fine or imprisonment". 
g)  A description of how management requirements for pathogens and vector attraction reduction requirements as required by this Ordinance are met. 
h)  The name of the company and signature of the person who applied the septage. 
I.  Compliance. Compliance with management practices, vector attraction practices and application rates may be determined by review of records required by this Ordinance. 
J.  Septage holding facilities. It is necessary that all septage land disposal systems have an alternative method for the temporary holding of septage during periods of adverse weather, and such systems shall meet the following requirements: a) No overflow or leakage of septage may be allowed from the system onto the ground surface, into surface waters or the groundwater table; b) Odors from such systems are to be controlled at all times; c) Septage is to be removed from the holding facility to the land disposal system as soon as weather and soil conditions permit. 
K.  Surface (land) application. Surface application is a frequently used septage disposal method, but as with any surface application technique, some nitrogen (N) loss occurs through ammonia volatilization. Consideration should be given to intermediate holding facilities before application to the land. Storage is necessary just prior to or during, periods of precipitation in order to prevent run off of contaminated water. In winter months, land application should be limited to non-frozen surfaces to prevent run off during thaws. Intermediate holding facilities are required for those seasonal periods when ground surfaces are frozen. Pathogen die-off during storage is also a factor in favor of using storage facilities. Pre-treatment may be required to avoid odors and to meet vector attraction reduction requirements. 
L.  Subsurface application. Subsurface application techniques include plow furrow cover (PFC), subsurface injection (SSI), and terreater injection, which is a patented device for subsurface injection. Placement in trenches and lagoons are considered burial practices and are not approved. Soil incorporation techniques offer better odor and vector control than surface spreading techniques. A storage facility approved by the Banks County Planning Department is required. A resting period of one to two weeks is required before equipment can be driven over waste incorporated land. 
13.  Commercial kennels, if such structures shall be located closer than 400 feet from any adjacent property line and/or closer than 800 feet from any residence on adjacent property. 
14.  Campgrounds for not more than ten spaces for vehicles (recreational vehicles and campers). If approved as a conditional use, campgrounds with not more than ten spaces shall not have to comply with Chapters 50 and 51 of the Code of Banks County. 
(Res. No. 98-20, § 1(503), 12-9-1998; Res. No. 2000-06, § 1, 2-8-2000; Res. No. 2002-02, § 1, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2002-13, § 4, 5, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 3, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-29, § 1, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 2015-12 , § 1, 7-14-2015) 
ARTICLE VI. - ARR, AGRICULTURAL-RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 601. - Purpose and intent. 
The ARR, agricultural-rural residential district is established to preserve and maintain a compatible land use relationship in the rural environs of unincorporated Banks County, free from uses that have intensive agricultural, commercial, industrial or other nuisance characteristics. No tract of land can be less than two acres (except lots of record) in ARR. In order for a parcel or tract of land to be considered for rezoning to ARR, the parcel or tract of land must consist of at least two acres. No tract of land in ARR can be subdivided into tracts of less than two acres. 
The siting of private landfills in this district is inconsistent with the intent of this district. 
(Res. No. 98-22, § 1(601), 12-9-1998) 
Section 602. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to one or more permitted principal uses, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
2.  Family, church or other nonprofit cemeteries. 
3.  Churches, temples, synagogues, places of worship, clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of assembly for nonprofit membership groups located on at least five acres of land. 
4.  Dwellings, single-family. 
5.  Farm buildings, including barns, grain storage bins, implement sheds, and structures accessory to agricultural uses, but not housing any animals or storing waste or other byproducts thereof. 
6.  Home occupations, as defined in article III and limited in section 417. 
7.  Mobile homes and manufactured homes on individual lots, subject to the requirements of the Banks County Mobile/Manufactured Home Ordinance as amended from time to time. 
8.  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, tennis courts, swimming pools and other noncommercial recreational facilities located on at least five acres of land if not incidental to a residential dwelling. All residential swimming pools, aboveground or in-ground, shall be at least ten feet from all property lines and be enclosed by a fence at least four feet in height. 
9.  Produce stands, provided products sold are those grown or produced on the premises, and provided such stands are located outside of any public right-of-way. 
10.  Public buildings and uses. 
11.  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary, and public and private colleges and universities located on at least five acres of land. 
12.  Home schooling for the residents of the dwelling on the property. 
13.  Agricultural uses (excluding animal waste lagoons, including forestry, commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries (wholesale and retail), livestock (except dairies, hog parlors, and feed lots), and poultry [except turkey ranges and commercial egg operations (caged layers)], provided that no structure housing poultry or other livestock as permitted herein is located closer than 800 feet from an existing dwelling unit other than that of the property owner and 400 feet from any common property line. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the structures located on the land housing the poultry or livestock shall not exceed the lesser of 83,200 square feet or ten percent of the land area. 
14.  Barns which house animals that are not being raised for commercial purposes, except for isolated sales not in the ordinary course of business, including, without limitation, poultry, cats, livestock, horses, goats, sheep, mules and donkeys, located no closer than 50 feet from any adjacent property line. 
15.  Subdivisions shall comply with Banks County Subdivision Regulations but all lots shall be at least two acres. 
16.  Farm structures for the temporary storage of poultry littler, other manure or other dust-producing substances produced on the owner's property, provided that all such structures shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any property line and 400 feet from any residences. 
17.  Commercial kennels, provided such structures shall be located a minimum of 400 feet from any adjacent property line and 800 feet from any residence on adjacent property. 
18.  Kennels which are located 50 feet or more from any adjacent property line and 200 or more feet from any existing residence on adjacent property. 
19.  Television, land mobile, communication, broadband, microwave, and radio transmission antennae and towers, (collectively "towers and antennae") not including studios or offices, provided the height of such towers and antennae exceed 70 feet in height and do not exceed 150 feet without specific authorization from the Federal Aviation Administration and the Federal Communications Commission. All towers and antennae must be set back a distance equal to the full height of the tower from all property lines. The applicant at the time of filing the application shall provide a site plan and information regarding topography, coverage zone, tower height and a signed tower easement to the planning and development office along with applicable fees. Accessory structures shall be limited to usages associated with the operation of the antennae or towers and shall be appropriate in scale and intensity. Upon approval of the application by the building official, a notice to proceed shall be granted to the applicant. After the tower is erected and before a tower is permitted for operation, the building official shall issue a certificate of completion. All towers and antennae not used to transmit signals or communications for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be removed from the property where the towers and antennae are located. 
(Res. No. 98-22, § 1(602), 12-9-1998; Res. No. 2000-19, § 1, 7-12-2000; Ord. No. 2003-35, §§ 1, 2, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 4, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2015-12 , § 4, 7-14-2015) 
Section 603. - Conditional uses. 
1.  Boarding homes, dormitories, lodging houses, and mobile homes and manufactured homes for agricultural workers, provided such dwellings are located on a farm with a minimum size of 20 acres in active agricultural production, provision is made to meet all applicable public health requirements, and provided such lodging is intended only for the temporary or seasonal housing of farm workers. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  Campgrounds for not more than ten spaces for vehicles (recreational vehicles and campers). If approved as a conditional use, campgrounds with not more than ten spaces shall not have to comply with Chapters 50 and 51 of the Code of Banks County. In addition, there must be 20 contiguous acres of land to qualify for a conditional use. 
4.  Commercial cemeteries. 
5.  Churches, temples, synagogues, places of worship, clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of assembly for nonprofit membership groups located on less than five acres of land. 
6.  Nurseries and greenhouses for the growth and sale of plants, trees and shrubs (wholesale and retail) provided that any structure housing the plants, trees and shrubs shall be at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
7.  Reserved. 
8.  Schools, parochial or private, offering courses in general education not operated for profit. 
9.  Barns, kennels and/or other structures which house small numbers of animals that are not being raised for commercial purposes except for isolated sales not in the ordinary course of business, including, without limitation, poultry, livestock, horses, goats, sheep, mules, dogs, cats, and donkeys, located closer than 50 feet from any adjacent property line. 
10.  Any place that regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells, trades or lets for hire any horse, donkey, burro or mule, provided that no structure or corral housing such animals is located closer than 400 feet from an existing dwelling other than that of the property owner and 200 feet from any adjacent property line. 
11.  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary, and public and private colleges and universities located on less than five acres of land. 
12.  Agricultural uses (excluding animal waste lagoons), including forestry, livestock (except dairies, hog parlors, and feed lots), and poultry [except turkey ranges and commercial egg operations (caged layers)], provided that no structure housing poultry or other livestock as permitted herein or containing manure or other dust-producing substances is located closer than 400 feet from an existing dwelling unit other than that of the property owner and 200 feet from any common property line. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the structures located on the land housing the poultry or livestock shall not exceed the lesser of 83,200 square feet or ten percent of the land area. 
13.  Commercial kennels, if such structures shall be located closer than 400 feet from any adjacent property line and/or closer than 800 feet from any residence on adjacent property. 
(Res. No. 98-22, § 1(603), 12-9-1998; Ord. No. 2002-13, § 6, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2003-35, § 3, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 5, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-29, § 2, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 2015-12 , § 3, 7-14-2015) 
ARTICLE VII(A). - R-1, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 701(A). - Purpose and intent. 
The R-1, single-family residential district is intended to provide an opportunity for the establishment and preservation of quiet, stable, single-family residential neighborhoods at low densities free from other uses except those which are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. All lots or tracts in the R-1 district (except lots of record) shall have a minimum lot size of one acre if served by public water and shall have a minimum lot size of 1.5 acres if not served by public water. 
To qualify acreage for rezoning to R-1, there shall be a minimum of 10 acres in the tract for consideration. 
Sites for private landfills in this district is inconsistent with the intent of this district. 
(Res. No. 98-21, § 1(701)(A), 12-9-1998; Ord. No. 2002-13, § 7, 7-9-2002) 
Section 702(A). - Permitted uses. 
1.  One accessory building, customarily incidental to the principal permitted use, not to exceed 250 square feet. The minimum roof pitch of the accessory building shall be four feet of rise per 12 feet of run. 
2.  Single-family dwelling, excluding modular homes. 
3.  Subdivisions (shall comply with Banks County Subdivision Regulations and minimum lot size for this district). 
4.  Playgrounds and parks. 
(Res. No. 98-21, § 1(701)(A), 12-9-1998; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Section 703(A). - Conditional uses. 
1.  Reserved. 
2.  Home occupations, as defined in Article III, Appendix A of the Code of Banks County and limited in Section 417, Article IV, Appendix A of the Code of Banks County. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  Modular home. 
5.  One accessory building customarily incidental to the principal permitted use, not to exceed 625 square feet. The minimum roof pitch of the accessory building shall be four feet of rise per 12 feet of run. 
(Res. No. 98-21, § 1(703)(A), 12-9-1998; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
ARTICLE VII(B). - R-2, RESIDENTIAL-MULTIFAMILY DISTRICT 

Section 701(B). - Purpose and intent. 
1.  This district is designed for higher density multifamily development served by a public water system and sewerage facilities. This district is to be located where there is convenient access to collector streets and major road thoroughfares. All developments within an R-2 District shall comply with the regulations established in Multifamily Housing Developments. of the Code of Banks County Georgia. (See also Article XVII, Appendix A of the Zoning Regulations of Banks County of the Code of Banks County, Georgia.) The siting of private landfills in this district is inconsistent with the intent of this district. 
2.  To qualify acreage for rezoning to R-2, there shall be a minimum of ten acres in the tract for consideration. 
(Res. No. 98-21, § 1(701)(B), 12-9-1998; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1, 5-9-2006) 
Section 702(B). - Permitted uses. 
1.  Reserved. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  Two-family dwellings (duplex). 
4.  Multi-family dwellings. 
5.  Townhouses provided no more than four dwelling units in a row. 
6.  Condominiums 
7.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to one or more principal permitted uses. 
8.  Reserved. 
9.  Reserved. 
10.  Reserved. 
11.  Reserved. 
12.  Public buildings, uses and utilities. 
(Res. No. 98-21, § 1(702)(B), 12-9-1998; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 2, 5-9-2006; Ord. No. 2007-12, § 1, 3-13-2007) 
Section 703(B). - Conditional uses. 
1.  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, located on a lot with a minimum area of five acres and with principal buildings set back a minimum of 50 feet from any property line. 
2.  Home occupations as defined in article III and limited in section 417. 
3.  Clubs and fraternal organizations not operating for profit. 
4.  Day care centers provided that prior to the application, the applicant shall show proof of registration and licensing as required by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
5.  Playgrounds and parks. 
(Res. No. 98-21, § 1(703)(B), 12-9-1998; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 3, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 704(B). - Special application requirements. 
Applications for rezoning to the R-2 Zoning District shall, in addition to the general requirements for rezoning applications specified in Section 1103, Article XII, Appendix A of the Code of Banks County, Georgia, submit the following as part of the application: 
(a)  Proof of availability of adequate sewer capacity including the size and location of connection points. 
(b)  A traffic study, including summary. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 4, 5-9-2006) 
ARTICLE VIII. - C-1, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 

Section 801. - Purpose and intent. 
The C-1, Neighborhood Commercial District is intended to provide areas for limited small-scale commercial uses of a convenience nature serving nearby neighborhoods as opposed to a regional market. The district is not intended to accommodate automotive or other types of more intensive commercial activities that are of such magnitude or type that would result in the generation of excessive traffic, noise, odors, pollution, safety hazards, other nuisances, or other adverse impacts which would detract from the desirability of properties in the area of residential use. In general, the neighborhood commercial district includes offices and retail and service establishments but exclude those highway-oriented uses which involve the use of chemicals or outside sales, storage or display. All structures within the C-1 District shall meet the design standards as stated in Article XVIII of Appendix A pertaining to the Zoning Regulations of the Code of Banks County, Georgia. Hours of operation for businesses within the C-1 District shall be no greater than 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. No building or structure allowed as a permitted use in Section 802, Article VIII, Appendix A of the Code of Banks County, Georgia, shall exceed 2,500 square feet with outdoor storage yards not to exceed 5,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2006-14, § 1, 5-9-2006) 
Section 802. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to principal permitted uses and structures. 
2.  Antique shops. 
3.  Art and school supply stores. 
4.  Bake shops and bakeries, but not including wholesale. 
5.  Banks and financial institutions, including drive-in, drive-through and automatic teller facilities as accessory uses. 
6.  Barber shops and beauty shops. 
7.  Book or stationery stores. 
8.  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their customary accessory uses and structures, including cemeteries. 
9.  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of public assembly for membership groups, nonprofit or for profit. 
10.  Clothes pressing, repair, sale and rental, but not including department stores. 
11.  Dressmaking, millinery, sewing and tailor shops. 
12.  Drug stores. 
13.  Electronic equipment sales. 
14.  Food catering establishments. 
15.  Florist shops. 
16.  Gift shops. 
17.  Ice cream and yogurt shops. 
18.  Interior decorating shops. 
19.  Jewelry stores. 
20.  Libraries, museums and art galleries. 
21.  Locksmith shops. 
22.  Photocopying, printing and reproduction services. 
23.  Public buildings, uses and utilities. 
24.  Radio and television repair shops. 
25.  Appliance repair shops. 
26.  Toy stores. 
27.  Travel agencies. 
28.  Watch and clock sales and repair shops. 
29.  Reserved. 
30.  Feed and feed equipment store. 
31.  Nurseries and greenhouses for the growth and sale of plants, trees and shrubs. 
32.  Offices, business, medical, professional, insurance and real estate. 
33.  Restaurants, which may include outdoor seating areas, but not including drive-ins or drive-through facilities. 
34.  Day care centers provided that the owner has proof of registration and licensing as required by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. Playground areas must be surrounded by a four foot safety fence. 
35.  Food, produce and grocery stores. 
36.  Hardware stores. 
37.  Hobby shops. 
38.  Instructional studios, such as music, dance, gymnastics, aerobics and martial arts. 
39.  Music stores. 
40.  Photography shops and studios. 
41.  Sporting goods stores. 
42.  Dry cleaners and laundromats. 
43.  Machine shops. 
44.  Trade shops. 
45.  Automobile repair and body shops. 
46.  Bed and breakfast inn. 
(Res. No. 2001-06, § 1(802), 3-14-2001; Res. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 6-8-2004; Ord. No. 2006-14, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Section 803. - Conditional uses. 
1.  Automated car washes, as accessory to convenience stores with retail gasoline sales. 
2.  Cemeteries. 
3.  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of public assembly for membership groups, nonprofit or for profit, that exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  Convenience food and retail stores with or without retail gasoline sales, not exceeding 10,000 square feet of total floor area, which must be surrounded by an opaque fence buffer along the side and rear property lines. 
5.  Paint stores. 
6.  Record, tape, and video rental and sales stores. 
7.  Recycling collection centers, but not including processing or disposal of recyclable materials. 
8.  Single-family dwelling. 
9.  Schools, public or private. 
10.  Dwellings, multifamily, subject to regulations established in Multifamily Housing Developments of the Banks County Code. For consideration as a conditional use permit, there must be a minimum of ten acres that will be dedicated for multi-family dwellings. (See also Article XVII, Appendix A of the Zoning Regulations of Banks County of the Code of Banks County, Georgia.) 
11.  Cultural facilities, including art galleries, museums, theaters (not including movie theaters), libraries, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
12.  Uses permitted in Section 802 that exceed 2,500 square feet, but in no case shall exceed 10,000 square feet. Outdoor storage yards shall not exceed 20,000 square feet and shall be surrounded by an opaque vegetative buffer or opaque fence buffer. 
(Res. No. 2001-06, § 2(803), 3-14-2001; Ord. No. 2006-14, § 3, 5-9-2006) 
ARTICLE IX. - C-2, GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 

Section 901. - Purpose and intent. 
The C-2, General Commercial District, is intended to provide adequate space for various types of general business uses that serve residents on a community or regional level rather than neighborhood level, including the retailing of major goods and services of large scale, and automotive and other types of more intensive commercial activities and establishments that rely on highway-oriented, passerby traffic. All structures within the C-2 District, shall meet the design standards as stated in Article XVIII of Appendix A of the Code of Banks County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, § 1, 5-9-2006) 
Section 902. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the C-1, Neighborhood Commercial Business District as enumerated in Section 802, Article VIII of Appendix A of the Code of Banks County, Georgia, but not subject to any specified square footage limitations. 
2.  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to permitted principal uses. 
3.  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics. 
4.  Assembly halls, auditoriums and meeting halls. 
5.  Banks and financial institutions. 
6.  Blueprinting establishments. 
7.  Trade shops. 
8.  Reserved. 
9.  Department stores. 
10.  Dry cleaning establishments, laundromats and laundries. 
11.  Reserved. 
12.  Reserved. 
13.  Floor covering stores. 
14.  Garden supply centers, greenhouses and landscaping services. 
15.  Reserved. 
16.  Machine shops. 
17.  Mini-warehouses and mini-storage facilities, where no individual storage stall or compartment exceeds 500 square feet of total floor area. 
18.  Monument sales establishments. 
19.  Parking garages and parking lots. 
20.  Pet stores and pet grooming establishments. 
21.  Repair of household appliances. 
22.  Residences for a caretaker or night watchman. 
23.  Restaurants, including drive-in and drive-through facilities. 
24.  Reserved. 
25.  Taxidermist shops. 
26.  Warehousing and storage uses which occupy no more than 20,000 square feet of floor area. 
27.  Wholesale establishments which occupy no more than 20,000 square feet of floor area. 
28.  Theaters, indoor. 
29.  Furniture, fixtures and home furnishing stores, including sales and rental, but not including manufacturing. 
30.  Office for governmental, business, medical, professional or general purposes. 
31.  Cultural facilities, including art galleries, museums, theaters (not including movie theaters), libraries, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
32.  Sign fabrication and painting shops, occupying not more than 2,500 square feet of floor area. 
33.  Exterminators and pest control businesses. 
(Res. No. 2001-07, § 1, 3-14-2001; Res. No. 2001-17, § 1, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2006-15, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Section 903. - Conditional uses. 
1.  Equipment sales, service, rental and repair. 
2.  Amphitheaters and stadiums. 
3.  Auction facilities. 
4.  Automobile boat, truck, motorcycle, bicycle and other vehicle rental, repair, service, parts and sales. 
5.  Reserved. 
6.  Automobile car washes, including automated, full-service or self-service. 
7.  Billiard halls and amusement/video arcades. 
8.  Bowling alleys and skating rinks. 
9.  Building materials sales and lumber yards. 
10.  Bus passenger stations, terminals. 
11.  Camper and recreation vehicle sales, service and repair. 
12.  Reserved. 
13.  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, group homes, rehabilitation centers, sanitariums and similar institutionalized residential facilities involving professional care and treatment. 
14.  Reserved. 
15.  Firearms sales and service, including gun clubs and indoor shooting ranges. 
16.  Flea markets. 
17.  Golf courses and golf driving ranges. 
18.  Health clubs and spas. 
19.  Heliports and helistops. 
20.  Hospitals and clinics. 
21.  Hotel/Motel an establishment providing accommodations for travelers normally advertised, designed or utilized for daily occupancy. 
22.  Kennels. 
23.  Mobile home, mobile building and manufactured home sales, but not including residential occupancy of such structures. 
24.  Palm reading and fortune telling establishments. 
25.  Pawn shops. 
26.  Extended Stay Hotels or Motels means any hotel or motel in which guest rooms have facilities for both the storage, refrigeration, and preparation of food, and/or which are advertised, designed, or utilized for weekly or monthly occupancy. Extended Stay Hotels or Motels are subject to the Rules and Regulations of the Georgia Health Code, as amended from time to time. 
27.  Private clubs operated for profit. 
28.  Race tracks for competitive racing of animals or motor-driven vehicles, including, without limitation, motorcycles, go-carts, cars, and trucks, provided the site contains a minimum of 100 acres, off-street parking, and permanent rest room facilities and is surrounded by an opaque vegetative buffer or opaque fence buffer. 
29.  Television, land mobile, communication, microwave, and radio transmission antennae and towers, including studios or offices, provided the height of such towers and antennae do not exceed 150 feet without specific authorization from the Federal Aviation Administration and the Federal Communications Commission. All towers and antennae must be set back a distance equal to the full height of the tower from all property lines. The applicant at the time of filing the application shall provide a site plan and information regarding topography, coverage zone and tower height. Accessory structures shall be limited to usages associated with the operation of the antennae or towers and shall be appropriate in scale and intensity. All towers and antennae not used to transmit signals or communications for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be removed from the property where the towers and antennae are located. 
30.  Recycling collection centers, but not including the processing or disposal of recyclable materials. 
31.  Research and scientific laboratories. 
32.  Sign fabrication and painting shops, occupying not more than 2,500 square feet of floor area. 
33.  Taxicab and limousine services. 
34.  Reserved. 
35.  Truck stops and truck terminals. 
36.  Reserved. 
37.  Funeral homes, mortuaries and mausoleums. 
38.  Reserved. 
39.  Contractors' establishments, building, electrical and plumbing. 
40.  Miniature golf courses, baseball/softball bating cages, go-cart track, which must be surrounded by a six foot fence along the side and rear property lines. 
41.  Convenience food and retail stores with or without retail gasoline sales, which must be surrounded by an opaque fence buffer along the side and rear property lines. 
(Res. No. 2001-07, § 2, 3-14-2001; Res. No. 2001-17, § 2, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2002-13, § 8, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2006-15, § 3, 5-9-2006; Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
ARTICLE X. - M-1, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 

Sec. 1001. - Purpose and intent. 
1.  The M-1 industrial district is established with the purpose of reserving certain areas with relatively level topography, adequate water and sewage facilities, and access to arterial streets for industrial operations, but where such areas' proximity to residential and other districts makes it desirable to limit industrial operations to those that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, or other nuisances, or radiation or other environmental hazards, and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. Uses within this district should not require substantial quantities of water for manufacturing operations and should not necessarily require rail, air and water transportation. No uses which pose risks of ground or surface water contamination, air pollution or other environmental hazards should be permitted. Certain commercial uses having an open storage characteristic, or which are most appropriately located as neighbors of industrial uses, are also included within this district. All outdoor storage yards within the M-1 District, shall be surrounded by an opaque vegetative buffer or opaque fence buffer. 
2.  To qualify acreage for rezoning to M-1, there shall be a minimum of two acres in the tract for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2002-13, § 9, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 1, 5-9-2006) 
Section 1002. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to permitted principal uses, including offices, showrooms and administrative facilities. 
2.  Agricultural implement rental, repair, sales and service, and farm supply stores and storage yards. 
3.  Blueprinting and printing establishments. 
4.  Building material sales. 
5.  Reserved. 
6.  Reserved. 
7.  Contractor's establishments. 
8.  Distribution of products and merchandise. 
9.  Dry-cleaning plants. 
10.  Exterminators and pest control businesses. 
11.  Reserved. 
12.  Lumber yards, mills for planing and sawing. 
13.  Machine shops. 
14.  Mini-warehouse and mini-storage facilities. 
15.  Reserved. 
16.  Reserved. 
17.  Repair of household appliances. 
18.  Sign fabrication and painting shops. 
19.  Reserved. 
20.  Reserved. 
21.  Reserved. 
22.  Reserved. 
23.  Trade shop. 
(Res. No. 2002-01, § 1, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Section 1003. - Conditional uses. 
1.  Airports and accessory facilities. 
2.  Asphalt plants. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  Ceramic production facilities. 
5.  Cold storage, frozen food lockers and ice manufacture. 
6.  Concrete, cement, clay, mortar and plaster production. 
7.  Extraction or removal of sand, gravel, top soil, clay, dirt, precious metals, gems, or other natural resources. 
8.  Feed, grain, or fertilizer manufacture or storage. 
9.  Food processing plants, including fish and poultry facilities. 
10.  Heliports and helistops. 
11.  Junkyards subject to the following: 
A.  All such operations shall be completely enclosed by an opaque vegetative buffer or opaque fence as will effectively screen all operations from view of the general public. The fence or buffer shall be installed adjacent to the front, side and rear property lines. 
12.  Landfills 
A.  Landfills are classified into three types: 1) Inert waste landfills, 2) Construction and demolition landfills, and 3) Solid waste landfills. Hazardous waste landfills are prohibited and hazardous waste (as defined by the Department of Natural Resources) may not be disposed of in an inert, construction/demolition, or solid waste landfill. Except for hazardous waste landfills which are prohibited, each type of landfill is a conditional use within the M-1 District and is subject to the following: 
(1)  All landfills must be surrounded by a buffer at least 800 feet wide, located on the landfill property. At least 200 feet of the buffer shall be sufficient in its undisturbed state, or supplemented as necessary by an opaque vegetative buffer or opaque fence buffer, to completely obscure viewing of any landfill cell at all times of the year. To be sufficiently vegetated, vegetation must include evergreen species that reach a minimum height of 20 feet when mature. If plantings are required, the planting plan shall be submitted to and approved by the zoning administrative officer. 
(2)  The boundary of the landfill property (either inside or outside the vegetated buffer) must be surrounded by a fence or wall, with the owner of the property maintaining and repairing the fence or wall. 
(3)  No landfill cell may exceed the height limitations as established by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(4)  No land disturbing activity or depositing of debris within 300 feet of any wetland, groundwater recharge area, floodplain, creek, stream, river, pond, lake or other body of water. 
(5)  No landfill cell may be located within 1,000 feet of an existing dwelling unit. 
(6)  All lights at a landfill shall be downward firing and shielded. 
(7)  Hours of operation for receiving waste at any landfill shall be no greater than 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Saturday. Waste shall not be received on Sunday. 
(8)  A landfill shall only be permitted where all county roads used for access have been built to a standard sufficient to withstand the projected number of trips per day at maximum weight for the vehicles expected. If a landfill is proposed adjacent to county roads that are not sufficient, according to the county engineer, to withstand the loads, or were not designed for such loads, the landfill owner may pay to bring such roads up to standard from the entrance(s) of the landfill to the nearest county or state road of sufficient strength; or the landfill shall be denied. Truck traffic shall be restricted to roads of sufficient design and construction standards. 
B.  An application for a conditional use permit for a landfill shall also submit the following information, in addition to other conditional use requirements: 
(1)  Site plan prepared, and sealed by a qualified engineer depicting: 
(a)  The zoning on all adjacent parcels. 
(b)  The location of the landfill cells, all buffers and fences. 
(c)  The location of all dwelling units within 1,500 feet of any proposed landfill cell. 
(d)  Topographic information highlighting land sloping 25 percent or more. 
(e)  All floodplains, streams and rivers, watershed areas, wetlands, and groundwater recharge areas within ½ mile of the subject property and on the subject property, as well as showing the location of the landfill and the landfill cells to those features showing all buffers and setbacks. 
(f)  All water wells within one mile of the landfill cells. 
(g)  Any other information as may be required by the zoning administrative officer. 
(h)  Certification by a qualified engineer that the landfill is in compliance with all local, state and federal regulations. 
(i)  Proximity to state or national historic sites within five miles shall be indicated. 
(j)  A report from a geologist of the soil conditions on the proposed landfill site, discussing the topography (especially any steep slopes), the substrata, and any geologic hazards or relevant conditions on the property, as well as giving an opinion as to the property's suitability for the type landfill proposed. 
(k)  A plan showing access, ingress and egress, including mechanisms to keep dust down and dirt off county roads. All access roads to landfill cells must be paved, and a truck cleaning station must be used at any exit. Entrances shall be located to minimize traffic hazards, with accel/decel lanes provided. The traffic plan shall also state the estimated number of trips per day, the vehicle types, and maximum weight of vehicles expected. 
13.  Manufacturing, processing and assembling, repair and servicing of commodities or products. 
14.  Television, land mobile, communication, microwave, and radio transmission antennae and towers, including studios or offices, provided the height of such towers and antennae do not exceed 150 feet without specific authorization from the Federal Aviation Administration and the Federal Communications Commission. All towers and antennae must be set back a distance equal to the full height of the tower from all property lines. The applicant at the time of filing the application shall provide a site plan and information regarding topography, coverage zone and tower height. Accessory structures shall be limited to usages associated with the operation of the antennae or towers and shall be appropriate in scale and intensity. All towers and antennae not used to transmit signals or communications for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be removed from the property where the towers and antennae are located. 
15.  Recycling plants, including any processing activities, but not including the incineration or disposal of any materials. 
16.  Research and scientific laboratories. 
17.  Residences for caretaker or night watchman. 
18.  Storage buildings and storage yards. 
19.  Wholesale establishments. 
(Res. No. 2002-01, § 2, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2002-13, § 10, 11, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2006-16, §§ 3—8, 5-9-2006) 
Section 1004. - Minimum setbacks. 
Refer to Section 411 entitled "Building Setbacks" of Article IV, Appendix A of the Code of Banks County. 
(Res. No. 2002-01, § 3, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 5-9-2006) 
ARTICLE XI. - AMENDMENT, APPLICATION AND PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS 

Section 1101. - Policies and procedures. 
The provisions of the "Land Use Public Hearing Policies and Procedures Ordinance of Banks County," as amended from time to time (the "Policies and Procedures Ordinance"), shall be applicable to each of the following matters arising under these regulations: 
(a)  The adoption of any amendment to or restatement of these regulations which changes the text of these regulations; 
(b)  The adoption of any amendment to these regulations which rezones property from one zoning district to another; 
(c)  The issuance of any conditional use permit under these regulations; 
(d)  The grant of any variance under these regulations; 
(e)  Any other action relating to these regulations requiring a public hearing pursuant to the State of Georgia Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. 36-66-1 et seq., enacted by Georgia Laws 1985, page 1139, as amended from time to time; and 
(f)  All applications, petitions, notices, public hearings, proceedings and other matters relating to any, of the foregoing, to the extent covered by the policies and procedures ordinance. 
Section 1102. - Amendment to text. 
All proposals to amend or restate the text of all of any part of these regulations shall be initiated as provided in section 5.01 of the policies and procedures ordinance, and shall be considered in accordance with the provisions of the policies and procedures ordinance. 
Section 1103. - Applications for rezoning, conditional use permits or variances. 
1103.1 Applications (i) for an amendment of the official zoning map to rezone any parcel of property from one zoning district to another, (ii) for a conditional use permit to allow a conditional use in any zoning district or (iii) for a variance from the provisions of these regulations may be made only by the governing body, the planning commission or the property owner of the parcel to be considered. All such applications shall be initiated as provided in section 5.02 of the policies and procedures ordinance, and shall be considered in accordance with the provisions of the policies and procedures ordinance. 
1103.2 The following application materials shall be filed in connection with applications described in section 1103.1 above: 
(a)  An application form furnished by the zoning administrative officer. 
(b)  A legal description of the property to be considered in the application. The legal description shall be by metes and bounds unless an alternative legal description is accepted by the zoning administrative officer. Boundary surveys of the property should be submitted with the application whenever available. 
(c)  A letter of intent which describes general characteristics of the proposed development such as type and time frame of development, background information in support of such application, and any other information deemed pertinent by the applicant or the zoning administrative officer. 
(d)  A site plan meeting the requirements of these regulations. 
(e)  A fee for said application as established by the governing body from time to time. 
(f)  Disclosures of any conflicts of interest as specified in O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq., "Conflicts of Interest in Zoning Actions." 
1103.3 All site plans required by these regulations shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
(a)  Title of the proposed development and the name, address and telephone number of the property owner. 
(b)  The name, address and telephone number of the architect, engineer or other designer of the proposed development. 
(c)  Scale, date, north arrow, and general location map showing relationship of the site to street or natural landmarks. 
(d)  Boundaries of the subject property, all existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way and street pavement widths, buildings, water courses, parking and loading areas, and other physical characteristics of the property and the proposed development. 
Section 1104. - Criteria to consider for map amendments. 
The applicant, zoning administrative officer, planning commission and governing body should review an application for a zoning map amendment with regard to the following criteria: 
(a)  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property and whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of nearby property. 
(b)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions. 
(c)  The extent to which the destruction of property values promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
(d)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
(e)  The physical suitability of the subject property for development as presently zoned and under the proposed zoning district. 
(f)  The length of time the property has been vacant, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property, and whether there are existing or changed conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the rezoning request. 
(g)  The extent to which the proposed zoning will result in a use which will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, parks, or other public facilities. 
(h)  Whether the proposed zoning will create risk of adverse environmental effects to the community, including, without limitation, air pollution, surface water contamination or groundwater contamination. 
(i)  Whether the proposal will create risks that uses with nuisance characteristics will occur. 
(j)  Whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect property values of others. 
(k)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan, land use plan, or other adopted plans. The zoning administrative officer, planning commission, and governing body are authorized to require such special studies relating to the above factors as they reasonably deem relevant, including without limitation, for such matters as noise, air particulate matter, odor, surface or groundwater contamination, radiation, or other environmental or nuisance considerations. The governing body may approve the application for rezoning provided that it has determined that under the criteria set out above the rezoning is appropriate and has determined that the benefits of and need for the rezoning are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damages to neighboring properties or other parts of the county. 
Section 1105. - Criteria to consider conditional uses. 
A.  The conditional use permit is designed to be used when: 
1.  A conditional use listed under the zoning district is desired for development and a more intensive zoning district which contains that use as a use by right would not be appropriate for the property; or 
2.  The density of development may be affected by the height of a building; or 
3.  The neighboring properties may be affected by the height of any structure; and 
4.  The conditional use would be consistent with the needs of the neighborhood or the community as a whole, be compatible with the neighborhood and would not be in conflict with the overall objective of the Banks County Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  In order to accommodate these conditional uses, the conditional use permit allows the board of commissioners to approve a conditional use on a particular parcel without changing the general zoning district. Such approval shall be subject to the requirements set forth above and any additional conditions deemed necessary to ensure the compatibility of the conditional use with the surrounding properties. 
C.  All conditional use permit applications shall be for firm development proposals only. The conditional use permit shall not be used for securing early zoning for conceptual proposals which may not be undertaken for some time. 
D.  A conditional use permit application shall be considered only if it is made by the owner of the property or his/her designated agent. 
E.  An application for a conditional use permit shall follow the same procedures as set forth in the Banks County Zoning Ordinance for an application for rezoning (i.e., application filed with Banks County Planning Department, public hearing after advertisement before the Banks County Planning Commission, recommendation by the Banks County Planning Commission to the Banks County Board of Commissioners, public hearing after advertisement before the Board of Commissioners of Banks County and approval or denial by the Board of Commissioners of Banks County). 
F.  The minimum requirements for a conditional use permit are: 
1.  Any uses permitted under a conditional use permit shall also conform to the requirements of this ordinance and the development regulations for the use as found in the zoning district. 
2.  The application and review process for a conditional use permit shall be the same as for the zoning district under which the conditional use is found. In addition to the information and/or site plans which are required to be submitted for the proposed development, additional information deemed necessary by the Banks County Planning Department in order to evaluate a proposed use and its relationship to the surrounding area shall be submitted. In the review process, particular emphasis shall be given to the evaluation of the characteristics of the proposed use in relationship to its immediate neighborhood and the compatibility of the proposed use with its neighborhood. In the approval process for a conditional use permit application, the board of commissioners shall consider the policies and objectives of the Banks County Comprehensive Plan, particularly in relationship to the proposed site and surrounding area, and shall consider the potential adverse impacts on the surrounding area, especially in regards but not limited to traffic, storm drainage, land values and compatibility of land use activities. 
4.  If an application is approved and a conditional use permit is granted, all conditions which may have been attached to the approval are binding on the property. All subsequent development and use of the property shall be in accordance with the approved plan and conditions. 
5.  Changes to a conditional use, or development of a site for the conditional use, shall be treated as an amendment to the conditional use permit and shall be subject to the same application and review process as a new application. 
6.  The conditional use for which a conditional use permit is granted shall commence operations or construction within 12 months of the date of approval by the board of commissioners. If the use for which the conditional use permit was issued is discontinued for nine continuous months, the conditional use permit shall terminate. 
7.  An application for a conditional use permit in a residential district and which use is proposed to operate in a dwelling or as an accessory use to a dwelling is subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  The conditional use permit shall be valid for no more than a two-year period. Upon or before the expiration of a conditional use permit, the owner shall make application to continue the conditional use permit if continuance is desired. However, after the first two-year period, the board of commissioners may waive the two-year time limitation with the concurrence of the Banks County Planning Commission. 
b.  The conditional use shall operate within the dwelling on the property or, if approved by the board of commissioners, in an accessory structure. 
c.  The exterior character of the dwelling shall be preserved in its residential state and there shall be no outside evidence of the operation of the conditional use to the neighborhood, except for any accessory structure approved by the board of commissioners. 
d.  The owner of the property shall occupy the property and shall operate any business associated with the conditional use.. The owner of the property shall submit with the application a signed statement in which he/she agrees that the conditional use permit, if approved, shall automatically terminate in the event that the property is sold, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to any other party, or the business which operates the conditional use is sold, transferred, otherwise conveyed or discontinued. The owner shall also agree to notify the director in writing upon the occurrence of any of these events. 
e.  In addition to the information and/or site plans required by this section, the owner of the property shall submit with the application for a conditional use permit information regarding the ownership of any business associated with the use, the experience and background qualifications related to the operation of said business, prior similar businesses operated, applicable State of Georgia certifications, licenses and like information. 
f.  If conditional use shall operate within the dwelling on the property or, if approved by the board of commissioners, in an accessory structure on the property where a dwelling is located the conditional use permit is non-transferable and not assignable and shall terminate if the owner of the property where the conditional use is operating sells the property. 
8.  The owner of the property approved for a conditional use permit may voluntarily request termination of the conditional use permit by notifying the Banks County Planning Department in writing. The Banks County Planning Department shall notify the board of commissioners through the planning commission of the voluntary termination as they occur and shall change the official zoning maps to reflect any voluntary termination. The approval of a conditional use permit for a specific use which may be operated by a lessee under a private agreement with a lessor in any non-residential district shall not obligate the board of commissioners to be responsible for or be required to resolve any disputes which may arise out of the voluntary termination of the conditional use permit by the property owner. 
9.  Upon approval by the board of commissioners, a conditional use permit shall be identified on the official zoning maps. 
10.  Upon approval by the board of commissioners of a conditional use permit, the owner of the property shall be issued a notice from the Banks County Planning Department which states the specific use permitted, the requirements of this section and any conditions attached to the approval. 
11.  The Banks County Planning Department shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for the specific use unless all requirements and conditions of the conditional use permit have been fulfilled by the owner of the property. 
G.  The applicant, zoning administrative officer, planning commission and governing authority will review applications for conditional uses with regard to the following criteria: 
1.  Whether off-street parking and loading facilities are adequate in terms of location, amount and design to serve the proposed use. 
2.  Whether the number, size and type of signs proposed are compatible with the surrounding area. 
3.  Whether the proposed use will have compatibility with existing uses of adjacent land and the surrounding area and will not cause or create or be likely to cause or create, adverse effects upon the existing or future development of either the area or the rest of the county. 
4.  Whether ingress and egress to the property is suitable and safe and the effect of the proposed activity on traffic flow along adjoining streets is not adverse. 
5.  Whether the location and intensity of outdoor lighting is such that it does not case light on adjacent, adjoining or neighboring properties. 
6.  Whether hours and manner of operation of the proposed use are inconsistent with adjacent and nearby uses. 
7.  Whether existing public facilities and utilities are capable of adequately serving the proposed use. 
8.  Whether the proposed use will have a significant adverse effect on the level of property values or the general character of land uses in the surrounding area or the county. 
9.  Whether the physical conditions of the site, including size, shape, topography and drainage, are suitable for the proposed development. 
10.  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property and whether the proposed use will adversely affect the existing use or usability of nearby property. 
11.  The extent to which property values of the applicant are diminished by the inability to take advantage of the potential use. 
12.  The extent to which the destruction of property values of the applicant promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
13.  The relative gain to the public, as compared, to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
14.  The physical suitability of the subject property for development for other possible uses in the zoning district. 
15.  The length of time the property has been vacant, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property, and whether there are existing or changed conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the conditional use. 
16.  The extent to which the proposed use will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, parks, or other public facilities. 
17.  Whether the proposed use will create risks of adverse environmental effects to the community including, without limitation, air pollution, surface water contamination or ground water contamination. 
18.  Whether the proposed use has nuisance characteristics. 
19.  Whether the proposed use is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan, land use plan, or other adopted plans. The zoning administrative officer, planning commission, and governing body are authorized to require such special studies relating to the above factors as they reasonably deem relevant including without limitation, for such matters as noise, air particulate matter, odor, surface or ground water contamination, radiation or other environmental or nuisance considerations, for conditional use applications. The governing body may approve the issuance of a conditional use permit provided that it has determined that under the criteria set out above the use is appropriate and has determined that the benefits of and need for the proposed use are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damages to neighboring properties or other parts of the county. 
(Res. No. 2003-08, § 1, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-18, § 1, 5-9-2006; Res. No. 2013-24, § 2(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Section 1106. - Criteria to consider for variances. 
The applicant, zoning administrative officer, planning commission and governing body should review applications for variances with regard to the criteria set out in section 416 of these regulations. 
Section 1107. - Action by the governing body. 
After the procedures called for under the policies and procedures ordinance have been completed, the governing body may take action to approve or deny the request or take any other action permitted by the policies and procedures ordinance or consented to by the applicant. 
Section 1108. - Conditional approval permitted. 
The zoning administrative officer and planning commission may recommend, and the governing body may approve, applications for zoning map amendments, conditional use permits, variances and other applications under these regulations subject to certain conditions, provided that the conditions are set forth in the ordinance relating to the approval of the application. The conditions of approval may reduce the number or type of allowed uses, limit the nature or scope of allowed uses, restrict certain activities on the property, restrict the number and kind of improvements which may be made on the property, stipulate specific acts which the property owner will perform, or mandate any other conditions related to the physical use of land and which are designed to render the proposed zoning or use appropriate when considered in light of the criteria set out in these regulations. 
ARTICLE XII. - ADMINISTRATION, INTERPRETATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Section 1201. - Administration and interpretation. 
The provisions of these regulations shall be administered by the zoning administrative officer who shall be appointed by the governing body and serve at its pleasure. The zoning administrative officer shall be responsible for interpretation of the provisions of these regulations and for maintenance of the official zoning map. 
Section 1202. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of these regulations may be enforced by the zoning administrative officer or any other county official to whom such authority may be delegated by the governing body from time to time. 
Section 1203. - Grading permit required. 
A grading permit shall be required for any proposed use of land(s), buildings or other structures(s) to indicate and insure compliance with all provisions of these regulations and any other county ordinances before any permit is issued or any improvement, grading, land disturbing activity or alteration of land(s), buildings or other structures commences; provided, however that grading permits for individual structures within approved single-family residential subdivisions or for single-family dwelling units on individual lots shall not be required. Approval of a preliminary plat in accordance with all applicable provisions of the county's subdivision regulations shall constitute approval of the grading permit for each subdivision. All grading permits shall be issued by the zoning administrative officer, who shall in no case approve a permit for the use, construction, or alteration of any land, building or other structure if the land, building or other structure as proposed to be used, constructed or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of these regulations or any other codes and laws. A grading permit shall be valid for six months from its issuance; provided, however, that if work described in any permit has not begun within 120 days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire, and further work shall not proceed unless and until a new permit has been obtained. 
Section 1204. - Building permit required. 
No building, structure or sign, except as specifically exempted by these regulations, shall be erected, moved; extended, enlarged or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building or other structure be commenced until the zoning administrative officer has issued a building permit for such work in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. All building permits shall be issued by the zoning administrative officer. In cases of uncertainty regarding whether a proposed building or other structure conforms to any provisions of these regulations, the zoning administrative officer shall consult with the county attorney for his interpretation. A building permit shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within 90 days after its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months or more. 
Section 1205. - Section certificate of occupancy required. 
A certificate of occupancy issued by the building official or zoning administrative officer is required in advance of occupancy or use of any lot or change or expansion in the use of any lot, any building or other structure hereafter erected, or any change in the use of an existing building or other structure. All certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the building official or zoning administrative officer, and no such certificate shall be issued unless the proposed use of a building, other structure or land conforms to the applicable provisions of these regulations and other applicable county regulations. Business licenses shall not be issued until the business conforms to these and all other applicable county regulations and a valid certificate of occupancy is issued. 
Section 1206. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense, or as determined by the court of proper jurisdiction. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 1207. - Remedies. 
In case any building or other structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of these regulations, the building official, zoning administrative officer, the governing body, or any other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of these regulations requiring the presence of the violator in the court of proper jurisdiction; institute injunction, or other appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, other structure or land. Where a violation of these regulations exists with respect to a building, other structure or land, the officials enforcing these regulations may, in addition to other remedies, require that utility service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of these regulations. 
ARTICLE XIII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Section 1301. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the provisions of these regulations impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, ordinance or regulation require more restrictive standards than are required by these regulations, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall govern. These regulations amend and restate in its entirety the Zoning Resolution of Banks County, Georgia. 
Section 1302. - Severability. 
Should any article, section or provision of these regulations be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declarations shall not affect the validity of these regulations as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional 
Section 1303. - Effective date. 
These regulations shall take effect and be in force from and after adoption by the Board of Commissioners of Banks County, Georgia, the public welfare demanding it. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PLANNING COMMISSION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Planning, ch. 58. 

Section 1401. - Membership. 
The Banks County Planning Commission ("BCPC") shall consist of five members who shall be residents of Banks County, Georgia, appointed by the board of commissioners of the county. The terms of the members shall be for four years or until their successors are appointed. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the board of commissioners, who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. Each member of the BCPC in office shall continue in office for the remainder of his/her term. In all actions or decisions of the BCPC, at least three members must concur. 
(Res. No. 2001-09, § 1, 3-14-2001) 
Section 1402. - Compensation. 
The chairman of the BCPC shall be paid $35.00 per month for his/her service as a member of the BCPC. All of the additional members of the BCPC shall be paid $25.00 per month for his/her service as a member of the BCPC. In addition, each member shall be entitled to reimbursement for their mileage for travel while performing services for the BCPC. (Mileage reimbursement rate shall be as approved by the Banks County Commissioners). 
(Res. No. 2001-09, § 1, 3-14-2001) 
Section 1403. - Organization and rules. 
A.  The BCPC shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. 
B.  The BCPC shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the county. 
C.  The BCPC shall prepare and maintain minutes of its meetings. 
D.  The BCPC shall make its own rules of procedure. 
E.  All meetings of the BCPC shall be held no less than five working days prior to the meetings of the Board of Commissioners of Banks County. 
F.  All meetings of the BCPC shall be open to the public and all records of the BCPC shall be a public record. 
(Res. No. 2001-09, § 1, 3-14-2001; Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 1-9-2007) 
Section 1404. - Powers and duties. 
From and after the time when the BCPC shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then the BCPC shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities specifically provided planning commissions under Georgia law and as specifically provided the BCPC under the resolutions, ordinances and regulations of Banks County, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 2001-09, § 1, 3-14-2001) 
ARTICLE XV. - ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION DISTRICTS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 99-13, adopted July 13, 1999, amended the zoning resolution by enacting standards, guidelines, and regulations for the environmental conservation districts. The new material has been designated by the editor within the substantive sections of article XV, divs. 1—4 of this appendix. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Section 1501. - Purpose. 
The intent of these overlay districts is to establish minimum development standards and criteria that will afford reasonable protection of environmentally sensitive natural resources found throughout the county. Based on the findings of the county's comprehensive plan, it has been determined that the wise management of these resources as defined in these regulations is essential to maintaining the health, safety, general welfare and economic well being of the public. These regulations do not apply to the Mountain Creek Reservoir. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1502. - Establishment of environmental conservation districts. 
Banks County's Environmental Conservation Districts shall include the following districts: 
Ground Water Recharge Area Protection District. 
Water Supply Watershed Protection District. 
Wetlands Protection District. 
The boundaries of these environmental conservation districts are shown on a set of maps designated as "overlay district" and are included as part of the county's official zoning district map, which is on file with the Banks County Clerk for public use. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1503. - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions provided in this zoning ordinance, the following definitions shall apply to this article: 
Corridor. All land within the buffer areas and other setback areas specified in a water supply watershed. 
Environmental conservation district. An environmental conservation district is a map overlay that imposes a set of requirements in addition to those of the underlying zoning district: 
Hazardous waste. Any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations, promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 CFR Section 261. 
Perennial river/stream. A river/stream or section of a river/stream that flows continuously throughout the whole year. 
Protected river corridor. All land, inclusive of islands, in areas of a protected river within a distance of 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river measured from the uppermost part of the river bank; the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the water is included in the protected area. 
Reservoir boundary. The edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
River/stream bank. The rising ground, bordering a river or a stream, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
Utility. Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water supply reservoir. A governmental owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmental owned public drinking water systems. 
Water supply watershed. The area of land upstream of a governmental owned public drinking water intake or water supply reservoir. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Sections 1504—1520. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Section 1521. - Findings of fact. 
Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Pesticides and herbicides sprayed on crops and animals wastes, like septic tank effluents contribute to deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1522. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to establish criteria to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other development. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1523. - District delineation. 
The groundwater recharge area protection map is delineated according to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' "Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrological Atlas 18 (1989 edition)" and the "Pollution Susceptibility Map," which categorize the land areas of Banks County into areas having high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1524. - Permitted uses. 
All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts are permitted in the groundwater recharge area protection district. The following are additional requirements for specific uses: 
a.  All above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall meet the requirements of US EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 112.1, including a secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. Enforcement of the Standard Fire Prevention Code by a local government means that the government already has a regulation in place that meet this criterion. 
b.  New dwellings served by septic tank and absorption field systems shall be on lots having the following minimum size as identified in Table 1: 
(1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table 1 if the lot is within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table 1 if the lot is within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table 1 if the lot is within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
c.  New mobile home parks served by septic tanks and absorption field systems shall be on lots having the following minimum size as identified in Table 2: 
(1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table 2 if the lot is within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table 2 if the lot is within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of Table 2 if the lot is within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
d.  All multifamily development located within a high pollution susceptibility groundwater recharge area shall be required to have the following minimum lot sizes: where individual on-site sewage systems are installed in conjunction with public water systems the minimum lot size for a multi-family structure shall be 10,890 square feet per unit; where individual on-site sewage systems are installed in conjunction with an individual water system the minimum lot size shall be 21,780 square feet per unit. All multi-family developments shall be approved by the Banks County Board of Health. If there are conflicts between provisions of these regulations, the stricter shall apply. 
e.  All new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner in areas having high pollution susceptibility except for the construction of mining settling basins. 
f.  All new agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
A high pollution susceptibility area; 
A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet in size; and 
A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet in size. 
As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5×10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1525. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins. 
b.  All sanitary landfills with or without synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1526. - Tables 1 and 2. 
TABLE 1: SUBDIVISION RECOMMENDED MINIMUM LOT SIZES WHERE SERVED BY INDIVIDUAL WATER AND INDIVIDUAL ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (UNITS IN SQUARE FEET) 

 
* Soil Grouping refers to Table CT-2, Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Note: All lots shall be a minimum width of 125 feet in the area where an approved on-site sewage management system or replacement system are to be located. 
TABLE 2: MOBILE HOME PARK RECOMMENDED MINIMUM LOT OR SPACE SIZES WHERE SERVED BY PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY AND INDIVIDUAL ONSITE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS (UNITS IN SQUARE FEET) 

 
* Soil Grouping refers to Table CT-2, Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Note: All lots shall be a minimum width of 125 feet in the area where an approved on-site sewage management system or replacement system are to be located. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1527. - Health department approval prior to construction. 
No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the standards of the DHR Manual and minimum lot size requirements and the environmental planning criteria. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1528. - Hazardous materials. 
New facilities which handle hazardous material, (of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, excluding underground storage tanks) and in amount (10,00 pounds or more on any one day) shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local fire prevention code requirements. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Sections 1529, 1530. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Section 1531. - Findings of fact. 
In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within Banks County and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted urban and suburban development. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxicants, nutrients, and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1532. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the water supply watershed protection district regulations is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply for Banks County that will minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply, and maintain the yield of the water supply watersheds. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1533. - District delineation. 
The protected water supply watershed districts are hereby designated, and shall comprise the land areas that drain to the public water supply intake and the public water supply intake. The boundaries of these districts are defined by the ridgelines of the respective watersheds and the boundary of a radius seven miles upstream of the respective public water supply intakes. These districts shall be further delineated and defined on the water supply watershed protection district overlay map of the Banks County's official zoning district map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this ordinance by reference. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1534. - Permitted uses. 
All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts as established by this ordinance except for those listed below are permitted in the water supply watershed protection district, subject to the following standards: 
a.  Natural buffer requirements. 
1)  Within a seven-mile radius upstream of the public water intakes, a natural buffer, 100 feet wide shall be maintained on both sides of the stream, measured from the stream banks. Similarly, outside the seven-mile radius, a natural buffer of 50 feet shall be maintained on both sides of the stream. 
2)  A natural buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 150 feet from the boundary of any existing or future water supply reservoir. 
b.  Impervious surface limitations. 
1)  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to 25 percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
2)  Within a seven-mile radius upstream of all public water intakes, no impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the streams as measured from the stream banks. 
3)  Outside a seven-mile radius upstream of all public water intakes, no impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both side of the stream, as measured from the stream banks. 
4)  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the setback area. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1535. - Exemptions. 
The following uses are exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback requirements if they meet the stipulated conditions: 
a.  Existing land uses. 
1)  The Banks County Board of Commissioners may exempt land uses existing prior to promulgation of water supply watershed protection plans from the provisions of water supply watershed protection plans. 
b.  Utilities. 
1)  Utilities shall be located as far as reasonably possible from the stream bank, and shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
2)  Utilities shall be installed and maintained without changing the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as much as possible, and shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
c.  Forestry and agricultural activities. Provided the quality of the drinking water stream not be impaired, the Banks County Board of Commissioners may exempt specific forestry and agricultural activities from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions of water supply watershed protection plans in accordance with the following conditions: 
1)  The activity shall be consistent with best management practices (BMPs) established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Department of Agriculture, including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. 
2)  The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1536. - Prohibited uses within the water supply watershed protection district. 
a.  All sanitary landfills with or without synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
b.  All hazardous waste manufacture, handling, storage, treatment or disposal facilities. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Sections 1537—1540. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WETLANDS PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Section 1541. - Findings of fact. 
The wetlands within Banks County are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; open space; and recreational opportunities. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1542. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, ground water recharge, aesthetic natural areas and wildlife habitat areas. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1543. - District delineation. 
These regulations shall apply to all lands within wetlands located within Banks County. The wetland protection district overlay map, adopted as part of this ordinance, shows the general location of wetlands and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands before engaging in a regulated activity. The wetland protection district map is an overlay map of the Banks County's official Zoning District Map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this ordinance by reference and shall be on file with the Banks County Clerk. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1544. - Wetland development permit requirements. 
No activity or use except those identified in section 1545 shall be allowed within the wetland protection district without written permission from the zoning administrator in the form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent on full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. If the area proposed for development is located within 100 feet of the wetland protection district boundary, as determined from the wetland protection district map, a U.S. Army Corp of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present and that a Section 404 Permit or letter of permission is required, a local development permit will be issued only following issuance of the Section 404 Permit or letter of permission. Furthermore, the local development permit will only be granted if the proposed use is in compliance with underlying zoning district requirements and other provisions of this ordinance. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1545. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted by right within the wetland protection district to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. 
a.  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission. (Section 404 does not require permits for normal, ongoing silvicultural activities. However, Section 404 does list some required road construction best management practices that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption.) 
b.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, or other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the State of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit. 
c.  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
d.  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
e.  Normal agriculture activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
Section 1546. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited in a wetland protection district: 
a.  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
b.  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills with or without synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
c.  All hazardous waste manufacture, handling, storage, treatment, or disposal facilities. 
(Res. No. 99-13, 7-13-1999) 
ARTICLE XVI. - LAND USE PUBLIC HEARING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A., § 36-70-1 et seq. 
Note— See editors note following ch. 58, art. III. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Section 1601. - Intent. 
As the governing body of the county, it is the intention of the board of commissioners to adopt an ordinance enacting uniform policies and procedures to govern the calling and conducting of public hearings relating to the county's various land use ordinances which are now existing or which may be hereafter enacted, including without limitation, those hearings required by the state zoning procedures law. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1602. - Definitions. 
The following terms when used in this article shall have the meanings given in this section: 
Land use ordinance means any zoning ordinance, the county mobile home/manufactured home and recreational vehicle ordinance adopted January 12, 1988, as heretofore or hereafter amended, the subdivision regulations of the county, adopted December 8, 1987, as heretofore or hereafter amended and any other county land use ordinance which may by its terms provide that this article shall be applicable thereto. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, institution, public official or public body including any trustee, assignee or other representative and including, without limitation, the governing body and the planning commission. 
Planning commission means the county planning commission. 
Property owner means the person or persons who own property being considered under any land use ordinance. 
Zoning administrative officer means the field representative of the planning commission or his designated representative. 
Zoning ordinance means any ordinance or resolution of the county, whether now existing or hereafter enacted, which falls within the definition of "zoning ordinance" provided by the zoning procedures law (O.C.G.A. § 36-66-3(5)) or any successor provision thereto, including without limitation, The Zoning Resolution of Banks County, Georgia, adopted April 9, 1991, as hereafter amended or restated from time to time. 
Zoning Procedures Law means the state zoning procedures law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., enacted by 1985 Georgia Laws, page 1139, as amended from time to time. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Section 1603. - Applicability. 
This article and the policies and procedures contained herein shall apply to all hearings of either the planning commission or the board of commissioners relating to any of the following: 
(1)  The adoption of any land use ordinance; 
(2)  The adoption of any amendment to or restatement of text of any land use ordinance which changes the text of the ordinance; 
(3)  The adoption of any amendment to any zoning ordinance which rezones property from one zoning classification to another; 
(4)  The issuance of any conditional use permit under any land use ordinance; 
(5)  The grant of any variance under any land use ordinance; 
(6)  The adoption of any amendment to or restatement of this article; and 
(7)  Any other action requiring a public hearing pursuant to the zoning procedures law. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURES FOR THE ADOPTION OF CHANGES TO LAND USE ORDINANCES AND THIS ARTICLE 

Section 1604. - Adoption or amendment of text of land use ordinances and this article. 
(a)  Initiation of changes. The board of commissioners may from time to time, on its own motion, or, in its discretion, upon recommendation of the planning commission or any other person, initiate a proposal to adopt, or to amend or restate the text of, any land use ordinance or to amend or restate this article. 
(b)  Submission of proposals. Any proposal to adopt, or to amend or restate the text of, any land use ordinance or to amend or restate this ordinance which the board of commissioners initiates shall be submitted by the board of commissioners to the county's zoning administrative officer who shall submit the proposal to the planning commission for its review and recommendation. 
(c)  Receipt of proposals. Upon receipt of any such proposal from the board of commissioners, the zoning administrative officer, after consultation with the chairman of the board of commissioners and the chairman of the planning commission, shall set dates, times and places for holding a public hearing before the planning commission and a public hearing before the board of commissioners to consider the proposed action. The public hearing of the planning commission shall be commenced first, and promptly after the conclusion thereof, the planning commission shall make its recommendation regarding the proposed action to the board of commissioners. In the event the planning commission fails to take official action regarding its recommendation to the board of commissioners within ten days after the date that the public hearing of the planning commission is concluded, or in the event that the planning commission fails to conclude its public hearing on the matter and take official action regarding its recommendation within 60 days after the date the proposal is initiated by the board of commissioners, the planning commission shall be deemed to have made a recommendation against the proposed change. Subject to the notice requirements set out below, the public hearing of the board of commissioners may be commenced at any time and may be concluded at any time after the earlier to occur of (i) the date the planning commission has taken official action regarding its recommendation, or (ii) a date which is 60 days after the date the proposal is initiated by the board of commissioners. No final action may be taken by the board of commissioners until after both (i) the planning commission has taken official action regarding its recommendation or is deemed to have made a recommendation on the proposed change and (ii) the public hearing of the board of commissioners has been concluded. If the board of commissioners fails to make a decision within 60 days after the date of the commencement of the public hearing before the board of commissioners, the proposed change shall be deemed to have been defeated. 
(d)  Notice of public hearings. After the date, time and place for a public hearing has been set, the zoning administrative officer shall cause notice of the hearing to be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing. Such published notice shall include, as a minimum, the purpose, location, date and time of the public hearing. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1605. - Proposals for modifications relating to particular property. 
(a)  Authority to file applications. The board of commissioners, the planning commission or any property owner may file an application for an amendment of the official zoning map of a zoning ordinance to rezone a particular parcel or parcels, for a conditional use permit under a land use ordinance relating to a particular parcel, or for a variance under any land use ordinance which provides for variances; provided, however, that in the event of (i) final action by the board of commissioners to deny any such application, or (ii) the withdrawal of such application after any public hearing before either the planning commission or board of commissioners has been commenced relating thereto, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning, conditional use permit or variance, as the case may be, under the applicable land use ordinance, and an application relating thereto may not be again filed, until the expiration of six months following the defeat of the application by the board of commissioners or the withdrawal, as the case may be. 
(b)  Procedure for applications. Each application shall contain all of the information required by the applicable land use ordinance, shall be accompanied by such other information reasonably related to the matter as may be called for by such ordinance or requested by the zoning administrative officer, planning commission or board of commissioners, shall be accompanied by any required filing fee, and shall be filed with the zoning administrative officer. Applicants shall submit to the zoning administrative officer such number of copies of the materials as may be required by the land use ordinance or the zoning administrative officer for distribution to the planning commission, board of commissioners and any other applicable bodies and/or review agencies. No application under this section shall be deemed filed until the zoning administrative officer has made a preliminary determination that the application is complete, and has certified in writing that the application has been accepted for filing, which certification shall include the date the application has been accepted for filing. 
(c)  Call of public hearings. Upon acceptance of an application for filing, the zoning administrative officer, after consultation with the chairman of the board of commissioners and the chairman of the planning commission, shall set dates, times and places for holding a public hearing before the planning commission and a public hearing before the board of commissioners to consider the application. The public hearing of the planning commission shall be commenced first, and promptly after the conclusion thereof, the planning commission shall make its recommendation regarding the proposed action to the board of commissioners. In the event the planning commission fails to take official action regarding its recommendation to the board of commissioners within ten days after the date that the public hearing of the planning commission is concluded, or in the event that the planning commission fails to conclude its public hearing on the application and take official action regarding its recommendation within 60 days after the date the application is accepted for filing by the zoning administrative officer, the planning commission shall be deemed to have made a recommendation against the application. Subject to the notice requirements set out below, the public hearing of the board of commissioners may be commenced at any time and may be concluded at any time after the earlier to occur of (i) the date the planning commission has taken official action regarding its recommendation, or (ii) a date which is 60 days after the date of the acceptance of the application for filing. No final action may be taken by the board of commissioners until after both (i) the planning commission has taken official action regarding its recommendation or is deemed to have made a recommendation on the application and (ii) the completion of the public hearing of the board of commissioners. If the board of commissioners fails to make a decision within 60 days after the date of commencement of the public hearing before the board of commissioners, the application shall be deemed to have been denied unless the applicant has consented in writing to an extension of the deadline, in which event the 60-day period shall be deemed to be extended to the date provided in the written consent of the applicant. 
(d)  Notice of public hearings. 
(1)  After the date, time and place of a public hearing has been set, the zoning administrative officer shall cause notice of such hearing to be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing. Such published notice shall include, as a minimum, the purpose, location, date and time of the public hearing, the location of the property being considered, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed action to be taken, as appropriate, such as proposed zoning classification, type of conditional use, variance to particular provisions of the applicable land use ordinance, and so forth. 
(2)  In the case of an application by a property owner, the zoning administrative officer shall also cause to have posted in a conspicuous location on the property under consideration one or more signs, each of which shall contain the information specified for published notices. A public hearing shall not take place until such sign has been posted for at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(3)  In the case of an application by a property owner, the zoning administrative officer shall, as a matter of courtesy, give notification of the application by regular mail to all abutting property owners as shown by county tax records prior to the planning commission public hearing which shall include a description of the application and the date, time and place of the public hearing. This notification requirement shall be deemed met upon the mailing of the notice to persons listed on the county tax records as owners of abutting property at the addresses shown on the county tax records, regardless of whether the notice is actually received and regardless of whether ownership of abutting property has changed. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1606. - Recommendation by zoning administrative officer. 
The zoning administrative officer will, as appropriate, customarily submit to the recommending and/or decision making body, prior to a scheduled public hearing, copies of the materials submitted by the applicant and any other information deemed relevant by the zoning administrative officer along with a written recommendation for approval, disapproval, modification, deferral or withdrawal or such other recommendation as the zoning administrative officer shall deem appropriate. Such recommendation shall include reasons for the recommendation considered within the context of the appropriate criteria as provided by the applicable land use ordinance. The recommendation of the zoning administrative officer shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the planning commission or the board of commissioners. Copies of the zoning administrative officer's recommendations shall be made available to the applicant and other interested parties upon completion and distribution to the appropriate bodies and at the public hearings. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1607. - Planning commission recommendation. 
After holding its public hearing, completing its studies of the particular application, and making its decision, the planning commission shall submit its recommendation in writing to the board of commissioners. The planning commission may submit any additional report it deems appropriate. Unless otherwise provided by the applicable land use ordinance, the recommendation of the planning commission shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the board of commissioners. Copies of the planning commission's recommendation and reports shall be made available to the applicant and other interested parties upon completion and distribution to the board of commissioners and, when available, at the public hearing before the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
DIVISION 3. - CONDUCT OF PUBLIC HEARINGS 

Section 1608. - Procedures. 
All public hearings held by either the planning commission or the board of commissioners to which this article applies shall be held in accordance with the procedures of this division. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1609. - Opening hearings. 
The presiding officer shall open the public hearing by stating the matter being considered at the hearing. At this time the presiding officer may summarize the public hearing procedures. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1610. - Background and recommendations. 
The zoning administrative officer will present a description of the proposal, any applicable background material, his recommendation regarding action on the proposal, as appropriate, and any recommendations and reports of the planning commission as appropriate. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1611. - Proponents of proposal. 
Persons who support the proposal will be asked to comment first. The person initiating the proposal or his designated agent (the proponent) may, upon recognition and upon statement of name, address and relationship to the matter, present and explain the proposal. The proponent shall be required to attend the public hearing unless written notice of hardship is received prior to the hearing. Failure of the proponent to attend the public hearing, except in cases of hardship, may be due cause for dismissal or denial of such application. The proponent shall have the burden of proof, which shall include the presentation of evidence and the burden of persuasion of each factor necessary to receive approval of the board of commissioners. After completion of the presentation of the proponent, other persons who support the proposal will be asked to comment, and will be allowed to speak in support of the proposal upon recognition and upon identification of the person's name, address, and relationship to the matter. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1612. - Persons opposing proposal. 
Persons who oppose the proposal will next be asked to comment. All interested persons, after being recognized, and providing their names, addresses and relationship to the matter shall be afforded an opportunity to address the proposal. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1613. - Summary remarks. 
The proponent shall have an opportunity for summary remarks and rebuttal concerning the proposed application. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1614. - Time limitations. 
The presiding officer, in his discretion, may impose time limitations on comments of each person, and may require that each person (other than any county official or his agent) who desires to speak sign in at the beginning of the meeting and indicate whether such person will be speaking for or against the proposal. No less than ten minutes shall be permitted for all those speaking in support of the proposed zoning decision and no less than ten minutes shall be permitted for those speaking against the proposed zoning decision. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1615. - Discussion. 
All public comments having been heard, the members of the body considering the application may discuss the matter among themselves. During this discussion period, the members of the body may call on the proponent or other persons to clarify points made previously, to answer questions or to provide additional information. Such persons may respond upon recognition. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1616. - Delay, rescheduling or continuation of hearing. 
Public hearings may be delayed, rescheduled or continued to another time and date, provided announcement is given at the time and place of the scheduled hearing, of the new time, place and date of the public hearing, which announcement shall constitute public notice for the hearing. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the presiding officer shall adjourn the hearing. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1617. - Transcription. 
The presiding officer or the applicant may require that any public hearing be transcribed by a court reporter provided that such person has made arrangements with the court reporter to have the court reporter attend and transcribe the hearing. All costs of any court reporter shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
DIVISION 4. - CRITERIA AND STANDARDS 

Section 1618. - Criteria to consider for map amendments. 
(a)  The applicant, zoning administrative officer, planning commission and board of commissioners should review an application for a zoning map amendment with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property and whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of nearby property. 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions. 
(3)  The extent to which the destruction of property values promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
(4)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
(5)  The physical suitability of the subject property for development as presently zoned and under the proposed zoning district. 
(6)  The length of time the property has been vacant, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property, and whether there are existing or changed conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the rezoning request. 
(7)  The extent to which the proposed zoning will result in a use which will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, parks, or other public facilities. 
(8)  Whether the proposed zoning will create risk of adverse environmental effects to the community, including, without limitation, air pollution, surface water contamination or ground water contamination. 
(9)  Whether the proposal will create risks that uses with nuisance characteristics will occur. 
(10)  Whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect property values of others. 
(11)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan, land use plan, or other adopted plans. 
(b)  The zoning administrative officer, planning commission, and board of commissioners are authorized to require such special studies relating to the above factors as they reasonably deem relevant, including without limitation, for such matters as noise, air particulate matter, odor, surface water or groundwater contamination, radiation, or other environmental or nuisance considerations. The board of commissioners may approve the application for rezoning provided that it has determined that under the criteria set out in this section the rezoning is appropriate and has determined that the benefits of and need for the rezoning are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damages to neighboring properties or other parts of the county. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1619. - Criteria to consider for conditional uses. 
(a)  The applicant, zoning administrative officer, planning commission and board of commissioners should review applications for conditional uses with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether off-street parking and loading facilities are adequate in terms of location, amount and design to serve the proposed use. 
(2)  Whether the number, size and type of signs proposed are compatible with the surrounding area. 
(3)  Whether the proposed use will have compatibility with existing uses of adjacent land and the surrounding area and will not cause or create or be likely to cause or create, adverse effects upon the existing or future development of either the area or the rest of the county. 
(4)  Whether ingress and egress to the property is suitable and safe and the effect of the proposed activity on traffic flow along adjoining streets is not adverse. 
(5)  Whether the location and intensity of outdoor lighting is such that it does not cast light on adjacent, adjoining or neighboring properties. 
(6)  Whether hours and manner of operation of the proposed use are inconsistent with adjacent and nearby uses. 
(7)  Whether existing public facilities and utilities are capable of adequately serving the proposed use. 
(8)  Whether the proposed use will have a significant adverse effect on the level of property values or the general character of land uses in the surrounding area or the county. 
(9)  Whether the physical conditions of the site, including size, shape, topography and drainage, are suitable for the proposed development. 
(10)  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property and whether the proposed use will adversely affect the existing use or usability of nearby property. 
(11)  The extent to which property values of the applicant are diminished by the inability to take advantage of the potential use. 
(12)  The extent to which the destruction of property values of the applicant promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
(13)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
(14)  The physical suitability of the subject property for development for other possible uses in the zoning district. 
(15)  The length of time the property has been vacant, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property, and whether there are existing or changed conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the conditional use. 
(16)  The extent to which the proposed use will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, parks, or other public facilities. 
(17)  Whether the proposed use will create risks of adverse environmental effects to the community, including, without limitation, air pollution, surface water contamination or groundwater contamination. 
(18)  Whether the proposed use has nuisance characteristics. 
(19)  Whether the proposed use is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan, land use plan, or other adopted plans. 
(b)  The zoning administrative officer, planning commission, and board of commissioners are authorized to require such special studies relating to the above factors as they reasonably deem relevant, including without limitation, for such matters as noise, air particulate matter, odor, surface water or groundwater contamination, radiation, or other environmental or nuisance considerations, for conditional use applications. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may approve the issuance of a conditional use permit provided that it has determined that under the criteria set out above the use is appropriate and has determined that the benefits of and need for the proposed use are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damages to neighboring properties or other parts of the county. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1620. - Criteria to consider for variances. 
The applicant, zoning administrative officer and planning commission should review applications for variances with regard to the following criteria: The grant of such variance from the terms of the county zoning regulations will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of such regulations will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of a nonconforming use or conditional use of neighboring land, buildings or structures in the same zoning district or of permitted uses, conditional uses or nonconforming uses in other zoning districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship, after appropriate application and public hearings as set forth in this article, upon specific findings that all of the following conditions exist, with the absence of any one of the conditions being grounds for denial of the application for variance: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other land or structures in the same district; 
(2)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of these regulations would create an unnecessary hardship and would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners within the district in which the property is located; 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located; 
(4)  Relief, if granted, will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or the health or general welfare of the public in such a manner as will interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of other property or unreasonably affect its value; 
(5)  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
(6)  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building, or structure; and 
(7)  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building or structures which are not permitted by right in the district involved. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1621. - Action by the board of commissioners. 
After the procedures called for under the this article have been completed, the board of commissioners may take action to approve or deny the request or take any other action permitted by this article or consented to by the applicant. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1622. - Conditional approval permitted. 
The zoning administrative officer and planning commission may recommend, and the board of commissioners may approve, applications for zoning map amendments, conditional use permits, variances and other applications under these regulations subject to certain conditions, provided that the conditions are set forth in the ordinance relating to the approval of the application. The conditions of approval may reduce the number or type of allowed uses, limit the nature or scope of allowed uses, restrict certain activities on the property, restrict the number and kind of improvements which may be made on the property, stipulate specific acts which the property owner will perform, or mandate any other conditions related to the physical use of land and which are designed to render the proposed zoning or use appropriate when considered in light of the criteria set out in this article. 
(Res. No. 2003-02, § 2, 2-11-2003) 
Section 1623. - Criteria to consider special use permit. 
A.  The special use permit is designed to be used when: 
1.  A unique use not addressed in any zoning district is desired for development and is not likely to be duplicated within Banks County; or 
2.  A nonconforming use exists in a zoning district under the Zoning Resolution of Banks County that has been in existence for a number of years and needs to expand at its present location; and, 
3.  The special use would be consistent with the needs of the neighborhood or the community as a whole, be compatible with the neighborhood and would not be in conflict with the overall objective of the Banks County Comprehensive Plan (Paragraph 3 applies to [subsections] 1 and 2 above). 
B.  In order to accommodate these special uses, the special use permit allows the board of commissioners to approve a special use on a particular parcel without changing the general zoning district. Such approval shall be subject to the requirements set forth above and any additional conditions deemed necessary to ensure the compatibility of the special use with the surrounding properties. 
C.  All special use permit applications shall be for firm development proposals only. The special use permit shall not be used for securing early zoning for conceptual proposals which may not be undertaken for some time. 
D.  A special use permit application shall be considered only if it is made by the owner of the property or his/her designated agent. 
E.  An application for a special use permit shall follow the same procedures as set forth in the Banks County Zoning Ordinance for an application for rezoning (i.e., application filed with Banks County Planning Department, public hearing after advertisement before the Banks County Planning Commission, recommendation by the Banks County Planning Commission to the Banks County Board of Commissioners, public hearing after advertisement before the Board of Commissioners of Banks County and approval or denial by the Board of Commissioners of Banks County). The special use for which a special use permit is granted shall commence operations or construction within 12 months of the date of approval by the board of commissioners. If the use for which the special use permit was issued is discontinued for nine continuous months, the special use permit shall terminate. 
F.  The minimum requirements for a special use permit are: 
1.  In addition to the information and/or site plans which are required to be submitted for the proposed development, additional information deemed necessary by the Banks County Planning Department in order to evaluate a proposed use and its relationship to the surrounding area shall be submitted. 
2.  If an application is approved and a special use permit is granted, all conditions which may have been attached to the approval are binding on the property. All subsequent development and use of the property shall be in accordance with the approved plan and conditions. 
3.  Changes to a special use, or development of a site for the special use, shall be treated as an amendment to the special use permit and shall be subject to the same application and review process as a new application. 
4.  Upon approval by the board of commissioners, a special use permit shall be identified on the Official Zoning Map of Banks County. 
5.  Upon approval by the board of commissioners of a special use permit, the owner of the property shall be issued a notice from the Banks County Planning Department which states the specific use permitted, the requirements of this section and any conditions attached to the approval. 
6.  The Banks County Planning Department shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for the specific use unless all requirements and conditions of the special use permit have been fulfilled by the owner of the property. 
G.  The applicant, zoning administrative officer, planning commission and governing authority will review applications for special uses with regard to the following criteria: 
1.  Whether off-street parking and loading facilities are adequate in terms of location, amount and design to serve the proposed use. 
2.  Whether the number, size and type of signs proposed are compatible with the surrounding area. 
3.  Whether the proposed use will have compatibility with existing uses of adjacent land and the surrounding area and will not cause or create or be likely to cause or create, adverse effects upon the existing or future development of either the area or the rest of the county. 
4.  Whether ingress and egress to the property is suitable and safe and the effect of the proposed activity on traffic flow along adjoining streets is not adverse. 
5.  Whether the location and intensity of outdoor lighting is such that it does not case light on adjacent, adjoining or neighboring properties. 
6.  Whether hours and manner of operation of the proposed use are inconsistent with adjacent and nearby uses. 
7.  Whether existing public facilities and utilities are capable of adequately serving the proposed use. 
8.  Whether the proposed use will have a significant adverse effect on the level of property values or the general character of land uses in the surrounding area or the county. 
9.  Whether the physical conditions of the site, including size, shape, topography and drainage, are suitable for the proposed development. 
10.  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property and whether the proposed use will adversely affect the existing use or usability of nearby property. 
11.  The extent to which property values of the applicant are diminished by the inability to take advantage of the potential use. 
12.  The extent to which the destruction of property values of the applicant promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
13.  The relative gain to the public, as compared, to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
14.  The physical suitability of the subject property for development for other possible uses in the zoning district. 
15.  The length of time the property has been vacant, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property, and whether there are existing or changed conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the conditional use. 
16.  The extent to which the proposed use will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, parks, or other public facilities. 
17.  Whether the proposed use will create risks of adverse environmental effects to the community including, without limitation, air pollution, surface water contamination or ground water contamination. 
18.  Whether the proposed use has nuisance characteristics. 
19.  Whether the proposed use is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan, land use plan, or other adopted plans. The zoning administrative officer, planning commission, and governing body are authorized to require such special studies relating to the above factors as they reasonably deem relevant including without limitation, for such matters as noise, air particulate matter, odor, surface or ground water contamination, radiation or other environmental or nuisance considerations, for conditional use applications. The governing body may approve the issuance of a special use permit provided that it has determined that under the criteria set out above the use is appropriate and has determined that the benefits of and need for the proposed use are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damages to neighboring properties or other parts of the county. 
(Res. No. 2013-25, § 2(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
ARTICLE XVII. - PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 1701. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Establish requirements for minimum off-street parking and loading areas in proportion to the need created by each use. 
(b)  To reduce congestion in the streets and to ensure that uses and functions of public rights-of-way are not interrupted. 
(c)  Establish certain maximum as well as minimum requirements for parking spaces to reduce development costs and ensure that excess impervious surfaces are not constructed, while providing for additional parking spaces additions when a demonstrated need exists. 
(d)  To promote flexible approaches to the provision of off-street parking, including in some cases, as appropriate, use of on-street parking, shared parking arrangements, smaller spaces for compact cars, and unimproved overflow or spillover parking areas. 
(e)  To encourage the provision of bicycle parking and park and ride facilities, where warranted. 
(f)  To establish design and improvement specifications for the development of parking lots, access aisles, parking decks, and connections of parking lots and decks to public streets. 
(g)  To ensure that parking areas will be compatible with abutting residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1702. - Applicability. 
Except as set forth in division 9, this article shall apply to any new building constructed for new uses or conversions of existing, conforming buildings and for enlargements of existing structures. In addition, this Article shall apply to any development providing five or more off-street parking spaces. This article shall not be construed as to require additional parking spaces to be furnished for an existing building which is repaired, altered, maintained, or modernized where no significant structural alterations are made, and the size of the building is not increased; provided, however, that when the occupancy of any building is changed to another use, parking shall be provided to meet the requirements of this article for the new use. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Secs. 1703—1710. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIRED PARKING 

Sec. 1711. - Required minimum number of parking spaces. 
No existing facility used for off-street parking shall be reduced in capacity to less than the minimum required number of spaces, or altered in design or function to less than the minimum standards, unless specifically provided for in this article. Buildings, structures, and uses shall meet the following: 
MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED 

 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1712. - Interpretations of parking requirements. 
(a)  Fractions. Where a fractional space results during the calculation of required parking, the required number of parking spaces shall be construed to be the next highest whole number. 
(b)  Parking space requirement not specified. Where the parking requirement for a particular use is not described in this article, and where no similar use is listed, the Banks County Building Inspector shall determine the number of spaces to be provided based on requirements for similar uses, location of the proposed use, the number of employees on the largest shift, and the expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed use. 
(c)  Required parking for multiple uses. When a building includes a combination of uses, the required number of parking spaces shall be the sum of the required parking for each use when the multiple uses operate simultaneously. For non-simultaneous use, the parking requirements for the use requiring the greater number of parking spaces will govern. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1713. - Reduction of required parking for off-site arrangements. 
Off-site parking may be used in combination to meet minimum parking space requirements. A reduction of required off-street parking spaces on a given site may be permitted by the Banks County Building Inspector in cases where additional off-street, off-site, parking area of sufficient quantity and in conformity with this article compensates for the reduction, subject to the following: 
(1)  The property is under one ownership, or a valid agreement exists between the two property owners for use of the parking area. 
(2)  Off-site parking shall be located within 500 feet of the building or buildings in which it is leased to serve. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1714. - Reduction of required parking for mixed or joint use of parking spaces. 
The Banks County Building Inspector may authorize a reduction in the total number of required off-street parking spaces for two or more uses jointly providing parking facilities when their respective hours of need of maximum parking do not normally overlap, provided that the developer submits sufficient data to demonstrate that the hours of maximum demand for parking at the respective uses do not normally overlap. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1715. - Reduction of required parking for alternative transportation arrangements. 
The Banks County Building Inspector may in individual cases administratively authorize a reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces for projects that are directly served by public transit and for projects that provide bicycle parking, provided that it can be shown that such available alternative travel modes will reduce the overall need for parking on the site proportional to the requested reduction in parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1716. - Reduction of required parking when on-street parking is permitted. 
The Banks County Building Inspector may in individual cases administratively authorize a reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces for projects that are directly served by on-street parking. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1717. - Parking maximums. 
To avoid excessive surpluses which increase development costs and impervious surfaces, parking shall not be provided in quantities greater than 25 percent above the required minimum; provided, however, the following: 
(1)  The Banks County Building Inspector may allow parking at a rate in excess of 25 percent above the required number of spaces, on a case-by-case basis based upon the scale and impacts of the request for good cause shown. The applicant shall make said request in writing, which shall include documentation from an acceptable industry publication (e.g., Institute of Transportation Engineers, Urban Land Institute, American Planning Association, etc.) or by a study prepared by a traffic engineering firm that documents parking requirements. 
(2)  The Banks County Building Inspector may allow a land area for parking that exceeds 25 percent above the required number of spaces to be designed and reserved for future parking use. In such a case, said reserved parking area shall not be developed except by written permission from the Banks County Building Inspector, upon demonstration by the applicant that existing parking spaces are occupied at a rate of 90 percent or higher for 25 percent or more of the regular business hours in which the business or use operates during a non-holiday week. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1718. - Parking space and isle specifications. 
(a)  Space size. An off-street parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet in width and 18 feet in length. 
(b)  Compact parking. Compact auto parking spaces shall be not less than eight feet wide by 17 feet long and may be used in commercial parking uses when more than 20 parking spaces are required, provided the area is clearly marked and not more than 20 percent of the entire parking area is designated compact auto parking. 
(c)  Ninety-degree angled parking. For a single row of 90-degree head-in parking, the minimum depth for a parking space plus the width of the aisle shall be 42 feet. For two rows of 90-degree head-in parking using the same aisle, the minimum depth for parking spaces plus the width of the aisle shall be 60 feet. 
(d)  Forty-five-degree angled parking. For a single row of 45-degree head-in parking the minimum width of parking space plus aisle shall be 31 feet. For two rows of 45-degree head-in parking using the same aisle, the minimum width for parking space plus aisle shall be 50 feet. 
(e)  Thirty-degree angled parking. For a single row of 30-degree head-in parking the minimum width for a parking space plus aisle shall be 29 feet. For two rows of 30-degree head-in parking using the same aisle, the minimum width for parking spaces plus aisle shall be 45 feet. 
(f)  Parallel parking. A single row of parking spaces may be provided parallel to an aisle, provided they are at least 22 feet in length and eight feet in width. 
(g)  Driveway direction. Driveways less than 20 feet in width, if provided, shall be marked and limited to traffic flow in one direction only. 
(h)  Barrier curbing. For all parking areas abutting a public or private sidewalk or landscaped area, barrier curbing shall be installed two feet, six inches from the sidewalk or landscaped area to prevent vehicles from overhanging the sidewalk or landscaped area. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Secs. 1719—1730. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOADING AREAS 

Sec. 1731. - Loading areas required for specified uses. 
On the same lot with every building, structure or part thereof, erected or occupied for manufacturing storage, warehouse, track freight terminal, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, dry cleaning plant, retail business or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for the standing, loading and unloading of such materials to avoid undue interference with public use of streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1732. - Loading area specifications. 
Unless otherwise approved by the Banks County Building Inspector, loading spaces shall be a minimum of 14 feet wide, 60 feet long, with 14 feet of height clearance. Said loading area shall be located to the rear of the building unless site design precludes a rear location, in which case loading shall be to the side of a building. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1733. - Minimum number of off-street loading spaces required. 
One off-street loading space shall be provided for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for light industrial use and one off-street loading space for the first 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for retail or other non-industrial use for which a loading space is required. One additional space shall be required for each additional 25,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for light industrial use and for each additional 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for retail or other non-industrial use. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Secs. 1734—1740. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL PARKING AND LOADING AREA SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 1741. - Location of parking and loading areas. 
All off-street parking and off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the structure or use, except as otherwise specifically permitted by this article. 
(1)  Interference with rights-of-way prohibited. Parking space and loading area arrangements that require vehicles to back out into the public road right-of-way are prohibited except in village activity centers where speeds are low and the arrangement is approved by the county engineer. Entrances to off-street parking for single-family detached dwellings and manufactured homes onto a local street shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(2)  Connections. The Banks County Building Inspector may require that parking areas and loading zones connect to other parcels. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1742. - Accessory uses of parking lots and loading areas. 
Parking facilities and loading areas shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Parking and loading areas shall not be used for the sale, storage, repair or dismantling of any equipment, materials or supplies, except that upon application the Banks County Building Inspector may approve temporary structures and uses such as tent sales. 
(2)  Parking and loading areas shall not be used to store vehicles for sale, except in cases where the property owner owns the vehicle(s), and provided auto sales is a permitted use in the district in which the property is located. This provision shall not apply to the placing of a "for sale" sign on or in one licensed vehicle, boat, or other vehicle at the same time located in a private residential driveway or front yard and which licensed vehicle, boat, or other vehicle is owned by an occupant of said private residence. 
(3)  An attendant's shelter building which does not contain more than 50 square feet of gross floor area and which is set a distance of not less than 20 feet from any boundary of the parking lot may be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Secs. 1743—1750. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PARKING AND LOADING AREA IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 1751. - Access and set back. 
All parking shall have access to a public street. All loading areas shall have access to a public street or alley. A parking lot pavement set back of ten feet from any public street right-of-way and five feet from any exterior property line shall be provided except where access points and interconnections to other parcels have been approved. (See division 8 for additional requirements.) 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1752. - Drainage. 
Parking and loading areas shall be properly graded for drainage, and they shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets. Curbing shall be installed as required by the county engineer when considered necessary for drainage. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1753. - Surfacing. 
Parking and loading areas shall be surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete, asphalt, or other dust-free surface; provided, however, that porous pavement parking spaces may be substituted for standard dust free pavements subject to the approval of the county engineer according to standards that may be adopted by the county engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1754. - Striping. 
All parking and loading spaces must be striped with paint lines, lines with curbstones, or otherwise permanently marked to designate the space. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1755. - Lighting. 
Adequate lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night or if necessary for security purposes. All lighting facilities shall be so arranged to prevent the direct illumination of adjacent properties or public streets. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1756. - Signs. 
Signs essential to the proper functioning of the parking lot and loading areas shall be installed. Such signs shall not be illuminated, shall not exceed four feet in area, or nine feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1757. - Landscaping. 
For all parking lots, a ten-foot wide strip of land along the entire front perimeter of the site located between the front property line and any vehicular use area shall be landscaped. 
(1)  Any parking area exceeding 25 spaces in any district shall provide a minimum of 12.5 percent of the total parking area as landscaped islands. Landscape strips along the perimeter of a parking area as otherwise required by this article shall not count toward meeting this requirement. 
(2)  Each landscaped area shall contain grass, shrubbery, trees, or other landscape material in any combination. Interior planting areas shall be located to most effectively relieve the monotony of large expanses of paving and contribute to orderly circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Secs. 1758—1760. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 1761. - Handicapped parking requirements. 
(a)  Number required. Regulations and dimensions for handicapped parking spaces shall be per requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) (Public Law 101-136) and the applicable building code adopted by Banks County. The required number of handicapped accessible spaces, which must be provided on site or as provided under section 1713, shall be as follows: 
HANDICAPPED PARKING REQUIREMENTS 

 
(b)  Locations. Accessible parking spaces serving a particular building shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible entrance. In parking facilities that do not serve a particular building, or buildings with multiple entrances, accessible parking shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible pedestrian entrance of the parking facility. 
(c)  Dimensions. Accessible parking spaces shall be at least eight feet wide. Parking access aisles shall be part of an accessible route to the building or facility entrance. Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle. 
(d)  Signs. Accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved by a sign showing the symbol of accessibility. Such signs shall be located so that they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parked in that space. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1762. - Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities. 
Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through facility or areas having drop-off and pickup areas in accordance with the following: Financial institutions with drive-through windows, restaurants with drive-through facilities, carwashes (automated or staffed facilities), drive-through photo finishing booths, and drive-through coffee sales facilities, and any other uses with drive-through facilities shall provide three stacking spaces for each window or drive-through service facility. Stacking spaces shall begin at the window or communication/mechanical device (e.g., order board) first encountered by the vehicle user. The following general standards shall apply to all stacking spaces and drive-through facilities: 
(1)  Stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through stations shall not impede on- and off-site traffic movements, shall not cross or pass through off street parking areas, and shall not create a potentially unsafe condition where crossed by pedestrian access to a public entrance of a building. 
(2)  Drive-through lanes shall be separated from off-street parking areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked or otherwise distinctly delineated. 
(3)  All drive-through facilities shall be provided with a by-pass lane with a minimum width of ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 1763. - Semi-tractor trailer parking. 
For those uses which cater to the parking of semi-tractor trailers, designated off-street parking spaces shall be required in proportion to the use as determined by the Banks County Building Inspector. All parking spaces designated for semi-tractor trailer parking shall be at least 14 feet in width and 60 feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Secs. 1764—1770. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CURB CUTS AND ACCESS SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 1771. - Curb cut and access specifications. 
Access from public streets to all parking areas for any permanent or temporary uses, buildings and/or structures, regardless of the number of parking spaces provided, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Curb cuts or access breaks for service drives, entrances and exits on public streets shall not be located within 50 feet of the intersections of two curb lines, street pavement lines or such lines extended or any street intersection nor within 40 feet of another curb cut or access break. 
(2)  Curb cuts shall be no greater than 40 feet in width and no closer than 20 feet to any property line, unless common use of driveways for an abutting lot is required or approved by the administrative officer. 
(3)  No more than two curb cuts or access breaks shall be permitted for any lot or parcel with a frontage of 200 feet or less on any one street. 
(4)  All commercial driveways, as defined by the Georgia Department of Transportation onto public streets, shall require a permit from the administrative officer. If a driveway permit is required by the Georgia Department of Transportation, then proof of said approval by the department of transportation shall be submitted to the administrative officer prior to the issuance of such local permit. When a building permit is required, said driveway permit may be issued as a part of the building permit. 
(5)  Curb cuts for driveways that serve high intensity use districts shall not be permitted to pass through low intensity use districts or to access alleys that abut a low intensity use district. 
(6)  Where the side of an accessed public street or alley does not contain curbing, such curbing or other method of approved access control shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Secs. 1772—1780. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PLANS 

Sec. 1781. - Plans. 
No permit shall be issued for any parking facility until the plans and specifications, including required entrances, exits, and aisles, landscaping, screening, surface materials and drainage, have been submitted for review and are in compliance with this article. Plans and specifications shall include proper drainage and retention, surface materials, curbing and screening as required. All parking areas shall be clearly marked and dimensioned with handicapped and loading or other special (i.e., compact, porous material) spaces designated. Before any building permit is issued, the parking lot layout must be found by the Banks County Building Inspector to be in compliance with all requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
Secs. 1782—1790. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 1791. - Exceptions. 
The parking requirements in article XVII shall not be applicable to shopping centers in existence in Banks County on the effective date of this article [May 10, 2005] and shall not apply to the expansion of shopping centers in existence in Banks County on the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1(Exh. A), 5-10-2005) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL USES 

Sec. 1801. - Site planning. 
The site plan, building design, and landscaping of new development should achieve a high quality and appearance that will enhance and be compatible with the character of the surrounding area. Site planning and design of projects proposed should carefully address the potential undesirable impacts on existing uses. These impacts may include traffic, parking, circulation and safety issues, light and glare, noise, odors, dust control and security concerns. 
(Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1802. - Required design standards for construction of new buildings. 
A.  Prohibited building materials. 
1.  Exposed poured concrete walls or the use of standard gray concrete block on the exterior walls of any building or structure shall be prohibited with the exception that such materials may be used on the side and rear walls of a commercial building if finished with paint or a masonry veneer including, but not limited to, brick, stone or stucco. Concrete or gray concrete block may not be exposed on the front exterior wall of any commercial building. The front exterior wall of a commercial building must be finished with a masonry veneer including, but not limited to, brick, stone or stucco. 
2.  Metal panels may be used on the side and rear walls of a commercial building, but may not be exposed on the front exterior wall which must be finished with either wood or a masonry veneer including, but not limited to, brick stone or stucco. Buildings within the Neighborhood Commercial District, C-1, are excluded from this requirement. 
3.  Highly reflective or mirror-like material, unfinished metal panels, unfinished gray concrete block and plywood or particle board shall be prohibited on any building or structure. 
B.  Material and color. 
1.  Piecemeal embellishments and frequent transitions in material or color shall be prohibited. 
2.  High-intensity colors, metallic colors, black, or fluorescent colors shall not be used. 
C.  Foundation walls. Exposed, unfinished foundation walls shall be prohibited on any building or structure. 
D.  Garbage dumpsters. 
1.  All garbage dumpsters and other similar areas devoted to the storage of waste materials shall be screened on three sides of said dumpster or area, with a minimum of six-foot high solid wooden fence or a wall constructed of material substantially similar in appearance to the building on site. 
2.  In addition, said dumpsters should be gated on the fourth side with a material that provides opaque screening. 
(Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1803. - Storage yards and outdoor operational activities. 
All outdoor storage yards and outdoor operational activities, shall be surrounded by an opaque vegetative buffer or opaque fence buffer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1804. - Exterior lighting. 
A.  Definition of terms used. 
1.  Direct light: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminary. 
2.  Luminary: A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps and a fixture. This term shall be interpreted broadly as applying to all outdoor electrically powered illuminating devises, outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devises (permanently installed or portable), used for illumination or advertisement. 
3.  Luminary, full cutoff: Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no direct light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane. 
B.  Purpose and intent. These regulations are intended to reduce the problems created by improperly designed and installed outdoor light, eliminate problems of glare, and minimize light trespass, with regulations that avoid unnecessary direct light from shining onto abutting properties or streets. 
C.  Direction of luminaries. 
1.  Light must be directed away from residential buildings and motor vehicles on public roadways. 
2.  Any luminary that is aimed, directed, or focused such as to cause direct light from the luminary to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public roadways, shall be redirected or its light output controlled as necessary to eliminate such conditions. 
D.  Luminaries adjacent to residential districts. For any commercial use adjacent to an area zoned ARR, R-1 or R-2, all luminaries, hereafter installed for outdoor lighting shall be full cutoff luminaries, as defined by this section, or another luminary that does not emit any direct light above a horizontal plane. 
E.  Prohibited lighting. The following types of outdoor lighting are prohibited: 
1.  Searchlights for advertising purposes; 
2.  Laser source light, or any similar high intensity light, for advertising purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 5-9-2006) 
ARTICLE XIX. - MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 1901. - Site plan approval required. 
(a)  All multifamily housing developments shall require site plan approval by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Development shall be according to a comprehensive development plan, connected to public sewer and public water, and must meet subdivision regulations and provide adequate protection of the surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1902. - Location and frontage. 
All multifamily housing developments shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a public street. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1903. - Street requirements. 
Interior roads serving the development are required and shall be suitably drained and have a minimum pavement width of 20 feet plus two feet of concrete gutter drainage area on both sides of road, for a total road width of 24 feet. If dedicated to the public, the roads within the development shall meet the same requirements as required for subdivision roads/streets. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1904. - Recreation and other community facilities. 
A fence not less than six feet high and equipped with a locking gate shall protect all swimming facilities that are a part of this development. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1905. - Setbacks required. 
Minimum setbacks of 60 feet from side and rear property lines, 60 feet from the front property line, and 60 feet from any other structure, and in the event there are multistory structures, an additional 20 feet per story over two shall be added to the setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1906. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1907. - Development grounds. 
(a)  Not less than 25 percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to open space areas, recreation and other community use facilities. (Same as Section 58-167, Article IV, Chapter 58 of the Code of Banks County.) 
(b)  All areas not utilized for buildings, or other facilities shall be landscaped and maintained in a suitable manner. 
(c)  All off-street loading, unloading and service areas provided as required shall be screened by means of landscaping or permanent construction from adjoining areas. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1908. - Lighting. 
(a)  All multifamily developments shall have lighting at appropriate height, spacing and intensity so to provide adequate lighting for each multifamily unit sites access and parking. Further, all access streets shall also have adequate lighting. 
(b)  Lighting shall be of mercury vapor, halogen or low pressure sodium lights that are not less than 300 feet apart with a minimum height of 18 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1909. - Pedestrian walkways. 
All buildings must have a minimum five-foot wide walkway access to dwelling units from parking areas, laundry facilities, recreation, swimming pools, etc., and they must be constructed of a concrete or asphalt material. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1910. - Parking. 
Parking shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
(2)  Two additional spaces per building for visitor parking. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1911. - Density. 
No more than four dwelling units per acre with public sewer and public water. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 1912. - Zoning code compliance. 
All multifamily developments shall meet all other requirements of the zoning regulations and the building codes as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
ARTICLE XX. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PUD) 

Sec. 2001. - Purpose and intent. 
The Planned Unit Development District is intended to provide flexibility in the application of area, height, bulk, placement, and other zoning controls; provide for mixing a wide variety of residential housing types and arrangements; provide for the mixing of compatible residential, office, commercial and industrial land uses; encourage imaginative and innovative design for the unified development of tracts of land; provide an alternative for more efficient use of land, resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets, thereby resulting in lower construction and maintenance costs to the public; preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas within the development; and to promote land development in proper relation to the surrounding neighborhood; provide a more desirable living environment than would be possible through the strict application of conventional requirements; and to ensure that the design of the building forms are interrelated and architecturally harmonious. 
This district is to be utilized as a "floating zone" which shall mean that areas will not be pre-designated as planned unit development districts, but rather each such designation shall result from a specific and separate application for amendment. Planned Unit Development Districts are separate zoning districts and shall follow the same amendment procedures as other districts. Unless otherwise stated in this section, the development standards and the land uses which are presented with the application for amendment shall, if approved, become the standards for the subject property and shall become a part of the zoning regulations. 
Any request pertaining to the establishment of a Planned Unit Development District shall be considered an amendment to the zoning regulations and shall be administered and processed in accordance with Section 1103 of the Zoning Ordinance of Banks County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 2002. - Definitions. 
Active recreational facilities: Equipment and areas prepared for active use for recreational and leisure purposes, including but not limited to: playground equipment (swing sets and climbing structures); courts for basketball, volleyball, and tennis; leveled, striped fields for football, soccer or multiple purposes; community picnic pavilions (including covered facilities with grills and/or fire rings); community buildings for recreational events and golf courses, excluding clubhouses, developed areas and accessory uses. Trails and bikeways through open spaces shall not be considered active recreational facilities. 
Open space: An area that is permanently set aside through dedication, designation, or reservation and is available to all occupants of a development and that is not used for or occupied by a public right-of-way, driveway, an off-street parking area, a loading space, a refuse storage space, or a building. 
Passive recreational facilities: Recreational activities and places that generally do not require a developed site. This generally includes such activities as hiking, horseback riding and picnicking, provided that such activities occur in a manner that is consistent with existing natural conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 2003. - Required conditions for Planned Unit Development District. 
In order to qualify for a Planned Unit Development District zoning classification, a proposed development must first meet each of the following specific requirements: 
(a)  The minimum site area for a Planned Unit Development District shall be 50 contiguous acres. 
(b)  Separate land uses, which would not otherwise be permitted to locate within the same zoning district, are proposed for development on a parcel under single or multiple ownership or management. 
Sec. 2004. - Permitted uses and dimensional requirements. 
Within a Planned Unit Development District, any land use may be permitted if such use or uses can be shown to provide an orderly relation and function to other uses in the development and to existing land uses, as well as with due regard to the Comprehensive Plan of Banks County. The permitted uses of property located in the planned unit development shall be those which have been specifically proposed by the applicant and approved by the governing body as a part of a planned unit development site plan, report, and/or other supporting information. 
A planned unit development may depart from strict conformance with the required dimension, area, height, bulk, use and specific content regulations of the county's land use regulations to the extent specified in the PUD application if approved, so long as the PUD provides tangible benefits in the form of provisions of open space, amenities and quality design. The dimensional requirements of property located in the planned unit development shall be those, which have been specifically proposed by the applicant and approved by the governing body as a part of a planned unit development site plan, except as provided for in section 2009(e). 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 2005. - Site plan approval required. 
Applications for rezoning to or development within a Planned Unit Development District shall require a site plan, including, at a minimum, those items enumerated in section 2008 of these regulations. The zoning administrative officer, planning commission and/or county commission may require, in addition, such other information, studies, plats, plans or architectural elevations deemed necessary to perform an adequate review of the proposed application. 
Site plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer, architect, land surveyor, land planner or landscape architect, and his/her seal of registration or professional initials shall be indicated on such plans. 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 2006. - Report and site plan are minimum requirements. 
The approved development summary report, site plan, and all other information, studies, plats, plans or architectural elevations submitted in the application, or required to be submitted by the governing body, shall establish the standards and minimum requirements for the subject property and shall become the zoning regulations that apply to the subject property, regardless of changes in property ownership. Compliance with the plans shall be a condition for rezoning to or development within a Planned Unit Development District and the plans shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 2007. - Development summary report required. 
Applications for rezoning to or development within a Planned Unit Development District shall require a written report which explains the type, nature, size, intent and characteristics of the proposed development. 
At a minimum, the report shall including the following: 
1.  A complete listing of every land use proposed within the development, including total acreage and the amount of acreage devoted to each use including open space, as well as residential units by type and density. All uses not specifically included in the report or site plan and approved by the governing body are prohibited unless the application is subsequently amended in accordance with applicable procedures. 
2.  Proposed development standards, including minimum lot sizes, minimum lot widths, minimum lot frontages, minimum floor areas or residential dwelling unit sizes, maximum number of dwelling units, maximum square footage figures for non-residential developments, minimum yards/building setbacks, landscape strips and buffers, height limitations, restrictive covenants, and any other such applicable standard or requirement. The report should also indicate any proposed exceptions or variations from the size, setback, frontage, density or other standards which are required in other conventional zoning districts, along with justification for such proposed exceptions or variations. 
3.  Time frame of development and provisions for ownership and management of the development. 
4.  Intended plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer, drainage facilities and street lighting. The report should also include the street types and right-of-way widths, parking areas, including the number of parking spaces provided and state the criteria used to determine the number of parking spaces required. 
5.  All streets and common open spaces not proposed for dedication to the public shall have the proposed maintenance and ownership agreements explained in detail. 
6.  Applications shall include perspective front, side and rear elevation drawings of representative building types. These drawings shall indicate general architectural characteristics. If the PUD is approved, substantial compliance with the architectural elevations shall be required. 
7.  Community benefit statement that will address the relative benefits that will accrue to the community as a result of the property being developed under PUD provisions. Specific mention should be made of mix of uses included, open spaces provided, natural features retained and architectural design to be provided. This statement is a developer's opportunity to define why the PUD proposal merits approval and how it will serve the community better than a conventional development. 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 2008. - Site plan requirements. 
All site plans required by this article shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
1.  Title of the proposed development and the name, address and telephone number of the property owner. 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of the architect, engineer or other designer of the proposed development. 
3.  Scale, date, north arrow, and general location map showing relationship of the site to the surrounding area, streets and/or natural landmarks. 
4.  Boundaries of the subject property, all existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way and street pavement widths; location of buildings; water courses; parking and loading areas; and other physical characteristics of the property and proposed development. 
5.  All sidewalks, trails, bikepaths, etc. 
6.  Building setbacks, buffers, landscape strips, and tree protection zone. 
7.  Open space areas to be retained. 
8.  Roadway composition, to include base and surface treatments, including certification from a professional engineer that roadway plans are in accordance with DOT Standards. Roadways shall be built to DOT Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 2009. - Requirements for development. 
Each proposed development shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  A minimum of at least 15 percent of the gross area of the site should be retained in open space, not including active or passive recreational areas. Wetland areas will not be considered as open space. Open space is required to be deeded as a separate tract to a Home Owners Association to be maintained by this entity and shall forever remain as open space. 
(b)  Townhouses and multi-family dwelling units shall not comprise more than 30 percent of the total dwelling units within the proposed development. 
(c)  All PUD's are required to have sewer, water and drainage facilities. Sewer is required to be connected to state-approved wastewater treatment facility either private or municipal owned. 
(d)  Commercial and/or office uses shall comprise at least ten percent of the total land area. 
(e)  Minimum setbacks of 30 feet are required on outside boundaries of the development, including front, back and sides. 
(f)  All utilities must be located underground and all interior roads must have curb and gutter, as well as sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be a minimum width of 48 inches plus have an 18 inch grassed planting strip between the sidewalk and curb. 
(g)  Within parking areas, at least one tree, reaching a minimum height of 25 feet at maturity, shall be planted or conserved within the interior of the parking lot for each ten parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 2010. - Suggested site planning guidelines. 
The following specifications are not regulations, but recommended guidelines to be utilized in preparation of site plans for planned unit developments: 
1.  Uses within the planned unit development shall be predominantly in accordance with the Banks County Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Land uses which have traditionally been viewed as incompatible (e.g. single-family subdivision and a manufacturing plant) should not be proposed in the same planned unit development unless considerable screening and physical separation are provided. 
3.  For developments that are predominantly residential, commercial and office uses should be scaled so that they primarily serve the occupants of the development. 
4.  Office, commercial and/or industrial uses should be located adjacent to major thoroughfares or in other areas with suitable access that will not result in traffic through residential areas. 
5.  Lot sizes, lot widths, unit sizes and other characteristics of residential development within the planned unit development should be similar to those characteristics of adjacent or nearby residential subdivisions or provide a suitable transition from such adjacent uses. 
6.  Location of land uses should conform substantially with land use plan goals, policies and suggested types of uses. The proposed development should be designed so as to produce an environment of stable and desirable character not out of harmony with its surrounding neighborhood. 
7.  Street lengths, alignments, patterns and other characteristics should conform to county subdivision regulations or standard planning principles. Streets should provide interconnectivity within the development or with adjacent uses. Provisions should be made for multiple ingress and egress access to the development. Streets should take into consideration the use and safety of pedestrians. 
8.  Large parking areas are discouraged. Parking should be provided in a variety of ways, including on-street parking, shared parking areas, or parking areas located to the side and/or rear of buildings. 
9.  Proposed developments should make maximum use of natural features of the land. The development should minimize any adverse impacts on the natural features of the property, including streams, trees, vegetation and terrain. 
10.  Interest and variety should be sought, by means of street design and changes in and mixtures of building types, heights, facades, setbacks, planting, or size of open space, the design should be harmonious as a whole and not simply from street-to-street. 
11.  Sites for churches, schools, community or club buildings and similar public or semi-public facilities are encouraged to be provided, where appropriate. 
12.  Active and/or passive recreational facilities should be provided, especially for developments with residential units. 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 2011. - Revisions to approved PUD application. 
Any additions in the types of land uses, increases in square footage or density, decreases in lot sizes, changes in the location or dimensions of streets, decreases in dwelling unit floor areas, major alterations in the land use patterns, or other substantial changes which, in the opinion of the zoning administrative officer, result in a development of such intent and character which has not been conceptually approved by the governing body shall require additional approval in accordance with procedures established in section 1103, as for a rezoning. Otherwise minor changes may be approved by the zoning administrative officer prior to issuance of building permits. The violation of any provision of the planned development standards as submitted and approved under the provisions of these regulations shall constitute a violation of the Zoning Resolution of Banks County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 2012. - Review standards. 
In considering and acting upon applications for rezoning to the Planned Unit Development District, the planning commission and the board of commissioners may consider and base their recommendation and decision, respectively, on the following information: 
1.  Conformity to the purpose and intent of the Planned Unit Development District. 
2.  Quality of site design. 
3.  Integration of a variety of land uses, building types and densities. 
4.  Preservation of natural features. 
5.  Compatibility with adjacent land uses. 
6.  Provision and type of open space and the provision of other amenities designed to benefit the general public. 
7.  Conformity with the Banks County Comprehensive Plan. 
8.  Adequacy of utilities and other public works. 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 9-12-2006) 
ARTICLE XXI. - OFFICE AND LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (OLI) 

Section 2101. - Intent and purpose. 
This district, known as the Office and Light Industrial (OLI) District, is established to promote sound and harmonious economic development by providing an environment for office and light industrial uses, all of a non- nuisance type, in an attractive campus-style setting with close access to major roads and served by public water and sewer. Proposals for this district are expected to submit for a public review, and abide by, a set of restrictive covenants designed to ensure an attractive campus-style environment and compatibility with adjacent land uses. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
Section 2102. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Office and administrative facilities. 
2.  Light industrial uses including manufacturing, distribution, processing, warehousing, alteration and assemble of products; provided, however, that the industrial activity is not injurious to the comfort, peace, enjoyment, health or safety of either the community or abutting areas by virtue of creating a disturbance or annoyance. Specifically uses in this district may not: 
a.  Disseminate dust, smoke, gas or fumes, odor, noise, vibration or excessive light beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the use is conducted; 
b.  Create a menace by reason of fire, explosive or other physical hazard; 
c.  Discharge harmful (chemical, biological or radioactive) waste material; 
d.  Have significant outdoor storage or assembly activity; 
e.  Uses may have incidental and accessory uses including: 
i.  Warehousing, storage facilities and/or display rooms for products or parts to be manufactured or assembled on site; 
ii.  Facilities for the storage, operation and maintenance of all plant machinery, equipment and vehicles needed for all the uses permitted on the site, including storage of gasoline and lubricating oils needed for their operation. 
iii.  Systems/facilities for all utility distribution (water, sewer, electricity and natural gas), communications (telephone and television wire/cables and antennas, provided they meet applicable Georgia State Regulations) and climate control (heating, ventilation and air conditioning). 
iv.  Facilities for employees and their customers such as clinics, cafeterias, employee credit unions and recreational facilities. 
3.  Research and educational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
Section 2103. - Conditional uses. 
1.  Outdoor storage yards subject to the criteria in section 2107. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
Section 2104. - Site and area regulations. 
A.  Sites located within a designated industrial park. 
Minimum lot area: One acre. 
Minimum setbacks: 

 
Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
Minimum landscaped area: Five percent of total site. 
B.  Sites not located within a designated industrial park. 
Minimum lot area: Two acres. 
Minimum setbacks: No building or structure shall be located closer than 50 feet to any property line. 
Minimum screening: An opaque fence or opaque vegetative buffer shall be provided for the entire distance along the property line that is adjacent to a residence. 
Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
Minimum landscaped area: Five percent of total site. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
Section 2105. - Existing uses. 
Any use or structure existing at the time of adoption of this article that would no longer be permitted or be in compliance with the current regulations shall be allowed to continue operation as is but shall be classified as a nonconforming use and subject to all applicable requirements of article IV, section 404, nonconforming uses, of the Zoning Regulations of Banks County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
Section 2106. - Parking. 
All uses within this district shall be subject to the same parking area design standards as designated in article XVII of the Zoning Regulations of Banks County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
Section 2107. - Design standards. 
All uses within this district shall be subject to the design standards for commercial uses as designated in article XVIII of the Zoning Regulations of Banks County, Georgia. 
Screening and buffering of objectionable views or nuisances, such as service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units, transformers, etc. is required. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
Section 2108. - Outdoor storage. 
Outdoor storage yards are permitted within this district solely as a conditional use. If approved, all outdoor storage yards must meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Outdoor storage yards are not permitted within the front or side yard. 
(b)  Outdoor storage yards must be set back at least 50 feet from any property line. 
(c)  Outdoor storage yards cannot exceed more than ten percetn of the business site. 
(d)  Outdoor storage yards must be completely screened from view from adjacent properties and the street. Storage yards must be surrounded by an opaque vegetative buffer or opaque fence buffer, as required in section 1803 and defined in section 301 of the Zoning Regulations of Banks County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
Section 2109. - Loading docks. 
All loading docks shall be located to the side or rear of the building. If a loading dock is situated on the side of a building, it shall be screened from the front by an opaque vegetative buffer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
Section 2110. - Landscape buffer. 
A 20-foot landscaped buffer between the road right-of-way line and the beginning of either paving or building on the site shall be provided. The landscaped buffer shall include a mixture of grass, shrubs and trees. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
Section 2111. - Cross-access easements. 
Where possible, developers are encouraged to obtain agreements with adjacent property owners for cross-access easements to facilitate the movement of vehicles from one business to another without the necessity of pre-entering the roadway. Likewise, developers are encouraged to design properties conducive to allowing future cross-access easements. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
Section 2112. - Signs. 
Section 2112.1. Permitted signs. 
Signs within this district shall be limited to indirectly illuminated monument signs not exceeding 10 feet in height or 32 square feet of display area. 
For planned industrial parks, one indirectly illuminated monument sign may be located at the primary entrance of the park. 
Section 2112.2. Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited within this district: 
• Billboards. 
• Pole signs. 
• Signs designated in Chapter 66, section 66-7 and 66-32 of the Code of Banks County, Georgia. 
Except as provided for in this section, all signs within this district shall be subject to the sign regulations established in Chapter 66 of the Code of Banks County, Georgia. 
Section 2112.3. Definitions. 
Billboard: A free-standing or attached outdoor advertising structure promoting any business, product, service, industry, activity or use other than that located on the property on which the sign is placed. 
Directly illuminated sign: Any sign designed to give forth artificial light directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a source of light within such sign including, but not limited to, neon and exposed lamp signs. 
Freestanding sign: A sign securely affixed to a substantial support structure of columns, uprights or braces which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support 
Indirectly illuminated sign: Any sign illuminated by an external light directed primarily toward such sign and so shielded that no direct rays from the light are visible elsewhere than on the lot where such illumination occurs. If not effectively so shielded, such sign shall be deemed to be a directly illuminated sign. 
Monument sign: A freestanding sign with a permanently affixed structural base of brick, masonry, stucco or stone, which base shall be of the same width as, or greater width than, the display area of the sign; the term excludes freestanding signs supported by poles. 
Pole sign: Any sign erected on one or more uprights supported from the ground, the height of which is greater than eight feet, and which is not a part of any building or structure, other than a structure erected solely for the purpose of supporting the sign. The overall total height of a pole sign shall not exceed 25 feet above ground level. A pole sign may include an accessory sign or changeable copy panel, the areas of which shall be included in the total area of the pole sign. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
ARTICLE XXII. - HOTELS OR MOTELS 

Section 2201. - Permit. 
A special land use permit must be obtained for the construction and operation of hotels and motels and may only be a conditional use in C2, general commercial zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2202. - Minimum lot size. 
Lot size shall be in accordance with the Banks County Code as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2203. - Occupation. 
No individual guests shall register, reside in, or occupy any room or rooms within the hotel or motel for more than seven consecutive day period, except in the event of an emergency or catastrophe, which shall be determined on a case by case basis by the Banks County Commission Chairperson or his/her designated agent. If individual guests register, reside in or occupy any room or rooms within the hotel or motel for more than seven consecutive day period it must be an extended stay hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2204. - Business license. 
No permanent business license shall be issued for the conduct of any business from any guest room of a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2205. - No conversion. 
No hotel or motel under this article shall be converted to or used as an apartment or condominium. No hotel or motel shall be converted to an extended stay hotel or motel without meeting all of the rules and regulations contained within article XXIII. Existing hotels/motels shall have 30 days from the effective date of this resolution to elect to convert to an extended stay hotel/motel and one year from the date of such election to complete the conversion. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2206. - Landscape plan. 
Hotels and motels must have a landscape plan submitted to and approved by Banks County Code Enforcement Officer, and constructed prior to issuance of a business license. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2207. - Timer. 
Each guest room having a stove-top unit or other type burner unit shall be required to also include a maximum 60 minute automatic power off timer for each such unit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2208. - Smoke detector. 
A hard-wired smoke detector with battery backup shall be provided and installed in each guest room. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2209: - Parking. 
No outside storage or permanent parking of equipment or vehicles shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2210. - Buffer. 
All such hotels or motels shall provide a 50 foot undisturbed buffer from any property zoned for multi-family residential purposes and/or a 100-foot undisturbed buffer from any property zoned for single family residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2211. - Set back. 
No building may be placed within 300 feet of any residentially zoned property, inclusive of the required buffer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2212. - Application. 
This article shall apply to all hotels or motels and other structures permitted or expanded after June 1, 2017. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2213. - Nonconforming use. 
Any lawful building, structure or use of land existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance and not in conformity with the rules and the regulations imposed herein may for a period of one year be continued subject to the following provisions. The building, structure or use of land shall not be: 
a.  Changed to another non-conforming use; 
b.  Enlarged or extended except in conformity with this article; 
c.  Reestablished after discontinuance for a period of six months; 
d.  Rebuilt, altered, or repaired after damage exceeding 60 percent of its fair market value; or 
e.  Improved in any way to the extent that such improvements equal or exceed 20 percent of the value of the structure at the time 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2214. - Hotel/motel defined. 
Except as defined in Chapter 6 entitled "Alcoholic Beverages" "Hotel" shall mean a building or other structure with or without a restaurant kept, used maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guest whether transient, permanent, or residential, in which up to 100 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge and restaurant in their premises and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
ARTICLE XXIII. - EXTENDED STAY HOTELS OR MOTELS 

Section 2301. - Extended stay hotels or motels. 
"Extended Stay Hotels or Motels" means any hotel or motel in which guest rooms have facilities for both the storage, refrigeration, and preparation of food, and/or which are advertised, designed, or utilized for weekly or monthly occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2302. - Permit. 
A special land use permit must be obtained for the construction and operation of extended stay hotels and motels and may only be a conditional use in C2, general commercial zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2303. - Minimum lot size. 
On and after the passage of this ordinance, a minimum of two acres is required to construct an extended stay hotel or motel in Banks County. On and after the passage of this ordinance a minimum of two acres is required to convert a hotel or motel or other structure to an extended stay hotel or motel in Banks County. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2304. - Occupation. 
No individual guests shall register, reside in, or occupy any room or rooms within the extended stay hotel or motel for more than a 29-consecutive day period. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2305. - Recreation. 
An indoor or fenced outdoor active recreation area shall be provided. The size of each recreation area shall be calculated at a ratio of five square feet per room with a minimum provision of 750 square feet. All recreation areas must be approved by the Banks County Code Enforcement Officer prior to development to ensure that all applicable safety specifications and standards are met. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2306. - Business license. 
No permanent business license shall be issued for the conduct of any business from any guest room of an extended stay hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2307. - No conversion. 
No extended stay hotel or motel under this article is to be converted to or used as an apartment or condominium. No hotel or motel or other structure can be converted to an extended stay hotel or motel without meeting all of the rules and regulations contained within this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2308. - Landscape plan. 
Extended stay hotels and motels must have a landscape plan submitted to and approved by code enforcement officer, and constructed prior to issuance of a business license. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2309. - Open space. 
Extended stay hotels and motels must have a minimum of 25 percent of the lot area dedicated to either active or passive open space. The open space shall include active recreation, such as a children's playground area, and/or passive recreation, such as green space and walking paths. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2310. - Sprinkler. 
Each guest room must be protected with a sprinkler system approved by the fire marshal or their designee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2311. - Timer. 
Each guest room having a stove-top unit or other type burner unit shall be required to also include a maximum 60-minute automatic power off timer for each such unit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2312. - Smoke detector. 
A hard-wired smoke detector with battery backup shall be provided and installed in each guest room. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2313. - Parking. 
No outside storage or permanent parking of equipment or vehicles shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2314. - Buffer. 
All such extended stay hotels or motels shall provide a 50-foot undisturbed buffer from any property zoned for multi-family residential purposes and/or a 100-foot undisturbed buffer from any property zoned for single family residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2315. - Set back. 
No building may be placed within 300 feet of any residentially zoned property, inclusive of the required buffer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2316. - Density. 
All extended stay hotels and motels shall have a maximum density of 75 guest units per gross acre of development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2317. - Application. 
This article shall apply to all extended stay hotels or motels and other structures permitted or expanded after June 1, 2017. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Section 2318. - Nonconforming use. 
Any lawful building, structure or use of land existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance and not in conformity with the rules and the regulations imposed herein may for a period of one year be continued subject to the following provisions. The building, structure or use of land shall not be: 
a.  Changed to another non-conforming use; 
b.  Enlarged or extended except in conformity with this article; 
c.  Reestablished after discontinuance for a period of six months; 
d.  Rebuilt, altered, or repaired after damage exceeding 60 percent of its fair market value; or 
e.  Improved in any way to the extent that such improvements equal or exceed 20 percent of the value of the structure at the time 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 6-13-2017) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification, and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 