THE CODE OF THE CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA ____________ Published in 2007 by Order of the City Council ____________ OFFICIALS of the CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Barry Blount, Mayor Walton Grant Eloise Paschal Eddie Rhea Walker Lou Chase Steve Jones Lorenzo Johnson City Council ____________ Charlotte D. Cotton City Administrative Officer ____________ Paula Martin City Clerk ____________ James Skipper City Attorney PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Americus, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the prior Code, and any ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and D. J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Charlotte Cotton, Chief Administrative Officer, Ms. Paula Martin, City Clerk, and Mr. James Skipper, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. © ;hg;Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. 2007. 
Chapter 62 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 62-1. - Handbills.     It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any advertising matter such as handbills to any person not willing to accept it. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any handbill on a motor vehicle. 
Sec. 62-2. - [Novelty lighters; retail sales, gift or distribution prohibited.] (a)  Definitions. "Novelty lighter" means a lighter without safety features that has entertaining audio or visual effects or that depicts, by way of logos, decals, or artwork, or resembles, in physical form or function, articles commonly recognized as appealing to or intended for use by children ten years of age or younger. The term includes, but is not necessarily limited to, lighters that depict or resemble cartoon characters, toys, guns, watches, musical instruments, vehicles, toy animals, food, or beverages, or that play musical notes or have flashing lights or other entertaining features. Such a lighter may operate on various fuels including, but not limited to, butane or liquid fuel. (b)  Prohibition. The retail sale, donation, gift, transfer or distribution of any novelty lighter within the city limits is prohibited. (c)  Penalty. Any person convicted, or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to, a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Americus. (Ord. No. O-08-08-20, 8-21-2008) 
Secs. 62-3—62-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING DAMAGING, DEFACING PROPERTY 
Sec. 62-21. - Generally.     It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or otherwise damage, deface, destroy, tamper or interfere with, or remove real property or improvements thereto, or movable or personal property belonging to or under supervision or control of the city. (Code 1962, § 15-41; Code 1986, § 15-7) State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 62-22. - Writing, etc., on streets; attaching advertising.     It shall be unlawful for any person to write, print or paint on any of the paved streets or sidewalks in the city or to otherwise use the streets or sidewalks in the city for the purpose of placing thereon any matter of advertising whatsoever. (Code 1962, § 20-10; Code 1986, § 15-8) State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 62-23. - Buildings, etc.     No person shall cut, scratch, paint, write on, paste on, or in any manner deface the walls, or any portion thereof, of any church, college, school building, academy, depot building, or any other building in this city; nor shall any person wantonly remove, damage or deface any fence, gate, sign or ornament attached to any store or office in the city. (Code 1962, § 15-9; Code 1986, § 15-9) State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 62-24. - Trees on public property.     It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, deface or destroy any shade tree on public property in the city unless authorized by the city. (Code 1962, § 15-46; Code 1986, § 15-10) State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 62-25. - Removing dirt, materials, etc. from public property.     It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to move, disturb, or remove any earth, stone or other material from any public property. (Code 1962, § 15-42; Code 1986, § 15-11) State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 62-26. - Advertising or posting bills prohibited; exception.     No person shall paint, print, post or cause to be posted, any bills or advertisements on any buildings, sheds or fences in this city, unless by consent of the owner or occupant thereof. (Code 1962, § 15-2; Code 1986, § 15-13) 
Sec. 62-27. - Refusal to leave premises.     It shall be unlawful for any person to idle, loiter, or stand within any public or private building after being requested by the owner or person in charge thereof to leave. (Code 1986, § 15-21) State Law reference— Refusal to leave premises, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-21(a)(3). 
Sec. 62-28. - Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies, or city. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without authority, to damage, injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to any company, or to the city, engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public services; or intentionally and without authority, to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; or in any way to interfere with the proper action of such company, or the city; or to intentionally divert any services of such company or city; or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of such company or the city any service manufactured, sold or distributed by such entities. (b)  Proof that a person performed any of the acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section, or proof that a person knowingly received the benefit of such acts, or proof that any of the acts specified in subsection (a) of this section were done on premises in possession of a person, with that person's knowledge, shall be prima facie evidence that such person or persons are responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. (Code 1986, § 15-35; Ord. No. O-87-11-25, 11-23-1987) State Law reference— Damaging utility property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Secs. 62-29—62-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 62-58. - Leaving wells and excavations open.     It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or person to permit any open well or hazardous excavation to remain or exist on the property under the control of such owner, occupant or person. (Code 1962, § 15-27; Code 1986, § 12-2) State Law reference— Abandoned hole or well, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-14. 
Sec. 62-59. - Iceboxes, refrigerators, etc.; abandonment.     It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any container of any kind that has a door, without removing the door from such icebox, refrigerator, or container. (Code 1962, § 15-15; Code 1986, § 12-3) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100. 
Sec. 62-60. - Barbed wire fence adjacent to sidewalks.     It shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee of real estate in the city to build or maintain any barbed wire fence adjacent to or along any sidewalk in the city, or so near thereto as to endanger any person using such sidewalk. (Code 1962, § 20-12; Code 1986, § 12-4) 
Sec. 62-61. - Obstruction of railroad tracks.     It shall be unlawful for any person to place on any railroad track in this city, any stone, timber, brush, iron, or any other article or thing, with the intention of derailing, obstructing or retarding the cars while in motion, or to injure or damage any track, wire, motor, locomotive, car or any other appliance of said railroads. (Code 1962, § 18-5; Code 1986, § 20-22) 
Secs. 62-62—62-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS 
Sec. 62-81. - Knives, razors and ice picks.     It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess, or carry upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or in any public place in the city any of the following implements unless same are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for harmful use: (1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. (2)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. (3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of, which when open projects from the handle more than three inches. This is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives and/or knives, which do not close and any type knife with the blade open. (4)  Any razor or razor blade. (5)  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point. (Code 1962, § 15-48; Code 1986, § 15-31) 
Sec. 62-82. - Discharging firearm in city; exceptions.     It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in the corporate limits of the city except in defense of person or property. This section shall not apply to authorized officers of the law. This section shall not apply to persons acting as official starters for track meets being held in the city. (Code 1962, § 15-49; Code 1986, § 15-32) 
Sec. 62-83. - Bow and arrow; air and pressure rifles.     It shall be unlawful for any person to use, discharge or shoot any air rifle, or guns discharged by forcing of air, gas, pressure or any other manner, or bow and arrow in the city. (Code 1962, § 15-50; Code 1986, § 15-34) 
Secs. 62-84—62-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 
Sec. 62-110. - Loud and unnecessary noises—Prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the city. (Code 1962, § 15-20; Code 1986, § 12-5) 
Sec. 62-111. - Same—Acts enumerated.     The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this Code, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: (1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or any other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creating by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; or the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. (2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the purpose of producing or reproducing sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with more volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. (3)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or any persons in the vicinity. (4)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird that by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. (5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. (6)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motorboat or any other motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. (7)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. (8)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creating of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of a vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. (9)  Construction or repairing of building. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety and then only with a permit from the building official, which permit may be granted for a period of not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building inspector should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if such official shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, such official may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. (10)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, court or church, while many of the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. (11)  Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of wares, ringing bells or use of other noise making device by peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. (12)  Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale, except parcels, etc., authorized by proper authorities. (13)  Metal, rails, pillars and columns, transportation. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along the streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, or trucks, which in any way disturbs the peace and quiet of persons in such streets or public places. (14)  Railroad operation. The causing, permitting or continuing any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of a railroad locomotive or cars. (15)  Piledrivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steamshovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliances, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. (16)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of the operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. (Code 1962, § 15-21; Code 1986, § 12-6) 
Sec. 62-112. - Disorderly conduct. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or endanger the public peace or decency by any disorderly conduct. (b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be disorderly conduct: (1)  Use of obscene, abusive or profane language that is reasonably foreseeable to provoke an immediate breach of the peace. (2)  Making of any threats of violence to or against any other person. (3)  Being noisy and disorderly in or upon any street or other public place in the city. (4)  Making any indecent or immoral exposure of the person. (5)  The reckless and dangerous use of dangerous weapons. (6)  Engaging in, promoting, encouraging, aiding or abetting any fight, riot, or noisy and disorderly proceeding on any street or public place, or in any private building or dwelling when persons residing in the vicinity are disturbed. (7)  Assault and battery upon any person on any street or public place, or in any private building or dwelling when persons residing in the vicinity are disturbed. (Code 1986, § 15-15) State Law reference— Indecent exposure, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8; assault, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-20 et seq. 
Sec. 62-113. - Maintaining a disorderly house.     A person who keeps and maintains, either by such person's self or others, a common, ill-governed, and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, or other misbehavior, or to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1962, § 15-7; Code 1986, § 15-16) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44. 
Sec. 62-114. - Loitering—Generally. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate with another or others in or on any public way or in any parking lot or shopping center so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear that public way or parking lot or shopping center when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in such a manner as to cause a breach of the peace, disturbance, or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person, or to obstruct free passage of pedestrians or vehicles, or to obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place by conduct, including the making of unsolicited remarks of any offensive, disgusting or insulting nature, or which are calculated to annoy and disturb persons in whose hearing they are made, under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. (Code 1962, §§ 15-18, 20-6; Code 1986, § 15-19) 
Sec. 62-115. - Same—Near schools.     No person shall loiter at or near any public school in this city, or engage by conversation, sign or otherwise, the attention of any of the pupils at said school to the disturbance of the same, or to the detriment of the discipline of such school. (Code 1962, § 15-19; Code 1986, § 15-20) State Law reference— Trespass on school property, O.C.G.A. § 20-2-1180. 
Sec. 62-116. - Public intoxication; use of drugs.     It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated or under the influence of any narcotic, narcotic derivative, stimulant, depressant, hallucinogenic or other type drug or medicine, now or hereafter controlled by state law, or any other intoxicant-type material not prescribed and administered according to state law; to inject or administer orally any narcotic, narcotic derivative, stimulant, depressant, hallucinogenic or other type drug or medicine controlled by state law, or not prescribed and administered according to law, or to take or use any other intoxicant-type materials not according to law upon the streets, lanes, roads and alleys in the city or in any motor vehicle, house, premises, building or enclosure in the city. (Code 1962, § 15-6; Code 1986, § 3-7) State Law reference— Public intoxication, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 62-117. - Obstruction of streets, etc.—Prohibitions, exceptions.     No person shall obstruct any public street or sidewalk for the purpose of selling, vending, showing or disposing of wares and merchandise, or of delivering the same; nor shall an assembly of persons, as bidders be assembled for the purpose of bidding for the same so as to obstruct free passage on the sidewalks or streets of the city, except that the foregoing shall not apply to the following: (1)  The selling, vending, or offering for sale of fresh produce to the general public by the following persons: a.  The producer of such fresh produce; or b.  The owner of an existing and duly licensed business, who has purchased such fresh produce directly from the producer. This exception shall not apply to anyone who has a regular place of business where produce is or could be sold as a normal part of such business. (2)  The selling, vending, or offering for sale of fresh flowers, plants, and similar products to the general public. (3)  The selling, vending, or offering for sale of newspapers via the placement of self-service newspaper boxes on the city sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to any business premises. (4)  The owner or operator of any business authorized to place products on the city sidewalk for sale under the provisions of this article shall place said products not more than 36 inches from the facade of such owner's or operator's business premises on the city sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to said owner's or operator's business premises. (Code 1962, § 20-5; Code 1986, § 15-25; Ord. No. O-99-05-18, 5-20-1999) 
Sec. 62-118. - Same—Delivery of goods.     No person shall deposit, place or put, or cause to be deposited, placed or put any vehicles, of any description or any goods, wares, wood, boxes, barrels, casks, logs, or other obstructions in or upon any street, alley or sidewalk of the city, so as to obstruct the free passage and use of the same; provided, this section shall not be construed as to prohibit the use of the streets, alleys and sidewalks for the necessary reception and delivery of any wood, goods, wares, or merchandise or to prevent workers employed in building or doing other necessary work, who have permission therefor, from depositing lumber, brick, mortar, and other building material and remains of old buildings on the streets, alleys and sidewalks contiguous thereto; but said workers shall obstruct the same as little as possible and remove said materials as soon as it can be done consistently with the prosecution of the work in which they are engaged; and shall remove such obstruction whenever required to do so by the city council. (Code 1962, § 20-7; Code 1986, § 15-26) 
Sec. 62-119. - Public urination. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate in a public place which is not set aside or established as a place for urination by the local governmental entity or by the owner of the premises where the public urination occurs. (b)  A person committing a violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (Ord. No. O-2013-3, 2-21-2013) 
Secs. 62-120—62-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS 
Sec. 62-150. - Prostitution. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of prostitution or to keep a place of prostitution. (b)  A person commits the offense of prostitution when such person performs or offers or consents to perform an act of sexual intercourse for money. (c)  A person having or exercising control over the use of any place or conveyance that would offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution commits the offense of keeping a place of prostitution when such person knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for prostitution. (Code 1962, §§ 15-38—15-40; Code 1986, § 15-17) State Law reference— Prostitution, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-9 et seq. 
Sec. 62-151. - Peeping Toms.     It shall be unlawful for any person to lurk about the premises or near the private habitations of other persons, or to enter upon the private premises of another to spy or look into the houses or buildings used for residential purposes. (Code 1962, § 15-28; Code 1986, § 15-18) State Law reference— Peeping Toms, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-61. 
Sec. 62-152. - Syringes, etc., for illegal administration of drugs; illegal possession of certain drugs. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Apothecary means a license pharmacist as defined by the laws of this state and, where the context so requires, the owner of a store or other place of business where narcotic drugs are compounded or dispensed by a licensed pharmacist; but nothing in this section shall be construed as conferring on a person who is not registered nor licensed as a pharmacist any authority, right or privilege that is not granted to him by the pharmacy laws of this state.     Cocoa leaves means and includes cocaine and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of cocoa leaves, except derivatives of cocoa leaves, which do not contain cocaine, ecgonine, or substances from which cocaine or ecgonine may be synthesized or made.     Dentist means a person authorized by law to practice dentistry in this state.     Drugs means coca leaves, opium, isonipecaine, marijuana, and every other substance neither chemically nor physically distinguishable from them and any other drugs to which the federal laws relating to narcotic drugs may now apply; and any drug found by the state board of pharmacy to have an addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining liability similar to morphine or cocaine; Methylphenidate HCl (Ritalin); Phencyclidine HCl (PCP); Methylbenzilate; Diethyltryphtamine (DET); N-Methyl-3-piperdyl Benzilate HCl (LBJ, JB-336); N-Ethyl-3-piperdyl Benzilate HCl (JB-318); Benactylzine HCl (DMZ); 3, 4-Methylendedioxy amphetamine HCl (STP, DOM); Dipropyltryptamine (RTP); Chlordiazepoxide (Librium); Asmadore; any drug, which under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (52 Stat. 1040 (1938)), 21 USC 301; or under any law of this state may be dispensed only upon prescription; any drug which the state board of pharmacy shall determine to be dangerous or detrimental to the public health when taken in accordance to directions.     Hospital means an institution for the care and treatment of the sick and injured approved by the state board of pharmacy as proper to be intrusted with the custody of narcotic drugs and the professional use of narcotic drugs under the direction of a physician, dentist, or veterinarian.     Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plants, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks, (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.     Opium includes morphine, codeine, and heroin, and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of opium, but does not include apomorphine or any part of its salts.     Physician means a person authorized to practice medicine in this state and any other person authorized by law to treat sick and injured human beings in this state and to use narcotic drugs in connection with such treatment. Osteopaths who are authorized to secure a federal narcotic permit as allowed physicians and other persons. Provided, however, osteopaths shall be allowed to purchase, prescribe, dispense and administer, for the alleviation of pain only, certain narcotic drugs, to wit: those narcotic drugs or their derivative, the sale or dispensing of which is regulated by the federal act known as the "Harrison Narcotic Act," as amended, said act being set out in the 26 USCA, Internal Revenue Code, section 3220 et seq.     Veterinarian means a person authorized by law to practice veterinary medicine in this state. (b)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any apparatus, device or instrument for the unauthorized use of drugs. Use shall not be unauthorized if authorized by a physician, dentist, veterinarian or hospital. (c)  Handling medical syringes and needles. All hypodermic syringes and hypodermic needles must be destroyed when no longer in use for medical purposes, and it shall be unlawful not to destroy same. Hypodermic needles shall be broken off from the hub, glass hypodermic syringes shall be broken, and disposable hypodermic syringes shall be incinerated. (d)  Selling, possessing, buying. It shall be unlawful for any person, except a dealer in surgical instruments, physician, apothecary, dentist, veterinarian or nurse, attendant or intern of a hospital, sanatorium, or institution in which persons are treated for disability or disease, at any time to have, possess, or buy a hypodermic needle or hypodermic syringe unless said possession, or purchase be authorized by the prescription or the certificate of a physician, dentist or veterinarian. It shall be unlawful to sell a hypodermic needle or hypodermic syringe unless such sale is authorized by prescription or a certificate of a physician, dentist or veterinarian and the prescription or certificate is not to be refilled or renewed unless authorized by the prescriber. (e)  Specific drugs. Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess drugs known as: (1)  Methylphenidate HCl (Ritalin) Phencyclidine HCl (PCP) Methylbenzilate Diethyltryptamine (DET) N-Methyl-3-piperdyl Benzilate HCl (1BJ, JB-336) N-Ethyl-3-piperdyl Benzilate HCl (JB-318) Benactylzine HCl (DMZ) 3, 4-Methylenedioxy amphetamine HCl (MDA) 4-Methyl-2, 5-dimethoxyamphetamine HCl (STP, DOM) Dipropyltryptamine (DPT) Chlordiazepoxide (Librium) Asmadore (2)  Any drug which the state board of pharmacy shall determine to be dangerous or detrimental to the public health when taken in accordance to directions, unless: a.  Such drug was obtained upon a valid prescription and is held in the original container in which such drug was delivered; or b.  Such drug was delivered by a practitioner in the course of his professional practice and the drug is held in the immediate container in which said drug was delivered. (Code 1962, § 15-51; Code 1986, § 15-27) State Law reference— Drug laws, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq. 
Sec. 62-153. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. O-12-01-01, adopted Jan. 19, 2012, deleted § 62-153, entitled "Gambling", which derived from: Code 1962, § 15-14; and Code 1986, § 15-28. See § 62-241 for similar provisions. 
Secs. 62-154—62-172. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING UNDERAGE PERSONS 
Sec. 62-173. - Curfew for minors. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Custodian means any person over the age of 21 years who is in loco parentis to a minor.     Guardian means any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a minor.     Minor means any person under the age of 18 years.     Parent means the natural or adoptive parent of a minor.     Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground, or place where the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. The term "public place" shall include, but shall not be limited to, a store, shop, restaurant, tavern, cafe, theater, drugstore, poolroom, shopping center, and any other place or location devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any of the above. (b)  Applicable hours. It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain, idle, wander, stroll, or play in any public place either on foot or to cruise about without a set destination in a vehicle, in, about or upon any place in the city between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. Friday through Saturday. (c)  Exceptions. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the minor was: (1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian; (2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; (3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; (4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; (5)  Involved in an emergency. In this subsection the term "emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life; (6)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by township, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the township, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; (7)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or (8)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law. (d)  Business compliance required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating or having charge of any public place to knowingly permit, encourage or allow the presence of minors under the age of 18 between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. Sunday through Thursday or between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. Friday through Saturday in violation of subsection (b) of this section. (e)  Parental or guardian responsible. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having custody or control of any minor under the age of 18 years of age to knowingly permit or by inefficient control allow such minor to be on the streets or sidewalks or on or in any public property or public place between the hours on the days set out in violation of subsection (b) of this section. (f)  Procedure upon violation. The following procedures shall be followed in connection with a violation of this section: (1)  Any police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of subsection (b) of this section, shall ascertain the name and address of such minor and then warn the minor that he or she is in violation of curfew and shall direct the minor to proceed at once to his home or usual place of abode. The police officer shall report the action to the chief of the city police department, who, in turn, shall notify the parents, guardian or person having custody or control of such minor. (2)  If such minor refuses to heed the warning or direction issued by a police officer, or refuses to give such police officer his correct name and address, or if the minor had been warned on a previous occasion that he or she is in violation of curfew, he or she shall be taken to the city police department and the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor shall be notified to come and take charge of the minor. If the parent, guardian or other adult person above cannot be located or fails to come and take charge of the minor, the minor shall be released to the custody of juvenile authorities. (g)  Penalties. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Any minor violating this section shall be dealt with in accordance with the juvenile court law of this state and procedures authorized by said law. In the event that any minor violates this section and such minor is not specifically covered or dealt with by the juvenile court law of this state, such minor shall be subject, after having been charged with the same and found guilty in the municipal court of the city, to punishment as provided in section 1-8. Any parent, guardian, or other adult person having legal care and custody of a minor and who permits said minor to violate this section shall be subject, after having been charged with the same and found guilty in the municipal court of the city, to punishment as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1962, § 15-5; Code 1986, § 15-22; Ord. No. O-94-01-02, 1-25-1994) 
Sec. 62-174. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. O-12-01-01, adopted Jan. 19, 2012, deleted § 62-174, entitled "Minors frequenting gambling houses", which derived from: Code 1962, § 15-22; and Code 1986, § 15-24. See § 62-242 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 62-175. - Truancy. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: Custodian means any person over the age of 21 years who is in loco parentis to a minor. Guardian means a person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a minor. Minor means a child between the ages of such child's seventh and 16th birthday who is required by Georgia law to enroll or be enrolled in a public school, a private school, or a home study program. Parent means the natural or adoptive parent of a minor. Public place means any street, highway, alley or right-of-way, including sidewalks, any park, playground, shopping center, or other place or building open to the public; any cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse; any privately or publicly owned place of amusement, entertainment, or combination, including parking lots and other areas adjacent thereto; and any vacant lot or land. (b)  Prohibited; exceptions. (1)  It shall be unlawful for any minor between the ages of seven years and 16 years to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in and upon public streets, highways, road, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, or any other public place between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on any school day when school is in session; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following circumstances: a.  When the minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; b.  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; c.  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced place during the prescribed period of time; d.  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel with interstate and intrastate travel through the city being excepted in all cases from this section; e.  When the minor is enrolled in a valid home study program as authorized by the O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690; f.  When the minor has completed all course study requirements for high school graduation; g.  When the minor is married in accordance with applicable law; h.  When the minor has written proof from school authorities that he is excused from school attendance at that particular time; or i.  When the minor is participating in an approved school or study activity, which requires the minor to be off school property. (2)  Any minor who violates this section is subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court, or any other court having jurisdiction of such minor, under O.C.G.A. title 11, ch. 15 (O.C.G.A. § 11-15-1 et seq.). (3)  The provisions of this section shall also be applicable to a minor who has been suspended or expelled from school. (c)  Parent or guardian responsible. (1)  No parent or guardian of a minor between the ages of seven years and 16 years shall allow a minor to violate subsection (b) of this section. (2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall be a defense for the person charged with such offense if the parent or legal guardian has invoked the jurisdiction of the juvenile court as to the minor violating subsection (b) of this section prior to the time that such minor violated such subsection. (d)  Suspension or expulsion from school. (1)  In addition to the other provisions of this section, if a minor has been suspended or expelled from school, the parent or legal guardian of that minor, for the duration of the suspension or expulsion, shall: a.  Personally supervise the minor or arrange for a responsible adult 21 years of age or older to supervise the minor at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he not been expelled or suspended; and b.  Prohibit the minor from being in any public place at the times the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he not been suspended or expelled unless: 1.  The minor is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian or responsible adult 21 years of age or older, selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor; or 2.  The minor is employed pursuant to an age or schooling certificate during the actual working hours or traveling directly to or from his job site. (2)  Upon conviction of a violation of this section, such convicted person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (3)  It shall be a defense for the person charged with such offense if the parent or legal guardian has invoked the jurisdiction of the juvenile court as to the minor violating this section at the time that such minor violated this section. (e)  Police may assume temporary custody if minor found in violation. (1)  A police officer may assume temporary custody during school hours of any child subject to compulsory school attendance who is found violating the provisions of this section or who is absent from a public or private school or a home study program without a valid written excuse from school officials or from the parent or legal guardian in charge of the home study program. (2)  Any police officer assuming temporary custody of a child pursuant to this subsection, or pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 20-2-698, shall immediately deliver such minor to the parent, legal guardian, or other person having control or charge of such minor, or to the school from which such minor is absent, or if the child is found to have been adjudged a delinquent or unruly, such police officer shall cause the child to be brought before the probation officer of the county having jurisdiction over the child. (Code 1986, § 15-36; Ord. No. O-96-10-46, 10-24-1996) 
Secs. 62-176—62-203. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC AUTHORITY 
Sec. 62-204. - Resisting police; obstruction; following. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any member of the police department, or any other person duly empowered with police authority, while in the discharge or apparent discharge of official duty, or in any way interfere with, obstruct or hinder such officer or other person in the discharge of official duty. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to follow any police officer, while in charge of any prisoner, after such person has been commanded to desist such following, or after any crowd has been commanded to disperse. (Code 1962, § 15-33; Code 1986, § 15-1) State Law reference— Obstruction of law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; refusal to disperse, O.C.G.A. § 16-20-30. 
Sec. 62-205. - Compliance with orders and directions.     It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer of the city. (Code 1962, § 15-35.1; Code 1986, § 15-3) State Law reference— Refusal to obey official request, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-30. 
Sec. 62-206. - Impersonating; badges. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card or any other insignia of office, like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by the official police officers of the city, unless such person is an official officer of the city. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession a police badge of the city except the official police badge. (Code 1962, §§ 15-31, 15-32, 15-34; Code 1986, § 15-5) State Law reference— Impersonating an officer, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23. 
Sec. 62-207. - Prisoners; escapes. (a)  Furnishing tools, etc. No person shall make available to, present, or place within the reach of, any person confined under authority of the city any tool, implement, or other thing calculated to aid in the escape of such person so confined or any other person confined under the authority of the city or confined by police officers of the city. (b)  Aiding escapee. No person shall assist or aid, or attempt to assist or aid any person in the custody of or confined under the authority of the city, to escape from jail, place of confinement, or custody. (c)  Attempts by those in custody or confinement. No person while a prisoner in the city jail, or in any other place where prisoners are confined, or otherwise in custody of and confined by the city or police officer of the city, shall escape or attempt to escape or to assist others to escape or attempt to escape from such custody or confinement. (Code 1962, § 15-37; Code 1986, § 15-6) State Law reference— Escapes, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-52. 
Sec. 62-208. - False alarm made to police or ambulance.     No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm by phone, in person or in any other manner, the need for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such false reporting. (Code 1962, § 15-11; Code 1986, § 15-29) State Law reference— False alarms and reports, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-26 et seq. 
Sec. 62-209. - False reports of crimes.     No person within the city shall make to, or file with, the police department of the city or any police officer of the city any false, misleading, or unfounded statement, or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any ordinance or law violation occurring within the city. (Code 1962, § 15-12; Code 1986, § 15-30) State Law reference— False alarms and reports, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-26 et seq. 
Secs. 62-210—62-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GAMBLING; AMUSEMENT GAME ROOMS AND COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE REGULATIONS 
Sec. 62-241. - Gambling.     It shall be unlawful for any person to set up, promote or play at any game of chance by lot or with dice, cards, numbers, hazards or any other gambling device whatever for the disposal of money or other thing of value or under the pretext of a sale, gift or delivery thereof, or for any right, share or interest therein. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) State Law reference— Gambling, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq. 
Sec. 62-242. - Minors frequenting gambling houses.     It shall be unlawful for any minor to visit a gambling room. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Secs. 62-243, 62-244. - Reserved. 
Sec. 62-245. - Gambling devices prohibited.     Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2) are prohibited in the City of Americus, and the ownership, use, or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(a)—(i). (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-246. - Gambling places prohibited.     Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(3) are prohibited in the City of Americus, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-247. - Definitions.     The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Amusement game room means any location as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(b), (c), or (d) where one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are operated that permit noncash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(d)(1)(B), (C), or a combination thereof.     Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-17-1(2)(A) and (B) and any applicable regulations of the State of Georgia. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to the following: (1)  Pinball machines; (2)  Console machines; (3)  Video games; (4)  Crane machines; (5)  Claw machines; (6)  Pusher machines; (7)  Bowling machines; (8)  Novelty arcade games; (9)  Foosball or table soccer machines; (10)  Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; (11)  Target or shooting gallery machines; (12)  Basketball machines; (13)  Shuffleboard machines; (14)  Kiddie ride games; (15)  Skeeball machines; (16)  Air hockey machines; (17)  Roll down machines; (18)  Coin-operated pool table or coin-operated billiard table as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1(3); and (19)  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. The term "coin-operated amusement machine" does not include the following: (1)  Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; (2)  Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; (3)  Gas and electric meters; (4)  Pay telephones; (5)  Pay toilets; (6)  Cigarette vending machines; (7)  Coin-operated vending machines; (8)  Coin-operated scales; (9)  Coin-operated gumball machines; (10)  Coin-operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; (11)  Coin-operated massage beds; and (12)  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia.     City means the City of Americus.     Location means a business within the City of Americus that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to occupation taxes and business licenses. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-248. - License required.     No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a license from the city and without first having paid the applicable occupation tax required under this article. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-249. - Issuance of license. (a)  Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city shall be made to the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information: (1)  Name, address and age of the applicant and the date of the application; (2)  Address or place where the bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that place or places; (3)  Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; (4)  Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the city; (5)  List of any other licenses or permits from the city held by the applicant. (b)  Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the city official or employee shall provide the licensee with a copy of the ordinance from which this article derives. The city shall not require a fee for licensure or registration of an amusement game room. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31st of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupation taxes in accordance with chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. (c)  Any person or entity operating an amusement game room on or after January 1st of any year shall be obligated to obtain all licenses and permits required hereunder and shall be subject to all of the provisions hereof. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-250. - Occupation tax required.     No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having completed the occupation tax certificate form, paid the required occupational tax, and without first having obtained the license required under this article. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-251. - Distance. (a)  No license for operating an amusement game room, required by the provisions of this article, shall be issued for a location within 300 feet of a location in which a license for operating an amusement game room is in effect. (b)  No license for operating an amusement game room, required by the provisions of this article, shall be issued for a location within 200 yards of any of the following: (1)  Church buildings; (2)  School buildings or educational buildings; (3)  School grounds; (4)  College campuses; (5)  Alcoholic treatment centers that are owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein; or (6)  Housing authority property. (c)  As used in this section, the term "school building(s)" or "educational building(s)" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state, and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). (d)  For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. For purposes of calculating such measurement, the following method shall be used: (1)  In a straight line from the front door of the location seeking a license for operating an amusement game room to the nearest property line of the location listed in subsection (b), supra. (2)  All renewal applications shall use the measurements required in the initial application and license. (e)  After a hearing, the city council may waive the applicability of this section to an individual location if no alcohol is served or sold at such location. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-252. - Number of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines at a location.     No amusement game room in the city shall offer to the public more than nine bona fide coin-operated amusement machines offering noncash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2), or both at the same location. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-253. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin-operated amusement machines and from business.     Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by city officials that account separately annual gross receipts for the amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. Income from bona fide coin-operated amusement machines offering noncash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2) shall not constitute more than 50 percent of the income from the location. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the 50 percent of income requirement. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-254. - Notice requirements. (a)  Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or similar words:  "GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE." (b)  Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the city conspicuously and permanently. (c)  The owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-255. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines.     Bona fide coin-operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the city only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license issued by the State of Georgia in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9. In addition, the business owner where the machines are available for play by the public must pay a location license fee in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-17-2(a.1) and (b). The city official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the state revenue commissioner of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2 or O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-256. - Penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. (a)  Penalties for violation of the provisions of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, are as follows: (1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for operating an amusement game room at the location for not more than three months, or both. (2)  Second offense: Fine not to exceed $750.00 for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for operating an amusement game room at the location for not more than six months, or both. (3)  Third offense: Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation, suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or operator's license for operating an amusement game room at the location, or suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city for the remainder of the calendar year, or both. (b)  The penalties for violation of the ordinance from which this article derives may be imposed by the judge of the municipal court of the city. (c)  Offering one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machine games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for operating an amusement game room at the location is punishable, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-257. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin-operated machines in violation of law or ordinance.     The municipal court of the city is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling, or overseeing such bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling, or overseeing a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine. (1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed $250.00 for each violation. (2)  Second and subsequent offenses: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation, imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-258. - Operating regulations.     Each business operating as an amusement game room hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: (1)  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit, or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. (2)  Inspection. The chief of police shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such machine(s) are operated or set up for operating, and shall inspect, investigate, and test such machines as needed. (3)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. (4)  Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, or walking about aimlessly, and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation licensed to operate an amusement game room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: a.  Create or cause to be created a danger or a breach of the peace; b.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; d.  Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. (5)  Shirt and shoes required. All proprietors shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their premises. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-259. - Revocation of license.     In the event that it comes to the attention of the governing body of the city that an amusement game room has created a nuisance to the surrounding community or the operator or proprietor has violated any provision of this section, the following procedure will be followed: (1)  The city clerk shall issue a notice of objection which shall include the address of the location and the specific reasons why the amusement game room in question is alleged to be a nuisance or alleged to be in violation of any provision of this section. The city clerk will then notify the proprietor that a notice of objection has been filed and will set a date for a hearing before the mayor and city council. Extensions of the date of hearing shall be as agreed upon between the city and the proprietor. (2)  At the time of the hearing, any resident, the operator, the proprietor and the city clerk or other witnesses may be heard. Thereafter, the mayor and city council shall issue a notice of decision which will call for the dismissal of the objection, removal of the machines, or such other remedy as they deem appropriate under the circumstances that are consistent with the purpose of this article. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at such hearing, and the proprietor may be represented by legal counsel and such hearing. All parties shall have the right to present and cross-examine witnesses. (3)  The decision of the mayor and city council shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for their decision. (4)  The decision of the mayor and city council shall be binding upon the proprietor and operator of the amusement game room under consideration, subject to appeal by petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Sumter County. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-260. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. (a)  Licenses required in this article are nontransferable. All businesses that have bona fide coin-operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current license issued by the city. Each separate amusement game room location shall require a separate license and applicable permits from the city. (b)  The issued license shall not be transferred to another owner at the same site within the city. A new owner or proprietor must first obtain a new license to operate an amusement game room at any location or locations in the city. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-261. - Enforcing officer.     The chief of police or his designee is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and be responsible for enforcing this article. (Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Secs. 62-262—62-290. - Reserved. 
Chapter 66 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Local government recreational systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 
Sec. 66-1. - Prohibited acts in public parks and grounds.     It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, pluck, break down, damage or destroy any tree, shrub, plant, flower, grass or vines in any of the public parks or grounds of the city, or to bathe in, or throw any stick or other substance, to befoul or pollute the waters of any fountain, lake, spring, or stream, natural or artificial, within any public park or grounds of the city; or to damage, deface or destroy any gate, fence, railing, enclosure, fountain, water or gas fixture or other fixture or property of the city situated or being within said public park or grounds; or to otherwise intermeddle or injuriously interfere with any of the property in said parks and public grounds; or to drive any vehicle or animal, or to ride any animal upon the grounds or walks of any such public park or grounds of the city; or bring any animal within the park enclosure. (Code 1962, § 6-9; Code 1986, § 16-1) State Law reference— Damaging property, O.C.G.A. § 16-17-22 et seq. 
Sec. 66-2. - Damaging playground equipment.     It shall be unlawful for any person to vandalize or, in any manner, destroy or mutilate any playground equipment installed and maintained by the city in any public park. (Code 1962, § 6-16; Code 1986, § 16-2) State Law reference— Damaging property, O.C.G.A. § 16-17-22 et seq. 
Sec. 66-3. - Hours of operation.     All public parks or playgrounds shall be open for public use; provided, however, that the public use thereof shall be limited to the period of time between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. in those parks or playgrounds where such opening and closing times are conspicuously posted by the city or under its authority. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or remain upon the premises, or any part thereof, owned by the city and known as playground property before the time said premises are opened to the public by the person in charge thereof or after said premises are closed to the public by the person in charge thereof in the afternoon or night. (Code 1962, §§ 6-15, 15-30; Code 1986, § 16-3; Ord. No. O-88-08-31, 8-22-1988) 
Chapter 70 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 70-1. - Property owned by the city not subject to zoning and historic district ordinances.     Unless otherwise provided by general state law, property owned by the city shall not be subject to zoning ordinances and historic district ordinances of the city; provided, however, that the city shall notify the historic preservation commission at least 45 days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and shall allow the commission an opportunity to comment on such proposal during such 45-day period. (Code 1986, § 1-13; Ord. No. O-95-02-06, 2-27-1995) 
Secs. 70-2—70-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sec. 70-21. - Generally. (a)  Created. Pursuant to article IX, section II, paragraph IV of the Constitution of Georgia of 1983 and also pursuant to the general law, the city planning commission (hereinafter referred to as the "planning commission") is hereby created and established. (b)  Composition. The planning commission shall consist of seven members who shall be registered voters of the city, five of whom shall be appointed by the city council. The remaining two members shall be ex officio voting members, who shall consist of the city manager of the city and the executive director of the housing authority of the city. (c)  Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (d)  Term of office. The term of the non-ex-officio members of the commission shall be for three years. Any non-ex-officio member may be reappointed for a subsequent term. Any vacancy in the membership of the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the city council in the same manner as hereinbefore provided. The city council shall, by majority vote, have the authority to remove any member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, conviction for a felony or for a crime involving moral turpitude, neglect of office, or for such other cause as the city council may deem appropriate. Non-ex-officio commission members shall not be deemed employees of the city for any purpose whatsoever, and the personnel regulations of the city shall not be applicable to such members. (e)  Compensation. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. (Code 1962, § 27-72; Code 1986, § 23-70; Ord. No. O-87-11-23, 11-23-1987; Ord. No. O-05-10-33, 10-20-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 70-22. - Powers and duties; chairman elected from members. (a)  Chairman. The planning commission shall elect a chairman from its members. The term of the chairman shall be for one year; the chairman shall be eligible for reelection as chairman. (b)  Assistance from city employees. The planning commission shall be entitled to receive such assistance from city employees as it shall request and shall be authorized to appoint such employees and staff and to secure such professional assistance on a fulltime or parttime basis as it may in its discretion deem necessary or appropriate; provided that the expenditures therefor shall not be in excess of such amounts as may be appropriated therefor by the city council. (c)  Rules of procedure. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and shall determine its time of meetings. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action shall be taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be public records and shall be kept in the custody of the city clerk. (d)  Powers and duties. The planning commission is hereby vested with all the powers, duties and responsibilities provided by law. (Code 1962, § 27-73; Code 1986, § 23-71) 
Sec. 70-23. - Effect on previous commission.     The planning commission shall have taken over all the duties, responsibilities and functions previously performed by the joint Americus-Sumter County Planning Commission as to all matters pertaining to zoning and planning within the city limits. (Code 1962, § 27-74; Code 1986, § 23-72) 
Secs. 70-24—70-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRIPP STREET ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORRIDOR 
Sec. 70-100. - [Established.]     The Tripp Street Economic Development Corridor for economic development purposes is hereby established and is more particularly described as commencing at the intersection of Tripp Street with Felder Street and concluding at the intersection of Tripp Street with East Forsyth Street, in the City of Americus. (Ord. No. O-10-05-19, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 70-101. - [Design standards.]     All future development in the Tripp Street Economic Development Corridor shall be subject to certain design standards which shall be applicable in such economic development corridor area. Such design standards are more particularly set out and established in Exhibit "A" attached to the ordinance from which this article derives and kept on file with the city. (Ord. No. O-10-05-19, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 70-102. - [Future or existing conflicts.]     Subject to the provisions of this section, such design standards shall take precedent over existing and future design standards for properties located in areas not included in the Tripp Street Economic Development Corridor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, these design standards shall not be construed to repeal or eliminate existing or future design standards applicable to properties located within the Tripp Street Economic Development Corridor where such existing or future design standards are not in conflict with the design standards established in this article. The design standards established in this article shall be considered cumulative of, and in addition to, other existing or future design standards applicable city-wide unless such existing or future design standards conflict with this article, in which case the design standards established in this article shall control only with respect to such areas of conflict. (Ord. No. O-10-05-19, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 70-103. - [Violation.]     The violation of such design standards shall be considered a violation of the City Code and any person convicted of such a violation shall be subject to punishment in the magistrate court as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (Ord. No. O-10-05-19, 5-20-2010) 
Secs. 70-104—70-130. - Reserved. 
Chapter 74 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 74-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Aggregate sign area means the area of all signs on a parcel, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs.     Animated sign means a sign with action, motion, or changing colors that requires electrical energy. The term "animated sign" does not include signs that indicate only time, temperature, date, or any combination thereof.     Area of a sign or sign area means the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses one face of the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members.     Awning sign means a sign located on a roof-like cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign.     Banner means a piece of fabric or similar material that is attached to a pole, enclosed in a frame, or mounted as a temporary sign device.     Billboard sign means a type of ground sign which is permitted in certain zoning districts as provided by this article, and which shall be a maximum of 35 feet in height and 240 square feet in sign face area, and which is greater than 100 square feet in sign face area. Billboards may be double-faced, and may include embellishments not exceeding an additional 50 square feet.     Directional sign means a sign dedicated to providing traffic direction such as enter, exit, drive through, etc. Limited to three feet in height and no larger than four square feet in sign area.     Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas placed back to back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction.     Freestanding sign means a sign securely affixed to a support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support.     Hanging/shingle-type signs means a sign no larger than six square feet in area, with a clearance of seven feet eight inches above the sidewalk or ground. Such a sign shall be attached firmly and perpendicular to a building. Such a sign may be double-faced but may not be more than four inches thick.     Illuminated sign means a sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign.     Monument sign means a permanent monument sign designed so that the base of the sign face is flush with the supporting base, and the supporting base is flush with the ground and extends the full width of the sign face and shall not exceed six feet in height, and 60 square feet in total area which shall include sign and structure.     Nonconforming sign means any sign that does not conform to the provisions of this article that was legal at the time of its erection.     Parcel means a separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records.     Portable signs means a mobile/temporary electric or non-electric sign that is mounted on a trailer or trailer-type frame with wheels or skids or a portable wood or metal frame and is not permanently attached to the ground or to any building or other structure. The definition of portable sign does not include messages painted directly upon or attached by sticker or magnetic backing to a motor vehicle or placed within a motor vehicle such that it may be viewed from outside the vehicle through windows.     Roof sign means a sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building that extends above the immediately adjacent roofline of the building.     Shopping center means a commercial area apart from the central business district consisting of two or more businesses in one or more buildings in any linear or other arrangement and providing not less than 75 off-street parking spaces.     Sign means a device or representation for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others.     Streamers means a sign consisting of narrow strips of plastic, cloth, or similar material used to direct attention to a building, sign, or physical location on a temporary or permanent basis.     Strip center means a commercial area apart from the central business district consisting of two or more businesses in one or more buildings in any linear or other arrangement and providing at least 25 off-street parking spaces.     Temporary sign means a sign of a nonpermanent nature.     Wall sign means a sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, and may be located on multiple walls provided each sign faces a street or parking lot.     Window sign means a sign installed flush with or on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside, and cannot exceed 30 percent of the available window space. Window signs shall not count towards the maximum aggregate sign area. (Code 1986, § 5-172; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-2. - Purpose and findings.     Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and detriment to property values and the city's overall public welfare as an aesthetic nuisance. By enacting this article, the city council intends to: (1)  Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; (2)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare; (3)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; (4)  Maintain the historical image of the city; (5)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; (6)  Promote economic development; and (7)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. (Code 1986, § 5-171; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-3. - Exemptions. (a)  Signs erected by a public officer in the performance of his duties, including, but not limited to, public notices, safety signs, danger signs, traffic and street signs, memorial plaques, and historical markers, shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. (b)  The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of section 74-49 and shall not count towards the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in subsection 74-85(g): (1)  Non-illuminated, temporary freestanding signs (excluding banners which are regulated in accordance with section 74-81. For R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-3a zoning districts there will be no limitation). For C-1, C-2, C-3, I-N, N-S, I, and A-G zoning districts each lot will be allowed not more than two signs up to four square feet. In addition, each sign shall not be greater than three feet above ground level. These signs shall not be located within the public street right-of-way and shall be no closer than ten feet to the back of curb of a public roadway. (2)  Numerals displayed for the purpose of identifying the property. (3)  Seasonal displays located outside of the public right-of-way that are erected for a maximum period of 30 days, no more than twice a year. (4)  Political signs. (5)  Real estate signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the land or building upon which such sign is located. (6)  Signs located on the premises in conjunction with active construction or property improvement projects. (7)  Memorial signs or tablets, including names of buildings and dates of erection of buildings cut into masonry, bronze, or similar materials. (c)  Every parcel may display no more than two flags that shall not count toward the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in subsection 74-85(g) without obtaining a permit. Flagpoles in residential zoned districts, shall not exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure, whichever is less. Flagpoles in commercial or industrial zoned districts shall not exceed 60 feet in height or the height of the primary structure whichever is less. The dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height such that the hoist side of the flag shall not exceed 50 percent of the vertical height. (Code 1986, § 5-188; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-4. - Prohibited signs.     The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: (1)  Roof signs. (2)  Animated signs. (3)  Signs on public rights-of-way other than publicly owned or maintained signs. (4)  Window signs which exceed 30 percent of the window area. (5)  Signs that contain words, pictures, or statements that are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. (6)  Signs that simulate an official traffic control or warning sign or hides from view any traffic or street sign, signal, or public service sign. (7)  Signs that emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing. (8)  Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. (9)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening, or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, post, curve, utility pole, fence, or other structure except as set forth herein. (10)  Streamers. (11)  Portable signs. (Code 1986, § 5-179; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-5. - Enforcement and penalties. (a)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The city may, after due notice, issue a citation to any permittee, or to the person owning such sign if the sign does not require a permit, for any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. Such due notice shall be in writing, shall specify the sign and its location, and shall state that the sign has not been properly maintained. The city shall give permittee ten days to rectify the condition of the sign or to remove the dilapidated sign before issuing a citation for violation of this article. (b)  Any lawfully existing sign which is not maintained, which has been abandoned for 180 calendar days or longer, or which no longer advertises a bona fide business or product, shall be taken down or removed by the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the building, structure, or land upon which such sign is located. The removal of such sign shall be undertaken and completed within 30 calendar days after written notification from the city building inspector is forwarded to the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the use of the building, structure, or land upon which such sign is located requesting removal of such sign. The failure to remove such sign within such time period shall be a violation of this article and shall subject the offender to punishment for violation thereof as provided in section 1-8 of the City Code. (c)  The city may issue a citation to any person who violates any provision of this article and, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, the municipal court shall be authorized to punish such offender as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (Code 1986, § 5-189.1; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-10-06-20, 6-24-2010) 
Secs. 74-6—74-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 74-29. - Nonconforming signs. (a)  Nonconforming signs, which met all legal requirements when erected, may stay in place, provided that within 120 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the owner of the nonconforming sign, or his designee, registers the sign with the city. Such registration shall contain the information listed in section 74-50 and shall specify the sign being registered as nonconforming and shall state that the sign was completely installed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The payment of a fee is not required for the registration of a nonconforming sign. Nonconforming signs shall be permitted until one of the following conditions occur: (1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or unsightly; (2)  The sign has been damaged by circumstances beyond the control of the owner to the extent that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign; or (3)  The 120 days has expired from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived without the sign being registered. (b)  No structural repairs or change in shape, size or design shall be permitted except to make a nonconforming sign comply with all requirements of this article. (c)  A nonconforming sign, may not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except where changed conditions beyond the control of the owner, render the sign nonconforming or warrant the sign's repair. (Code 1986, § 5-186; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-30. - Variances.     Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. A variance from compliance with the sign regulations of this article shall be limited to the following hardship situations: (1)  Standards. a.  Where the proximity of existing signs on adjoining lots causes the subject property to be ineligible due to spacing requirements, for a sign of the type sought; or b.  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the public street and within 50 feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, buildings, or structures on a different lot; and c.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction and such visibility obstruction, was not created by the owner of the subject property, and the variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to traffic. (2)  Applications. Variance applications shall be submitted to the board and shall be heard under the same rules governing appeals.     Administrative variances. The planning and inspection director shall be able to authorize a variance for minimal or minor variations from the requirements of the sign ordinance including, but not limited to, maximum height, maximum size in square feet, minimum ground clearance, or any distance or setback requirement where the minimal variation does not vary 25 percent. The planning and inspection director shall use the same criteria as the board of appeals in subsection 94-88(3). (Code 1986, § 5-187; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Secs. 74-31—74-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 
Sec. 74-49. - Required. (a)  Existing signs must be permitted and registered with the city within 120 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The information provided for registration will be the same information required in a permit application under section 74-50. No permit fee will be required for the registration of existing signs. (b)  Work on illegal signs. No person shall erect or assist in the erection, construction, maintenance, alteration, relocation, repair or painting of, or do any work upon any sign for which a permit has not been obtained. Any such sign shall be illegal and the director of planning and inspection shall order the owner to remove the sign immediately. If the owner fails to remove the sign within 30 days, the director of planning and inspection shall proceed in accordance with this article. (c)  Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required by this article are subject to inspection by the director of planning and engineering, chief building inspector, or their designees. (d)  Revocation. The director of planning and inspection is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by him upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days after notification in writing. (e)  Where the sign construction requires an electrical connection, the electrical contractor shall obtain an electrical permit. (Code 1986, § 5-173; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-50. - Application and content.     Applications for sign permits required by this chapter shall be submitted for approval by the sign contractor or the sign installer with the building risk management office of the city. Notwithstanding the identity of the sign permit applicant, the owner or lessee of the property where the sign is installed shall be responsible for ensuring that the sign is installed in accord with the provisions of the sign permit and this chapter. The application shall describe and set forth the following: (1)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and a plat map of the property that bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign. (2)  The aggregate area for all signs on the parcel. (3)  The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. (4)  Consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign. (5)  Name, address, phone number, and business license number of the sign contractor. (6)  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected, including a drawing depicting the design and size of the sign. (7)  The approximate distance of the sign from the closest adjacent sign in either direction. (8)  A drawing of the proposed sign showing dimensions and construction specifications. There may be circumstances such that in order to protect public health, safety and welfare the drawing must be prepared and signed by an architect or engineer licensed by the State of Georgia. This will be determined by the director of planning and inspection. (Code 1986, § 5-174; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-51. - Processing procedure.     The city shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the city's actual receipt of a completed application and a sign permit fee. The building risk management office shall notify the applicant of the decision of the city by hand delivery or by mailing a notice to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the completed application. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the city fails to act within the 30-day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. (Code 1986, § 5-175; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-52. - Denial and revocation. (a)  Procedure. The city shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, incomplete applications, and applications containing any false material statements. Violation of any provision of this chapter will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the building risk management office shall revoke the permit. Should the city deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, or via hand delivery to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and the applicant is granted a public hearing before the board. The applicant will be given ten days' written notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the denial of the permit application, or the revocation of a permit. The term "due cause" means the violation of the provisions of this chapter, state or federal law related to signage, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. (b)  Appeal; final decision by city council. An individual whose permit application has been denied, or a permittee whose permit has been revoked, may appeal the decision to the board to the city council, provided that they file written notice of an appeal with the city clerk within ten business days of the decision. Such appeal shall be considered by the city council at the next city council meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that notice of appeal is received a minimum of two full business days before the meeting. If the appeal is not heard at such meeting, it shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the city council thereafter. The city council shall make a final decision no later than 30 days from the date of the hearing. An applicant denied a permit by final decision of the city council shall have a right to appeal the decision of the council to the superior court. (c)  Petition for writ of certiorari by denied applicant. In the event that an individual whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council, he or she may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. (Code 1986, § 5-176; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-53. - Expiration.     A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed within six months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. (Code 1986, § 5-177; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-54. - Fees.     The cost of a permit shall be as established by ordinance. (Code 1986, § 5-178; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Secs. 74-55—74-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 74-81. - Banners and moving signs. (a)  Banners shall be limited to 32 square feet; only one banner per property or road frontage; and only permitted in C-1, C-2, C-3, I-N, I, A-G, and N-S zoning classifications, and it must be mounted or attached to a building or attached to a pole, mast, arm or other structure. Banners may only be exhibited six times each calendar year for a period of not more than 14 consecutive days during each period. Banners shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be maintained free of defects such as holes, tears, fading, cracks, breaks or missing portions. Upon written notice of any such defects the banner must be repaired or removed. (b)  Flag-type banners shall be limited to 32 square feet; only two flag-type banners per property or road frontage; and only permitted in C-1, C-2, C-3, I-N, I, A-G, and N-S zoning classifications, and it must be mounted or attached to a pole, mast or arm. Banners may only be exhibited six times each calendar year for a period of not more than 14 consecutive days during each period. Banners shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be maintained free of defects such as holes, tears, fading, cracks, breaks or missing portions. Upon written notice of any such defects the banner must be repaired or removed. (c)  Moving signs, or signs with moving parts, shall be limited to 20 feet in height from the ground and 75 square feet of area and must be placed no closer than 20 feet from the back of curb. Air- or gas-filled devices may only be exhibited six times each calendar year for a period of not more than 14 consecutive days during each period. Air- or gas-filled devices shall be maintained free of defects such as holes, tears, fading, cracks, breaks or missing portions. Upon written notice of any such defects the air- or gas-filled devices must be repaired or removed. (d)  Permits are required for moving signs. Written application shall be made to the building official. The building official shall establish an application form and the permit fees. (Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-82. - Restrictions in residential zoning districts.     Following are the restrictions in residential zoning districts: (1)  Other than subdivision entrance signs allowed under section 74-83, parcels located in residential zoning districts, as defined by the city's zoning code as now or hereafter amended, shall not have an aggregate sign area greater than four square feet; and (2)  Signs indicating the name of an institution, church, or other place of worship or civic association, noncommercial clubs, lodges, and social and recreational centers, shall not have an aggregate sign greater than 20 square feet; and (3)  Signs having a height of greater than five feet above the grade level of the adjacent street to which the parcel on which the sign is located shall not be located in residential zoning districts. (Code 1986, § 5-180; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-83. - Residential subdivision entrance signs.     Platted residential subdivisions consisting of more than two parcels, including subdivisions which contain both single-family and multifamily residences, may erect one monument sign at each entrance to the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed a height of five feet above the grade level of the adjacent street and shall not have a sign area greater than 25 square feet. Such entrance signs shall not count toward the maximum allowable signage on a residential parcel. (Code 1986, § 5-181; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-84. - Height requirements.     The following height requirements shall be applicable to signs located in nonresidential zoning districts: (1)  No sign shall exceed 25 feet in height at the highest point on the sign. (2)  Monument signs shall not exceed six feet in height. (3)  Hanging/shingle-type signs shall have no portion of the sign, which is less than seven feet eight inches above the sidewalk surface below. (4)  No sign, sign structure, or advertising device shall be located closer than two feet from the outside edge of a sidewalk. Where no sidewalk exists, a seven-foot setback from the street or curb will be required, except in the C-3 downtown general business district. All other utility restrictions shall apply. (Code 1986, § 5-182; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-06-06-19, 6-22-2006) 
Sec. 74-85. - General size and location requirements. (a)  Freestanding signs. No freestanding sign may be located within 30 feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended. (b)  Consent of owner required. No sign shall be located on any building, fence, or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this article. (c)  Billboard signs. (1)  Billboard signs shall not exceed 240 square feet of sign area. Billboard sign faces shall not exceed 12 feet in height or 24 feet in length. Billboard signs may not exceed 35 feet in total height. (2)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels in commercial or industrial zoning areas. (3)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels adjacent to designated state or federal highways. (4)  No billboard signs shall be located within 3,000 feet of another billboard sign. (5)  No billboard sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of residential zoned parcels. (6)  No billboard sign shall be located within 1,000 feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however that such sign may be located within 1,000 feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery when the sign is separated by buildings or other obstructions so that the sign located within the 1,000-foot zone is not visible from the public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area or cemetery. (d)  Freestanding signs. (1)  One double-faced sign per lot. Maximum square footage for each sign face shall be 1-½ square feet for each linear foot of building frontage facing the public right-of-way, provided that no sign face may exceed 70 square feet. Maximum height for each sign structure shall be 25 feet. (2)  In shopping centers, one freestanding sign having a maximum area of 1-½ square feet for each linear foot of building frontage for the identification of a shopping center and the businesses therein shall be permitted. The maximum allowed signage for any shopping center (to identify the shopping center and businesses therein) shall be 300 square feet in area. Such a sign shall not exceed 25 feet in height from the ground level. Where a shopping center is located on a corner lot and where vehicle entrances are provided on two streets, the 300 square foot maximum may be divided between two signs, provided that the combined square footage of both signs does not exceed 300 square feet. (3)  In strip centers, one freestanding sign having a maximum area of 1-½ square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage for the identification of the strip center and the businesses therein shall be permitted. The maximum signage allowed for any strip center sign shall be 100 square feet in area. Such a sign shall not exceed 25 feet in height from the ground level. A portion of the allowed signage area may be utilized for a marquee-type sign. Where a strip center is located on a corner lot and where vehicle entrances are provided on two streets, the 100 square foot maximum may be divided between two signs, provided that the combined square footage of both signs does not exceed 100 square feet. (4)  Freestanding signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas. (e)  Monument signs. Monument signs shall not exceed 60 square feet of total area, which shall include signage and structure. (f)  Wall and awning signs. (1)  Wall and awning signs shall not project above the parapet wall. (2)  Wall signs shall not project beyond the building face. Awning signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than four feet. (3)  Wall and awning signs are allowed at the rate of one square foot per linear foot of wall building frontage. (4)  Wall signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoned areas. (Code 1986, § 5-183; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-86. - Historic district signage. (a)  In addition to the general requirements herein and any other requirements contained herein, which may be applicable to signs located with the city's designated historic district, all signage in the city's designated historic district shall meet the following minimum requirements: (1)  Any sign attached to or painted upon any portion of a building in the national register of the city's historic district shall not cover, destroy, or otherwise alter the historic fabric or architectural features of the structure. (2)  Signs which have no historical basis or which create an appearance not in conformity with the city's historic district shall be prohibited. (3)  Signs shall be placed in the traditional signboard area, painted on windows, painted or sewn on awnings and/or on hanging or perpendicular signs, provided they comply with all other ordinances of the city which are or may be applicable thereto. (4)  Contemporary design of signs on existing or new structures shall not be discouraged when such signs do not destroy significant historical, architectural, or cultural material and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property, neighborhood, or environment where such signs are located. (5)  Historical markers or plaques may be placed on any historical building or site, provided the size and location are in compliance with all other requirements of this chapter. (6)  Any illumination or illumination device in or directed onto signs shall be installed and maintained so as not to detract from the historic district or any part thereof. (7)  No mobile signs are permitted in the city's designated historic district. (8)  There shall be no requirement that temporary signs, as defined in this chapter, must be submitted to the historic preservation commission for approval or disapproval. (b)  Applications for sign permits where the proposed sign is to be located in the historic district shall first be reviewed by the building official, and the application shall then be submitted to the historic preservation commission as an application for a certificate of appropriateness, which shall approve or disapprove such application under the same ordinances and rules as any other certificate of appropriateness is considered. (Code 1986, § 5-184; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-87. - Construction standards. (a)  All signs for which a permit is required under this chapter shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the city building code. (b)  Signs for which a permit is not required under this chapter that are constructed of degradable material may be posted for a maximum of 60 days unless replaced with another sign of the same material. Any such replacement signs may be posted for a maximum of 60 days. (Code 1986, § 5-185; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-88. - Illumination. (a)  Signs cannot be illuminated in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-3A zoning districts. Signs may be illuminated in all other districts, subject to the following provisions. (b)  Flashing or blinking illumination is not permitted. Except as expressly provided in this article, no sign may use images changing more frequently than once per minute; except as otherwise provided, no sign may display pictures changing more frequently than once per minute. No external or internal illumination that causes confusion with or distraction from any traffic signal or safety device shall be permitted. (c)  All externally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries, mounted in fixtures designed to direct the light and eliminate light trespass, such as light shining into residences or other neighboring structures. (d)  All internally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries designed to reduce light glow. (e)  All illuminated signs over ten feet in height shall be internally illuminated or illuminated by external lighting fixtures located above the sign area, firing downward, and not visible to passing motorists. (f)  No sign shall give off light, which glares, blinds, or has any other adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. This shall be determined by measuring the footcandles (lumens per square foot) that fall on adjacent properties. No sign shall exceed one-half (0.5) footcandles at any adjacent property line in a residential district and two footcandles at any public right-of-way. (Code 1986, § 5-189; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-89. - Multiple-message signs. (a)  Multiple-message signs are those which change the message or copy on the sign face mechanically or electronically by movement or rotation of panels or slates, or by changing electronic display on the sign face. Except as expressly provided in this article for multiple-message billboards, such signs are not permitted in the C-3, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-3A zoning districts and the historic district, but are permitted in all other zoning districts. (b)  No multiple-message sign may change its message or copy, or any pictures or images that are part of the message, more frequently than once every minute, provided that multiple-message billboards shall be allowed to change the copy or images that are part of the message not more frequently than once every ten seconds. (c)  When the message of a multiple-message sign is changed mechanically, it shall be accomplished in three seconds or less. When the message of a multiple-message sign is changed in an electronic manner, through the use of light emitting diodes, back lighting or other light source, the transition shall occur within two seconds. (d)  Except as expressly provided in this article in regards to billboards, the portion of the sign face of a multiple-message sign which accommodates multiple-messages shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign face area and may not change its message or copy, or any pictures or images that are part of the message, more frequently than once every minute; the remaining portion shall be static. (e)  When any multiple-message sign is located within 250 feet of any residential district, the display of multiple-messages shall discontinue between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.. and the sign shall be static and not display more than one message during that period. (f)  Multiple-message signs which are illuminated or which use electronic lighting to display message shall be subject to the restrictions and limitation applicable to illumination in this article. (g)  There shall be located no more than one multiple-message sign per lot, and such sign shall be permitted only on a ground sign or freestanding structure, and not on any wall sign or window sign. (h)  The total number of multiple-message billboards within the city shall be limited to eight sign faces. After the adoption of this article, new multiple message billboards shall only be permitted when both of the following location requirements are met: (1)  The proposed multiple-message billboard is to be erected on an existing billboard sign structure as of the date of the adoption of this article or at the location of and as a replacement for such an existing billboard sign structures. A list of such existing billboard sign structures known to the city is attached [by reference] as exhibit A to the ordinance adopting this article, and identified as "Billboards existing in the City of Americus, Georgia, as of July, 2015;" and (2)  The proposed multiple-message billboard will be located facing one of the following designated public right-of-way, which are deemed by the city council to be the only rights-of-way within the city where multiple-message billboards are appropriate. (i)  Multiple-message billboards constructed after the adoption of this article shall be located at least 5,000 feet from existing billboards using a multiple-message sign face, measured from the base of the billboard along the street frontage to the base of the nearest existing billboard using a multiple-message sign face on the same side of the street, and 3,000 feet from any existing billboard using a multiple-message sign face, measured along the shortest straight-line from sign structure to sign structure. (j)  No multiple-message sign shall be permitted in any historic district of the city. (Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Secs. 74-90—74-110. - Reserved. 
Chapter 78 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Owners with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 78-1. - Encroachments. (a)  No person, except by permission of the city council, shall make any encroachment upon, under or over any street, sidewalk or alley; nor, without such permission, place or erect any box, fence, railing, platform, steps, portico or shed, awning or other structure in, upon, over or under any street, sidewalk or alley in the city. Whenever such permission is granted, it shall give no right to interest in the land occupied or used, and the permission may be revoked at any time. In addition to the punishment prescribed in section 1-8, any person violating this section shall, upon notice, remove such encroachment, and, upon failure so to do, the city council may cause the same to be removed at the expense of the person so offending, and execution shall issue for the amount so expended. (b)  A restaurant, as defined in section 6-1, which is located in the city business improvement district, as established pursuant to chapter 22, article II of this Code, shall be authorized to place restaurant dining facilities, principally including tables and chairs, on the city sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to the restaurant's place of business for the purpose of serving restaurant patrons on the sidewalk in front of such business, provided that the following requirements are met by the restaurant: (1)  A clearance not less than 48 inches be maintained between the edge of the sidewalk where it abuts the street and the restaurant furniture located on the sidewalk so as not to obstruct the movement of pedestrian traffic along the sidewalk. (2)  The furnishings located on the sidewalk must be maintained in a safe manner and be constructed of heavy duty material so as not to be easily moved and must be in keeping with the general appearance of the downtown area. (3)  The number of persons to be served at such outside dining facilities shall in no event exceed the number of chairs available for such persons to be seated at such outside dining facilities. (4)  The restaurant owner shall be responsible for maintaining the area on and around the serving tables in a clean manner and shall also be responsible under the littering laws of the state and city littering ordinances for maintaining such area in a litter-free and clean condition at all times. (5)  All necessary approvals of such arrangement are obtained from the county board of health or such other governmental entities as may be required to approve such arrangements. Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 6, article I or section 6-5 regarding open containers, any restaurant which complies with the terms of this section and locates serving tables on the sidewalk in front of such restaurant shall be authorized to serve alcoholic beverages at such outside tables which the restaurant is otherwise authorized to serve inside the restaurant building in accord with appropriate alcoholic beverage license or licenses issued by the city. (Code 1962, § 20-8; Code 1986, § 18-5; Ord. No. O-95-05-15, 5-18-1995; Ord. No. O-06-98-26, 8-24-2006) 
Sec. 78-2. - Lighting of obstructions and excavations at night.     No person shall leave rubbish, lumber, brick, barrels, mortar, or other building materials of any kind whatever on the open streets or sidewalks at night in quantities large enough to prevent persons or vehicles from going over with safety that part of the street or sidewalk, nor shall any person make and leave open any excavation on such street and sidewalks, without placing a sufficient number of red lights to warn travelers of the same between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (Code 1962, § 20-9; Code 1986, § 18-6) 
Sec. 78-3. - Erection of poles, wires, etc.—Permission required.     No person shall have the right or authority to place poles or wires in or on the streets, sidewalks or other public property of the city without permission of the city council. (Code 1962, § 20-3; Code 1986, § 18-7) 
Sec. 78-4. - Same—Authority of building official. (a)  The building official shall be the inspector of all wires on or in the streets, sidewalks and other public property of the city and shall direct any person to repair or remove, lower or elevate, any wires that such inspector may consider unsightly, or dangerous to life or property. (b)  All electric wires shall be properly insulated and kept at a regulation distance, all wires or cables to have a clearance of 25 feet. (Code 1962, § 20-4; Code 1986, § 18-8) 
Sec. 78-5. - Parades, marches and processions. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Parade, march, or procession means a group or number of people or vehicles, or the combination thereof, consisting of five or more vehicles or 20 or more persons, or a combination of three or more vehicles and 15 or more persons, proceeding or moving in a body or in concert along the streets or sidewalks of the city. The term "parade" shall include picketing conducted on sidewalks. (b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to be a part of or to engage in any parade, march, or procession or to march, parade, or proceed along any street or sidewalk in the city as a part of or a party to such parade, march, or procession without there having been first obtained a written permit from the chief of police for the holding of such parade, march, or procession. (c)  Application filing. Permits shall be secured from the chief of police by filing a written application therefor at least 48 hours prior to the time the proposed parade, march, or procession is desired to be held. Applications shall be filed on forms provided by the city and signed by the persons desiring to conduct such parade, march, or procession, or by the properly authorized agent of the organization, or persons who propose to conduct such parade, march, or procession. The application forms shall be filled out completely, giving all legal information as designated in such forms. (d)  Issuance of permit; conditions. The issuance of the permit by the chief of police shall show the time and place for beginning the parade, march or procession, the route it shall follow, and the destination thereof, all of which conditions shall be decided by the chief of police giving full consideration to the conditions contained in the request of the applicant, the condition and width of the streets or sidewalks along said proposed route, and the nature of traffic conditions as related to the number of participants and the number and type vehicles to participate in the parade, march, or procession as shown on the application for such permit. (e)  Considerations for issuance. The chief of police shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: (1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; (2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection; (3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the village other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; (4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; (5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to fire; (6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; (7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; (8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product or goods and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. (f)  Police vehicle to precede parades, marches and processions. All parades, marches, or processions through the streets of the city shall be preceded by a police vehicle and conducted in such manner as to impede and interfere with the flow of traffic to the least possible extent. (g)  Funeral processions excepted. The terms of this section shall not apply to funeral processions. (Code 1962, § 15-27.01; Code 1986, § 20-13) 
Secs. 78-6—78-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING NUMBERS 
Sec. 78-29. - Required.     Every person owning property within the city is required to place a number on either the building, mailbox, or curb, or any combination thereof, which is visible from the fronting street on which the house, dwelling, store, or other building designed for occupancy is located. Such number shall be the number assigned by the city pursuant to section 78-30. All numbers and letters identifying such property as required herein shall be at least three inches in height. (Code 1962, § 20-16; Code 1986, § 18-1; Ord. No. O-97-11-34, § 1, 11-20-1997) 
Sec. 78-30. - Assigned by building official.     It shall be the responsibility of the building official of the city to assign numbers to buildings within the city. (Code 1962, § 20-17; Code 1986, § 18-2; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992; Ord. No. O-97-11-34, § 2, 11-20-1997) 
Sec. 78-31. - Violation and enforcement.     Any person who fails or refuses to place a number for any building in the city as may be required by this chapter shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished as provided in section 1-8. The code enforcement officer shall be authorized to issue citations and summons in connection with the violation of section 78-29. (Code 1962, § 20-18; Code 1986, § 18-3; Ord. No. O-97-11-34, § 3, 11-20-1997; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 78-32. - Action by city.     Should any person fail or refuse to number buildings as hereinbefore set forth, the building official shall have authority to place said number upon the building at the expense of the property owner; and the finance director is hereby directed to issue execution against the property for the payment of the cost of such number and the expense of placing the same on said building, which execution shall be issued under the same terms as tax executions are now issued by the city. (Code 1962, § 20-19; Code 1986, § 18-4; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Secs. 78-33—78-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS FOR SPECIAL ACTIVITIES 
Sec. 78-53. - Required. (a)  This policy statement of special activities covers all special activities and the commercial filming of locations and events in the city. Any organization wishing to sponsor or hold a special activity in the city will be required to complete the city's special activity permit application and obtain approval of such special activity as provided in this article. (b)  As required by this article a special activity within the city that will be conducted on the streets, in the parks, or in other public areas must be approved by the city manager of the city. Applications to conduct a special activity must be made in writing to the office of the city manager. Applications shall be available from the city clerk's office. Applications shall be submitted to the city clerk's office no later than 45 days prior to the date of the actual event. No special activity shall be permitted within the city unless such special activity is approved by the city manager of the city or the city council under the provisions of this article. (c)  The city may hold its own special activities, or it may contract with one or more organizations to perform special activity services, or it may jointly sponsor a special activity with one or more organizations. In such cases, the participating organization shall submit a special activity permit application that shall include a presentation of the city's financial participation and the financial participation of the related organizations. (d)  The city manager will undertake a complete review of any special activity application, including consultation with the applicant as may be reasonably necessary to resolve problems, at no charge to event sponsors. (e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to alter, affect or repeal the provisions of this Code that require parade permits to be issued by the chief of police under the appropriate ordinances applicable thereto. (Code 1986, § 16-10; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-54. - Basis for city services.     The city will provide support to special activities on the following basis: (1)  City-operated activities. The city will operate certain special activities directly. The full cost of these special activities will be funded by the city. (2)  Co-sponsored activities. The city will co-sponsor certain activities with other organizations when the city manager determines that the activity is of general interest to the public and advances the city's public image. The city will provide financial support to these activities as determined in the annual budget appropriation. These activities must meet the requirements of the special activities policy and any city costs in excess of the support level authorized by the budget appropriation, must be reimbursed to the city by the city's co-sponsor. (3)  Other nonprofit activities. The city will provide one person, if necessary, to assist other special activities operated by nonprofit organizations. These activities must meet the other requirements of the special activities permit policy and must reimburse the city for any city costs in excess of this support level. (4)  Other for-profit activities. The city will allow other special activities operated by for-profit sponsors that are beneficial to the city and the public, subject to a rent charge for the use of the public property that is approved for each activity. These activities must meet the other requirements of the special activity permit policy and the sponsor must reimburse the city for any city costs in addition to the payment of established rent charges. (Code 1986, § 16-11; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-55. - Fees.     Fees shall be charged for city services provided to special activities as follows: (1)  Straight time shall be the hourly cost for any employee working on a special activity during the normal work day including the actual cost for fringe benefits. (2)  Overtime shall be the hourly cost for any employee working on a special activity during a time period that would be considered overtime for city payroll records, including the actual cost for fringe benefits. (3)  Purchased or rented materials shall include all direct costs for all materials purchased or rented by the city for use at the activity. (4)  Equipment charges shall be the current equipment rental rates charged by the city. In addition thereto, for any authorized special activity held in the Rylander parking lot or any special activity held at the gazebo at Rees Park where the applicant will utilize electricity, there shall be a charge of $25.00 per day. Such charge shall not be subject to waiver, and in the event that it is determined that the applicant utilized city electrical services without advising the city of its intent to do so in the application for a special activity permit, then the applicant shall pay the sum of $100.00 per day for the use of such electricity. (5)  An application fee in the amount established by ordinance is to be paid at the time of application unless the application seeks a waiver of such fee. If a waiver of such fee is sought, such waiver must be approved by the city manager at the time the application is approved. If no waiver is approved, the fee must be paid before any permit is issued for the special activity. In order to receive a waiver of such fee, the applicant must provide written proof to the city manager that the applicant is a then-current nonprofit corporation exempt from the payment of income taxes in accord with 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3). The application fee is intended to cover the city's expenses related to approval of the permit application and related expenses. (Code 1986, § 16-12; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-08-10-33, 10-23-2008; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-56. - Billing for special activities.     Special activity billings by the city shall be itemized as follows: Cost for services:  DPW employee straight time/overtime $ ____________  Police employee straight time/overtime $ ____________  Fire employee straight time/overtime $ ____________  Other employee straight time/overtime $ ____________ Equipment charges: $ ____________  Electricity charges (Rylander parking lot or the gazebo at Rees Park only) $ ____________  Purchased materials $ ____________  Rented materials $ ____________ Subtotal: $ ____________  Plus for-profit rent, if applicable $ ____________  Less amount of city support ($ ____________ ) Net total billing: $ ____________  (Code 1986, § 16-13; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-08-10-33, 10-23-2008) 
Sec. 78-57. - Rental charges for private for-profit activities.     Special activities that are exclusively sponsored by private for-profit organizations shall be charged a reasonable rent for use of public areas, such as parks or streets, in addition to the special activity fees provided herein. The rent shall be set by the city manager of the city as part of the special activity application process. (Code 1986, § 16-14; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-58. - Civic organizations and merchants' participation encouraged.     It is the desire of the city council that local nonprofit organizations and local merchants in the vicinity of the special activity being held are given the opportunity to participate in the special activity to the greatest extent practical, consistent with the nature and purpose of the special activity. (Code 1986, § 16-15; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000) 
Sec. 78-59. - Video or film production coordination and costs.     Organizations which request any location in the city as a location for a commercial video or film production shall be required to coordinate the production with the office of the city manager. The city manager shall have the authority to grant permission for commercial video or film production in the city and to allow use of the city's facilities for this purpose. All commercial video or film productions shall be required to pay the actual costs of all straight time and overtime for all city employees and equipment. In addition, a rent shall be charged for the use of public areas, such as parks and streets. The rent shall be set by the city manager. (Code 1986, § 16-16; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-60. - Liability insurance requirements. (a)  In order to comply with the city's liability insurance carrier, the city shall require that all sponsors of special activities or commercial video or film crews carry liability insurance with coverage of at least $1,000,000.00, except for class I; low-hazard activities as defined in subsection (c) of this section. Where liability insurance is required, an activity sponsor shall be required to provide a valid certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional or named insured prior to the activity. The city manager may require higher levels of insurance based upon risk factors and past experience. (b)  The special activity review committee shall include the city manager, the city clerk, the finance director, and the community development director. The special activity review committee is intended to provide a review of proposed special activities and a risk control guide for the handling of any increased liability on the part of the city associated with special activities. Special activities are defined as activities which are not directly related to the day-to-day operations of the city, but which may occur on premises owned or controlled by the city. The special activity review committee shall make recommendations to the city manager regarding approval of the special activity, liability insurance requirements, and regarding any additional requirements that the committee deems it appropriate to be placed upon any special activity as a condition of the issuance of a permit for such activity. (c)  It shall be the policy of the city council to not routinely require insurance coverage for activities classified by the special activity review committee as class I; low-hazard. These would be activities that include no physical activity by participants and no substantial exposure to spectators. This waiver of the insurance requirements is meant to cover small gatherings or ceremonies that do not involve more than 50 people, are limited to passive participation by the public, and require no city services. All other activities are required to provide insurance as outlined in this policy. (d)  In making its recommendations to the city manager regarding each special activity permit, the special activity review committee may recommend additional requirements as a condition of permit issuance. Such additional requirements may include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, specific staffing levels for police, fire, public works, or other personnel in connection with the activity. Expenses incurred by the city in compliance with such requirements shall be billed to and paid by the sponsoring organization. Agreement by the sponsoring organization to pay such additional expenses may be made a condition of the issuance of the permit by the city manager. (e)  The special activity review committee will review each special activity permit application received and assess the potential liability risk of the city, based upon the following categories: (1)  Class I; low-hazard activities involve no physical activity by participants and no substantial exposure to spectators. Examples of activities in this category include, but are not limited to, meetings, seminars, social gatherings, theatrical performances, and weddings. (2)  Class II; moderate-hazard activities involve limited physical activity by participants and no substantial exposure to spectators. Activities in this category include, but are not limited to, downtown celebrations, dances, animal shows, political rallies, and picnics. (3)  Class III; high-hazard activities major participation and/or moderate exposure to spectators. Activities in this category include, but are not limited to, marathons or running races and circuses or carnivals. (4)  Class IV; severe-hazard activities involve substantial exposure to participants and/or spectators. Examples of activities in this category include, but are not limited to, rock concerts, vehicle races, and fireworks displays. (f)  The city manager shall consider the recommendations of the special activity review committee in connection with the approval or disapproval of the proposed special activity. The city manager shall be authorized to accept or reject the recommendations of the committee regarding approval of the proposed permit and regarding the placing of additional requirements, including liability insurance requirements, upon the activity as a condition for the issuance of the permit. The city manager shall also be authorized to place such additional restrictions or requirements as part of the permit as the city manager deems appropriate and in the best interest of the city. The city manager shall also be authorized to require a member or members of the special activity review committee to be available to meet with activity organizers to review any special conditions and to ensure that all such special conditions are met before or during the course of the activity. Some special activities may require that a member of the special activity review committee be on site during the course of the special activity. (Code 1986, § 16-17; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-61. - Traffic control and safety requirements.     The sponsor of the special activity shall be responsible for complying with all traffic control and safety procedures required by the city during the activity. The requirements will be indicated in the notice of approval, and additional requirements may be made by the city during the activity as may be necessary for the safety of the public. (Code 1986, § 16-18; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000) 
Sec. 78-62. - Participant waiver of liability.     The sponsor of the special activity shall be responsible for obtaining all signed indemnification agreements as required by the city. A sample of the basic agreement will be included in the application. (Code 1986, § 16-19; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000) 
Sec. 78-63. - Food vendor insurance and license required.     An activity that includes the serving of food must have all food vendors approved by the county health department. All food vendors must supply a valid certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured prior to opening of the food stand. All food vendors must post a valid temporary food license as authorized by the county health department. Food vendors are responsible for any and all fees related to obtaining a food license. (Code 1986, § 16-20; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000) 
Sec. 78-64. - Multiple applications for the same activity date.     In the event that two or more special activity permit applications are received for the same date and time prior to the approval of either activity, the date and time that each application was received by the city shall determine the order of preference. Once a special activity permit has been granted, it shall be the policy of the city council to not award further permits for the same date, time, and general location. (Code 1986, § 16-21; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000) 
Sec. 78-65. - Reservation of annual activity dates.     If an activity is intended to be an annual activity at regularly scheduled dates, the current year's application may include the following year's requested dates. Approval of the current year's application will include reservation of the next year's proposed dates. However, it will not constitute approval of next year's permit, which must have its own timely application submitted for city approval. In general, the city will not approve special activity permit dates more than one year in advance. (Code 1986, § 16-22; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000) 
Sec. 78-66. - Confirmation of city approval.     Upon approval of the special activity permit application, a written or oral confirmation as to the decision of the city manager will be forwarded by the city clerk to the individual or organization requesting the special activity permit. If there are any special conditions that must be met as a condition of the issuance of the permit, the confirmation must be in writing. The city special activity permit application form must be completed for all special activities that take place on public land or lands that are controlled by the city. (Code 1986, § 16-23; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-67. - Appeal of denial of special activity permit application.     In the event that the city manager denies an application for a special activity permit, the applicant shall be authorized to appeal such denial to the city council. Such appeal must be in writing and filed with the city clerk no later than ten calendar days from the date of the written notice to the applicant that such special activity permit was denied. Upon such appeal, the appeal shall be considered at the next regular monthly meeting of the city council. The city council shall, either uphold the city manager's decision, modify the city manager's decision, or overrule the city manager's decision. The city manager's decision shall only be overruled if the city council finds that there is no evidence to support such decision or that the city manager abused his discretion in denying of the application. Upon final decision of the city council regarding the appeal, there shall be no further appeals thereof. (Code 1986, § 16-24; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 78-68—78-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS AND TUNNELS 
Sec. 78-93. - Permit—Required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to tunnel under or to make any excavation in any street, alley or sidewalk or other public place in the city without having obtained a permit as herein required, or without complying with the provisions of this section or in violation of or variance from any term of such permit. No permit is required on state highways. (Code 1962, § 20-24(a); Code 1986, § 18-20) 
Sec. 78-94. - Same—Application.     An application for such permit shall be made to the utilities director, and shall describe the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person doing the actual work and the name of the person for whom or which the work is being done, the date that the area will be fully restored to its original condition prior to any excavation or tunneling being done, and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done. (Code 1962, § 20-24(b); Code 1986, § 18-21) 
Sec. 78-95. - Supervision.     The utilities director shall, from time to time, inspect or cause to be inspected, all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the city to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this article. Notice shall be given to the city at least ten hours before the work of refilling any such tunnel or excavation commences. (Code 1962, § 20-24(i); Code 1986, § 18-25; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Sec. 78-96. - Manner of performing the work.     It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining areas around; and in excavations, the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface, any portion which extends beyond the opening at the surface. No damage shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making of such excavation or tunnel; and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the city department or officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel before such pipes, cables or conduits are disturbed. No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or the roots thereof. (Code 1962, § 20-24(f); Code 1986, § 18-26) 
Sec. 78-97. - Restoring surface.     Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the city shall restore the surface to its original condition if there was no pavement there. Refills shall be properly tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation shall be left in the ground. Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be repaired and the surface relaid by the applicant by the date set out in the application that the excavation will be fully restored, in compliance with the ordinances of the city and under the supervision of the utilities director. (Code 1962, § 20-24(h); Code 1986, § 18-27; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Sec. 78-98. - Temporary sidewalks.     If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and the convenience for users. (Code 1962, § 20-24(g); Code 1986, § 18-28) 
Secs. 78-99—78-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS 
Sec. 78-125. - Shubbery, obstructions for drivers.     Any person who plants, permits or maintains any shrubbery, or any other object upon any parkway or private property within the city adjacent to the intersection of any streets in the city, which obstructs the driving vision of the operator of any vehicle is hereby declared to be guilty of committing a nuisance. (Code 1962, § 23-15; Code 1986, § 20-8) 
Sec. 78-126. - Notice to owner of property to remove; duty to comply.     Whenever the chief of police, after investigation, shall determine that any shrubbery or other object upon any parkway or private property, in the city adjacent to a street intersection, obstructs the driving vision of the operators of vehicles passing over or through such street intersection, such officer shall cause to be served upon the owner or occupant of the property abutting such parkway, or the owner of the property upon which such trees, shrubbery or other objects exist in violation of section 78-125, a written notice requiring such owner or occupant to remove such shrubbery or other object, or to trim such shrubbery or reduce the height and width of other objects so as to comply with the provisions of such section. The notice herein provided for shall be served upon the owner or occupant of the property herein described and shall require the owner to comply with the directions contained in the written notice, within 15 days after the service of the notice. Such notice may and can be served by placing a copy thereof at a conspicuous place upon the property abutting the parkway, if the offending plant or object is thereon or upon the private property upon which the offending plant or object may exist. Said notice shall be issued by the city clerk. (Code 1962, § 23-16; Code 1986, § 20-9) 
Sec. 78-127. - Appeal.     The owner of any property affected by the directions of the notice in section 78-126 may, within the time specified in such notice, appeal to the city council and until the city council shall act upon such appeal, an appellant shall not be required to comply with the notice. (Code 1962, § 23-17; Code 1986, § 20-10) 
Sec. 78-128. - Failure of owner to comply with notice; removal or abatement by city.     If after the service of the notice as provided in section 78-126, the owner does not comply with the directions contained in the notice within the time specified, and if the traffic hazard can be removed by the trimming of the shrubbery, and the city shall trim the shrubbery to such dimensions as to terminate such traffic hazard. Should it become necessary in order to terminate such traffic hazard to remove shrubbery or other objects, such removal shall be made by the city. (Code 1962, § 23-18; Code 1986, § 20-11) 
Sec. 78-129. - Exemptions regarding the erection or maintenance of buildings.     Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the owner of any property from erecting or maintaining buildings or structures as permitted by any laws or ordinances of the city. (Code 1962, § 23-19; Code 1986, § 20-12) 
Secs. 78-130—78-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NAMING OF STREETS 
DIVISION 1. - NAMING OF NEW STREETS 
Sec. 78-150. - Title.     This division shall be known as the "naming of new streets" division and may be referred to by that title. (Ord. No. O-07-03-12, § 18-100, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-151. - Authority.     The governing body of the city shall have the sole power and authority to name new streets located within the incorporated limits of the city where such streets are owned by the City of Americus. (Ord. No. O-07-03-12, § 18-101, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-152. - Procedures.     With respect to the naming of a new street owned by the city and located within the corporate limits of the City of Americus, the governing body shall be required to follow the following procedures with respect to the naming of such new street: (1)  By application of a citizen or group of citizens. a.  A citizen or group of city citizens may submit an application to name a new street hereunder. Such application shall be on forms prescribed by the city clerk. Such application shall not be considered unless at least 75 percent of the persons owning real property abutting such new street submit a written application to the city clerk requesting that such street be named a particular name. b.  Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $100.00, which is intended to cover administrative and other costs which are anticipated to be incurred by the city in connection with its consideration of the application. Such application fee shall be deposited into the general fund of the city. c.  The governing body of the city shall consider such application and act thereon in accord with this division no later than 90 calendar days after the date of submission of such application to the city clerk. In the event that the governing body does not act upon the application prior to the expiration of such 90 calendar day period, then the street shall be automatically renamed as requested in the application. d.  Upon receipt of the application by the city clerk, the city clerk shall proceed to validate the application. The city clerk shall validate the application by verifying that the proper number of signatures is contained on the application and that the persons signing the application are owners of real property abutting said street as required by this division. In the event that the city clerk determines that the application is invalid for any reason, or that the application does not contain sufficient signatures, the application shall be returned to the person or persons submitting such application, and it shall not be subject to further consideration by the governing body until such time as a new application is submitted and the city clerk validates the new application. e.  In determining the required percentage of the persons signing such application in connection with the validation thereof, where property abutting such street is owned by more than one person, the signature of only one such owner shall be counted in calculating such 75 percent. In addition, persons who rent or lease real property abutting such street may sign such application, but their signatures shall not be counted toward the 75 percent threshold for submission of the application to the governing body. Signatures on any such application signed more than 90 calendar days prior to the date of submission of the application to the city clerk shall be invalid and shall not be counted toward the 75 percent threshold. In the event that more than one application for naming a new street is presented to the city clerk, the city clerk shall validate such applications in the order received. The first application validated by the city clerk shall be presented to the governing body first, and only if the resolution to approve the application is denied shall the city clerk present the second or subsequent validated application to the governing body. f.  The application shall be in such form as established by the city clerk. At a minimum, the application shall indicate thereon the location of the street, the proposed name of the street, the printed name, street address, and signature of each property owner signing such application, and the date that each property owner signed the application. In addition, each such application shall include therewith a written statement which provides, in succinct detail, the reasons for the proposed street naming in honor of a particular person or business listed in the application. In providing such written statement, the criteria to be considered by the governing body regarding the naming of such street as more particularly established in this division shall be specifically addressed by the application in such written statement accompanying the street naming application. In addition, the application shall also list any public announcement or public recognition request that should accompany any official street naming ceremony undertaken by the city in connection with the naming of such street. g.  In the event that the city clerk determines that the application is valid, then prior to the submission of the application to the governing body, the city clerk shall undertake the following: 1.  Provide notification of the application to and compile for review by the governing body responses to the application from the following: i.  All city agencies and departments, including, but not limited to; city police, city fire and EMS, city GIS system personnel, city building risk management risk department, and other city agencies or departments that the clerk deems appropriate; ii.  All other local, state, or national agencies which the city clerk determines may be affected by the naming of the street; iii.  All schools located in the immediate vicinity of the street; iv.  Any other persons or entities the city clerk deems, in his or her sole discretion, should receive notice of the proposed street naming. 2.  Review existing public records for the purpose of establishing that the proposed street name does not duplicate any existing street name and is not confusingly similar to any existing street name in Americus or Sumter County. h.  Upon the completion of the foregoing, the city clerk shall be required to place consideration of the application on the agenda for the city council meeting occurring in the calendar month after the month in which the application was finally validated. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the tabling of such proposal by the governing body, but in no event shall consideration of such proposal by the city council be delayed beyond 90 calendar days after the validated application was filed with the city clerk. i.  Prior to the governing body considering or voting upon such application, the governing body shall hold a public hearing regarding such application. Notice of such public hearing shall be published once in the city's legal organ no later than the day prior to the date of the public hearing. Such public notice shall advise the public regarding the application, the proposed new street name, and the time and place of the scheduled public hearing before the governing body. Such public hearing shall be conducted with the same formality as that required of public hearings in connection with zoning and rezoning matters before the governing body. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the governing body shall be authorized to vote on the application. j.  In the event that the application is approved by an appropriate resolution of the governing body, the name of the street shall take effect at such time as is determined by the governing body in such resolution. k.  Upon adoption of the resolution by the governing body, the city clerk shall undertake the following: 1.  Provide written notice to each property owner owning property abutting the street of the official name of the street as approved by the governing body; 2.  Provide written notice of the name of the street to the United States Postal Service; 3.  Provide written notice of the name of the street to the emergency 911 system in effect for the geographical area including the City of Americus. l.  Within 60 calendar days of the effective date of the resolution adopting the street name, the city utilities director shall have fabricated and installed appropriate signage regarding the name of the street at such locations as deemed appropriate by the utilities director. (2)  By the professional staff of the city.     The professional staff of the city, or a member of the city council, may submit an application to name a new street. The procedures to be followed by the governing body in the event that such an application is submitted shall be the same procedures as previously outlined in this section, except that no application fee shall be required, and the application shall not require the signatures of 75 percent of the persons owning real property abutting the new street. (Ord. No. O-07-03-12, § 18-102, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-153. - Determination of name. (a)  In making a determination as to the name to be given to a new street, if the street is proposed to be named after a natural person, the governing body shall take into consideration the following: (1)  Whether such person has resided for a long period of time on such street; (2)  Whether such person has made significant and long-lasting contributions to the city and its citizens; (3)  Whether such person is a national or internationally prominent figure who has or may have a direct or indirect connection to the city and its citizens; (4)  Whether such person has provided charitable or philanthropic contributions to the city and its citizens; (5)  Whether such person has brought honor, prestige, or recognition in a positive manner to the city and its citizens; (6)  Whether such person is a leader in local governmental, civic, educational, or public affairs; or (7)  Whether such person is a distinguished and accomplished scholar, scientist, educational leader, business leader, government leader, or civic leader. In order to be considered for having a street named after a person, such person may be either living or deceased at the time of the street naming. With respect to a deceased individual, the application shall not be submitted until at least one year after the date of death of such person. With respect to a living person, such person must have reached the age of 75 years at the time of the submission of the application, unless such age limitation is affirmatively waived by the governing body of the city within 30 calendar days after the filing of the application required by section 78-152. (b)  In the event that consideration is given to naming a new street after a business, an organization, or a nonprofit entity, the governing body of the city shall consider the following: (1)  Whether such entity is located upon such street; (2)  The length of time that such entity has been located on such street; (3)  The length of time that such entity has been located within the city; (4)  The civic, community, and educational contributions of the business to the city and its citizens; or (5)  The length of time that such entity is expected to remain in business under the same name on such street. No street shall be named after any ongoing business, organization, or nonprofit entity which is not located upon the street to be named in honor of such entity. (c)  In addition to the foregoing factors to be considered by the governing body in naming a new street, the governing body shall also be authorized to consider any and all other relevant factors that the governing body deems appropriate in making a street naming decision. (d)  Unless waived by the governing body, new streets which are obviously in alignment with streets already in existence and already named shall be given the name of the existing street. In addition, no applications proposing to change the name of only a portion of a street shall be accepted by the city clerk. (Ord. No. O-07-03-12, § 18-103, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-154. - Prohibition.     Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or interfere with the right of the State of Georgia or the Georgia Department of Transportation to name roads or streets under their respective ownership or jurisdiction in such manner as they may be authorized to do in accord with Georgia law or regulations promulgated thereunder. (Ord. No. O-07-03-12, § 18-104, 3-22-2007) 
Secs. 78-155—78-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHANGING THE NAME OF EXISTING STREETS 
Sec. 78-180. - Title.     This division shall be known as the "changing the name of existing streets" division and may be referred to by that title. (Ord. No. O-07-03-13, § 18-150, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-181. - Authority.     The governing body of the city shall have the sole power and authority to change the name of existing streets located within the incorporated limits of the city where such streets are owned by the City of Americus. (Ord. No. O-07-03-13, § 18-151, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-182. - Procedures.     With respect to changing the name of an existing street owned by the city and located within the corporate limits of the City of Americus, the governing body shall be required to follow the following procedures with respect to changing the name of an existing street: (1)  By application of a citizen or group of citizens. a.  A citizen or group of city citizens may submit an application to change the name of an existing street hereunder. Such application shall be on forms prescribed by the city clerk. Such application shall not be considered unless at least 75 percent of the persons owning real property abutting such existing street submit a written application to the city clerk requesting that the name of such existing street be changed. b.  Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $100.00, which is intended to cover administrative and other costs which are anticipated to be incurred by the city in connection with its consideration of the application. Such application fee shall be deposited into the general fund of the city. c.  The governing body of the city shall consider such application and act thereon in accord with this division no later than 90 calendar days after the date of submission of such application to the city clerk. In the event that the governing body does not act upon the application prior to the expiration of such 90 calendar day period, then the street shall be automatically renamed as requested in the application. d.  Upon receipt of the application by the city clerk, the city clerk shall proceed to validate the application. The city clerk shall validate the application by verifying that the proper number of signatures is contained on the application and that the persons signing the application are owners of real property abutting said street as required by this division. In the event that the city clerk determines that the application is invalid for any reason, or that the application does not contain sufficient signatures, the application shall be returned to the person or persons submitting such application, and it shall not be subject to further consideration by the governing body until such time as a new application is submitted and the city clerk validates the new application. e.  In determining the required percentage of the persons signing such application in connection with the validation thereof, where property abutting such street is owned by more than one person, the signature of only one such owner shall be counted in calculating such 75 percent. In addition, persons who rent or lease real property abutting such street may sign such application, but their signatures shall not be counted toward the 75 percent threshold for submission of the application to the governing body. Signatures on any such application signed more than 90 calendar days prior to the date of submission of the application to the city clerk shall be invalid and shall not be counted toward the 75 percent threshold. In the event that more than one application for changing the name of an existing street is presented to the city clerk, the city clerk shall validate such applications in the order received. The first application validated by the city clerk shall be presented to the governing body first, and only if the resolution to approve the application is denied shall the city clerk present the second or subsequent validated application to the governing body. f.  The application shall be in such form as established by the city clerk. At a minimum, the application shall indicate thereon the location of the street, the proposed new name of the street, the printed name, street address, and signature of each property owner signing such application, and the date that each property owner signed the application. In addition, each such application shall include therewith a written statement which provides, in succinct detail, the reasons for the proposed street name change in honor of a particular person or business listed in the application. In providing such written statement, the criteria to be considered by the governing body regarding the changing of the name of such street as more particularly established in this division shall be specifically addressed by the application in such written statement accompanying the street name changing application. In addition, the application shall also list any public announcement or public recognition request that should accompany any official street name changing ceremony undertaken by the city in connection with the changing of the name of such street. g.  In the event that the city clerk determines that the application is valid, then prior to the submission of the application to the governing body, the city clerk shall undertake the following: 1.  Provide notification of the application to and compile for review by the governing body responses to the application from the following: i.  All city agencies and departments, including, but not limited to; city police, city fire and EMS, city GIS system personnel, city building risk management risk department, and other city agencies or departments that the clerk deems appropriate; ii.  All other local, state, or national agencies which the city clerk determines may be affected by the changing of the name of the street; iii.  All schools located in the immediate vicinity of the street; iv.  Any other persons or entities the city clerk deems, in his or her sole discretion, should receive notice of the proposed changing of the street's name. 2.  Review existing public records for the purpose of establishing that the proposed street name does not duplicate any existing street name and is not confusingly similar to any existing street name in Americus or Sumter County. h.  Upon the completion of the foregoing, the city clerk shall be required to place consideration of the application on the agenda for the city council meeting occurring in the calendar month after the month in which the application was finally validated. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the tabling of such proposal by the governing body, but in no event shall consideration of such proposal by the city council be delayed beyond 90 calendar days after the validated application was filed with the city clerk. i.  Prior to the governing body considering or voting upon such application, the governing body shall hold a public hearing regarding such application. Notice of such public hearing shall be published once in the city's legal organ no later than the day prior to the date of the public hearing. Such public notice shall advise the public regarding the application, the proposed new street name, and the time and place of the scheduled public hearing before the governing body. Such public hearing shall be conducted with the same formality as that required of public hearings in connection with zoning and rezoning matters before the governing body. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the governing body shall be authorized to vote on the application. j.  In the event that the application is approved by an appropriate resolution of the governing body, the new name of the street shall take effect at such time as is determined by the governing body in such resolution. k.  Upon adoption of the resolution by the governing body, the city clerk shall undertake the following: 1.  Provide written notice to each property owner owning property abutting the street of the official name of the street as approved by the governing body; 2.  Provide written notice of the new name of the street to the United States Postal Service; 3.  Provide written notice of the new name of the street to the emergency 911 system in effect for the geographical area including the City of Americus. l.  Within 60 calendar days of the effective date of the resolution adopting the new street name, the city utilities director shall have fabricated and installed appropriate signage regarding the new name of the street at such locations as deemed appropriate by the utilities director. (2)  By the professional staff of the city.     The professional staff of the city, or a member of the city council, may submit an application to change the name of an existing street. The procedures to be followed by the governing body in the event that such an application is submitted shall be the same procedures as previously outlined in section 78-152 of this division, except that no application fee shall be required, and the application shall not require the signatures of 75 percent of the persons owning real property abutting the existing street. (Ord. No. O-07-03-13, § 18-152, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-183. - Determination of renaming. (a)  In making a determination as to changing the name of an existing street, if the street is proposed to be renamed after a natural person, the governing body shall take into consideration the following: (1)  Whether such person has resided for a long period of time on such street; (2)  Whether such person has made significant and long-lasting contributions to the city and its citizens; (3)  Whether such person is a nationally or internationally prominent figure who has or may have a direct or indirect connection to the city and its citizens; (4)  Whether such person has provided charitable or philanthropic contributions to the city and its citizens; (5)  Whether such person has brought honor, prestige, or recognition in a positive manner to the city and its citizens; (6)  Whether such person is a leader in local governmental, civic, educational, or public affairs; or (7)  Whether such person is a distinguished and accomplished scholar, scientist, educational leader, business leader, government leader, or civic leader. (8)  In order to be considered for having an existing street renamed named after a person, such person may be either living or deceased at the time that the street name is changed. With respect to a deceased individual, the application shall not be submitted until at least one year after the date of death of such person. With respect to a living person, such person must have reached the age of 75 years at the time of the submission of the application, unless such age limitation is affirmatively waived by the governing body of the city within 30 calendar days after the filing of the application required by section 78-152. (b)  In the event that consideration is given to changing the name of an existing street so as to name such existing street after a business, an organization, or a nonprofit entity, the governing body of the city shall consider the following: (1)  Whether such entity is located upon such street; (2)  The length of time that such entity has been located on such street; (3)  The length of time that such entity has been located within the city; (4)  The civic, community, and educational contributions of the business to the city and its citizens; or (5)  The length of time that such entity is expected to remain in business under the same name on such street. (6)  No street shall be named after any ongoing business, organization, or nonprofit entity which is not located upon the street to be renamed in honor of such entity. (c)  In addition to the foregoing factors to be considered by the governing body in changing the name of an existing street, the governing body shall also be authorized to consider any and all other relevant factors that the governing body deems appropriate in making a street naming decision. (d)  No applications proposing to change the name of only a portion of a street shall be accepted by the city clerk. (Ord. No. O-07-03-13, § 18-153, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-184. - Prohibitions.     Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or interfere with the right of the State of Georgia or the Georgia Department of Transportation to name roads or streets under their respective ownership or jurisdiction in such manner as they may be authorized to do in accord with Georgia law or regulations promulgated thereunder. (Ord. No. O-07-03-13, § 18-154, 3-22-2007) 
Secs. 78-185—78-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CITY SIDEWALK INSTALLATION 
Sec. 78-201. - Title.     This article shall be known as the "city sidewalk installation article." (Ord. No. O-07-03-11, § 18-201, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-202. - Definitions.     The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, as follows:     City block is the smallest area that is surrounded by public streets within the incorporated area of the city.     Lot owners means the owner or owners of record of each lot abutting a proposed sidewalk, whether or not there is constructed on such lot a dwelling, house, commercial building or other structure. Such term shall include both personal and business owners of such lots of record.     Petition means a petition as more particularly described in section 78-203 of this article. (Ord. No. O-07-03-11, § 18-202, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-203. - Petition. (a)  Whenever any lot owner or owners located within the corporate limits of the city desire to request the city to install a sidewalk fronting the property owned by such lot owner or owners along one or more sides of a city block, then such lot owner or owners shall notify the city clerk, who shall provide the lot owner or owners with a pre-printed petition, which petition shall be for the purpose of ascertaining the level of support for the installation of such sidewalk. At the time of providing the petition to the lot owner or owners, the city clerk shall determine an estimated installation cost of the proposed sidewalk, which cost shall be assessed to each lot owner in a prorated amount as established in this article, and such estimated cost shall be provided to the lot owner or owners requesting the application. (b)  Such petition shall have typed thereon a title, which shall be "Petition Requesting the City of Americus to Install a Sidewalk Along the ____________ Side of ____________ Street from ____________ Street to ____________ Street." There shall further be typed thereon the following statement at the top of each page of the petition: The undersigned, by signing this petition, do hereby request the City of Americus to install a sidewalk as described above. The undersigned have been informed and do understand that if at least 75 percent of the record owners of lots abutting such proposed sidewalk sign this petition, the governing body of the city may authorize the installation of such sidewalk, and each record owner of a lot or lots abutting said sidewalk shall be required to pay the pro-rated cost of installation of such sidewalk as established by city ordinance. (c)  Such petition shall thereafter have spaces for the printed name and address, the legal signature, and the date of signing for each lot owner who signs such petition. Such petition shall be returned to the city clerk within 90 calendar days of the date that the petition was delivered by the city clerk to the lot owner or owners requesting such petition. No such petition shall be returned to or accepted by the city clerk until at least 75 percent of the record lot owners abutting the proposed sidewalk shall have signed the petition. For purposes of ascertaining the 75 percent threshold, the following shall apply: (1)  A lot owner may be counted as signing the petition only once, regardless of the number of lots such lot owner may own abutting said sidewalk. (2)  Where property is owned by more than one person, the signature of only one such owner shall be counted in calculating such 75 percent. (3)  Persons who rent or lease property abutting such proposed sidewalk may sign such petition, but their signatures shall not be counted toward the 75 percent threshold. (4)  Where the lot owner is a corporation or other legal entity, the petition shall only be signed by an authorized officer or agent of the corporation. (d)  Upon submission of said petition as a single petition to the city clerk, the city clerk shall cause the signatures thereon to be verified. The city clerk shall validate the petition by verifying that the proper number of signatures is contained on the petition and that the persons signing the petition are owners of real property abutting said proposed sidewalk as required by this article. In the event that the city clerk determines that the petition is invalid for any reason, or if the application does not contain sufficient signatures, the application shall be returned to the person or persons submitting such application, and it shall not be subject to further consideration by the governing body until such time as a new application is submitted and the city clerk validates the new application. Any persons who are not record owners of lots abutting the proposed sidewalk, or who are otherwise not authorized to sign such petition or have their signatures counted, shall have their names stricken from the petition and shall not be counted for purposes of ascertaining the 75 percent threshold. (e)  If, after verification of the signatures, the city clerk determines that at least 75 percent of the lot owners owning real property abutting the proposed sidewalk have signed the petition, then said petition shall be presented to the governing body of the city at its next regular monthly meeting for consideration. In the event that the petition contains the properly verified signatures of at least 75 percent of the persons owning real property abutting the proposed sidewalk, the city council shall be authorized to approve the installation of the sidewalk, but the city council shall not be required to approve such installation. (f)  If the installation of such sidewalk is approved by the city council, the appropriate city departments shall proceed with the installation of such sidewalk, which installation shall be performed in accord with applicable building and other codes. (g)  The city shall provide all labor and materials required for the installation of the sidewalk. At the conclusion of the installation, the city clerk shall determine the actual total installation cost incurred by the city, including, but not limited to; the cost of labor, materials, right-of-way acquisition, surveys, and engineering costs. Such cost shall be determined within 30 calendar days of the completion of the installation. The finance director shall then determine the cost of the installation per linear foot and shall cause each lot owner abutting such subdivision to be billed an amount equal to such cost per linear foot times the number of linear feet owned by such lot owner abutting the installed sidewalk. Such bills shall be paid by the lot owners within 30 days of submission by the city. In the event that it is requested by one or more lot owners and approved by the governing body, and in lieu of payment of such cost of installation in one payment, as to any lot owner or owners so requesting, the city shall be authorized to bill each lot owner for such lot owner's prorated cost over a 12-month period; provided, however, that any lot owner requesting to be billed over a 12-month period shall also pay interest equal to one percent per month on the unpaid principal balance until all payments are paid in full. The sale of the lot prior to the lot owner's payment of such prorated cost shall not relieve the lot owner of the obligation to pay such cost in full as required by this article. Failure to pay any installment when due shall entitle the city to terminate utility services to the lot owner in the same manner as if the lot owner had failed to pay a city utility bill. Nothing herein shall prohibit the city from including the billing for the pro-rata share of the installation of such sidewalk to the lot owners in the lot owner's monthly utility bill. (Ord. No. O-07-03-11, § 18-203, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-204. - Application acceptance; right-of-ways. (a)  The city shall not be required to install such sidewalk unless the city obtains from each lot owner a deed to such real property as the city may require in order for the city to construct said sidewalk. Such right-of-way shall be conveyed to the city in fee simple and at no cost or expense to the city. (b)  No application for the construction of a sidewalk shall be accepted by the city clerk hereunder, unless such application includes the construction and paving of a sidewalk for the distance of at least one side of a city block. (c)  No application shall be accepted by the city clerk hereunder for the repaving of an existing paved sidewalk. (Ord. No. O-07-03-11, § 18-204, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-205. - Maintenance and upkeep.     Upon completion of the installation of the sidewalk, the city shall assume responsibility for the maintenance and upkeep thereof. (Ord. No. O-07-03-11, § 18-205, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-206. - Prohibition.     Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the city from undertaking to construct sidewalks at such locations as the city may deem appropriate and in the best interest of the city and its citizens, regardless of whether a petition as described in section 78-203 hereof, has been submitted to the city. Any such construction by the city shall be undertaken and completed at the sole cost and expense of the city. (Ord. No. O-07-03-11, § 18-206, 3-22-2007) 
Secs. 78-207—78-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - IMPROPER USE OF PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY 
Sec. 78-301. - Urban camping and improper use of public property. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep, lie down, to reside upon, or to store personal property in any park, in any cemetery, upon any sidewalk, or in or upon any public property of the city. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any public park, cemetery, public sidewalk, or public property for living accommodations or for camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner, tenant, employee, or other person with permission from the owner, to camp, sleep, reside, store personal property upon, or lie down outside upon any private property without the owner's permission to do so. (d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, this section shall not apply to the following: (1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; (2)  Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using parks, sidewalks or other public places; (3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades for which valid permits have been issued; (4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; (5)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or by an abutting private property owner; provided, however, that such exception shall not apply to persons sleeping, lying down, residing upon, or storing personal property upon such chairs or benches; (6)  Persons sitting down or lying down while attending sporting events, performances, festivals and concerts taking place in any park, or upon any street or sidewalk where such event is authorized by the city; (7)  Children under the age of 13 years sleeping in parks while being carried by or accompanied by another person over such age, or while sitting or lying in a baby stroller or carriage; (8)  Persons offering the sale of merchandise, food, vegetables, fruit, produce and similar items from the sidewalk in front of a business where such sale is otherwise authorized by the City Code. (e)  A person convicted of violating this Code section, or a person entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendre to a violation of this Code section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the City Code. Each day that a person violates this Code section shall be considered to be a separate offense. In no event shall a violation of this Code section be considered or held to be a lesser included offense of the offense of loitering as provided in section 62-114 of the City Code. (Ord. No. O-09-07-21, 7-23-2009) 