THE CODE OF THE CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA ____________ Published in 2007 by Order of the City Council ____________ OFFICIALS of the CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Barry Blount, Mayor Walton Grant Eloise Paschal Eddie Rhea Walker Lou Chase Steve Jones Lorenzo Johnson City Council ____________ Charlotte D. Cotton City Administrative Officer ____________ Paula Martin City Clerk ____________ James Skipper City Attorney PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Americus, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the prior Code, and any ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and D. J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Charlotte Cotton, Chief Administrative Officer, Ms. Paula Martin, City Clerk, and Mr. James Skipper, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. © ;hg;Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. 2007. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited.     The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Americus, Georgia" and may be so cited. (Code 1986, § 1-1) State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction.     In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto.     As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances.     City. The term "city" means the City of Americus, Georgia.     City council. The term "city council" "or council" means the city council of the city.     Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Americus, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.     Computation of time. When a number of days are prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation.     Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: (1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. (2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. (3)  The term "either . . . or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination.     County. The term "county" means Sumter County, Georgia.     Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act.     Following. The term "following" means next after.     Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders.     Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands.     Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared.     Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general.     May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive.     Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.     Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory.     Number. Words used in the singular include the plural. Words used in the plural include the singular.     Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."     Officials, officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city.     Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land.     Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, any limited liability company, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual.     Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property.     Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before.     Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property.     Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate.     Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.     Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory.     Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.     Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write.     State. The term the "state" means the State of Georgia.     Statutory references. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the "Official Code of Geogia Annotated" as now or hereafter amended. Any reference to a state act, whether by short title or year, page number and/or act number, is a reference to such act, as amended.     Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, courts, alleys, lanes, circles, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way.     Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others.     Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.     Week. The term "week" means seven days.     Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory.     Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals.     Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. (Code 1986, § 1-2; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, references in Code. (a)  The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section or subsection, and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles thereof, or as any part thereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. (c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. (Code 1986, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances.     The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. (Code 1962, § 1-4; Code 1986, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. (a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. (b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. (c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: (1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. (2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. (3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. (4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). (5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. (d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. (Code 1986, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendment to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. (a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. (b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "section ____________ of The Code of the City of Americus, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. (c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Americus, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered ____________ , that reads as follows:…." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. (d)  All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. (Code 1986, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc.     Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. (Code 1986, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. (a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: (1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; (2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or (3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. (b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. (c)  Except as otherwise provided: (1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or compulsory labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public places for a period not exceeding 30 days, or any combination thereof. (2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. (3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. (d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. (e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. (Code 1986, § 1-8) State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); authority to punish ordinance violations by requiring labor, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8. 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code.     It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 hereof. (Code 1986, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code.     It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Code 1986, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.     The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-12. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code.     Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: (1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. (2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. (3)  Granting any right or franchise. (4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. (5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. (6)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. (7)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. (8)  Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. (9)  Dedicating, accepting or approving any plat or subdivision. (10)  Providing traffic regulations for specific areas, such as no parking zones, stop intersections, etc., not in conflict with this Code. (11)  Levying taxes that are not codified in this Code. (12)  Rezoning specific property or amending the zoning map. (13)  Adopted for purposes which have been consummated. (14)  That is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect. (Code 1986, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-13. - Statute of limitations.     All prosecutions for violations of any city ordinance shall be commenced within two years after such violation, and any offense against said ordinance for which no prosecution is begun within two years after its commission shall be barred, unless the party so offending shall have been beyond the limits of the city, in which case the time of absence from the city shall not be embraced and computed as within said two years. (Code 1962, § 19-1; Code 1986, § 8-2) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 2-1. - Regulatory fees.     All regulatory fees charged by the city are hereby determined to be reasonable and reflective of the cost of regulation. 
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-21. - Mayor.     The mayor shall have the general superintendence of the affairs of the city; shall preside at all meetings of the city council, and it shall be the mayor's duty to see that all laws, ordinances, resolutions and rules of the city council are observed and enforced, and that all officers of the city shall faithfully discharge the duties required of them. (Code 1962, § 2-28; Code 1986, § 2-21) 
Sec. 2-22. - Mayor pro tem election.     The city council shall elect from its body a mayor pro tem, who shall, during the illness, absence or disqualification of the mayor, act in the mayor's stead, and be clothed with all rights, privileges and duties of the mayor. (Code 1962, § 2-29; Code 1986, § 2-22) 
Secs. 2-23—2-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE 
Sec. 2-48. - Meetings, when held.     The city council shall meet regularly at least once each month, at such place and time as it may fix and prescribe. Special meetings may be called by the mayor at any time for the consideration and determination of any questions or matters requiring immediate attention, of which special meeting the city clerk shall give the members notice. (Code 1962, § 2-10; Code 1986, § 2-24) 
Sec. 2-49. - Speaking at meetings; decorum at meetings; notices to city council from members of the public; disturbing or interrupting meetings; violations. (a)  Monthly public meetings of city council and city council committees. Unless otherwise provided by a majority vote of the city council, the mayor and city council shall meet at least two times each calendar month. The first meeting shall be an agenda setting meeting and the second meeting shall be the regular monthly meeting. Such meetings shall be at such times and dates as established by the city council from time to time. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit called meetings otherwise allowed by law; nor shall any provision of this subsection be construed to require that both meetings be held each calendar month if a majority of the city council agrees to dispense with one of such meetings; provided, however, that, unless prevented by circumstances or events beyond the control of the mayor and city council, the mayor and city council shall have at least a regular monthly meeting each calendar month. All meetings of the mayor and city council shall be held and conducted under the provisions of the Georgia Open Meetings Act. (b)  Meeting agenda. At least 48 hours prior to each meeting of the mayor and city council, or any committee thereof, the city clerk, or the designee thereof, shall publish an agenda of the matters anticipated to be considered or discussed at the meeting. The fact that a particular matter is not included on the published agenda shall not prevent the matter from being considered, provided that a majority of the city council or the council committee, as the case may be, adopts a motion approving the addition of the matter to the agenda at any time during the meeting. (c)  Public hearings. At each meeting of the mayor and city council, or any committee thereof, when the mayor and city council or a committee of the city council is conducting a public hearing in accord with the requirements of federal, state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances, any person desiring to address the mayor and city council or a committee of city council during such public hearing regarding the subject matter of the public hearing shall be authorized to do so. Such person must be recognized by the presiding officer prior to speaking at the public hearing. Comments by persons speaking during the public hearing shall be directed to the presiding officer, and not to individual members of the city council, and unless otherwise provided by state law or local ordinance, the comments of such person addressing a public hearing shall be limited to five minutes per person. Any person speaking during a public hearing shall limit his or her comments to the subject matter of the public hearing, and any statements or comments made by such person not related to the subject matter of the public hearing shall be immediately ruled out of order by the presiding officer. At the conclusion of the time to speak at such public hearing, each speaker shall terminate his or her remarks. (d)  Agenda items. At any regular monthly meeting of the city council, members of the public desiring to address the mayor and city council regarding items that appear on the published city council agenda shall personally sign up to do so at the meeting location on the day of the meeting as long as such person signs up to speak prior to the time that the meeting is called to order by the presiding officer. A person signing up to speak on an agenda item must indicate the item on which such person desires to address the mayor and city council by reference to the meeting agenda at the time such person signs up to speak. The city clerk, or his or her designee, shall provide a sign-up sheet for such purposes at least 30 minutes prior to the scheduled starting time of the meeting. Such sign-up sheet shall be located on the lectern provided for speakers at the meeting. No more than a total of five speakers can sign up to speak at any one meeting, and each speaker shall be provided three minutes to address the mayor and city council regarding the agenda item or items to be addressed by such speaker. A speaker can sign up to address more than one agenda item, but the number of agenda items to be addressed by a speaker shall not affect the total amount of time allotted for each individual speaker. If more than a total of five speakers sign up to speak at any one meeting, the presiding officer shall only be authorized to recognize the first five persons who signed up to speak. No person shall be authorized to sign up for another person to speak and no speaker shall be authorized to yield any portion of his or her unused time to another person. In the event that there are a large number of persons who desire to speak on a particular agenda item, the presiding officer may request that the persons wishing to speak on the agenda item select a spokesperson to address the mayor and city council on behalf of such persons. A person speaking to the mayor and city council on an agenda item shall only be authorized to speak on such agenda item and any statements or comments made by such person not related to the agenda item upon which such person is authorized to speak shall be immediately ruled out of order by the presiding officer, and if a speaker continues to speak on matters not related to the agenda item upon which such person is authorized to speak after being ruled out of order by the presiding officer, then such person may be removed from the meeting and charged with violation of this section. Comments by persons speaking on an agenda item shall be directed to the presiding officer, and not to individual members of the city council. Any speaker addressing individual member of the city council shall be ruled out of order by the presiding officer, and if such speaker continues to address individual members of the city council after being ruled out of order for doing so by the presiding officer, then such person may be removed from the meeting and charged with violation of this section. At the conclusion of the time to speak on such agenda item, each speaker shall terminate his or her remarks. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require a person to sign up to speak in connection with a public hearing to be conducted by the mayor and city council under subsection (c) of this section. (e)  Non-agenda items. Members of the public desiring to bring any matter concerning the city to the attention of the city council which does not appear on a meeting agenda of the mayor and city council may submit such person's comments in writing to the city manager of the city at any time during which the city council or a council committee is not in an administrative briefing, an agenda setting meeting, or in a regular monthly meeting. Copies of such written comments from a member of the public shall be submitted to the mayor and city council within ten calendar days of the date such comments are submitted to the city manager. In the event that at least three members of the city council deem it appropriate to include issues or comments submitted to the city manager under this section on the agenda of a subsequent meeting of the mayor and city council, then, at least three calendar days prior to the meeting of the city council at which such members desire that such item be placed upon the agenda, such three members shall submit a notice to the city manager, either jointly or severally, to place such item on such city council meeting agenda for consideration by the mayor and city council; provided, however, that unless such matter is tabled or otherwise postponed by action of the governing body, no such item shall be placed on an agenda of the city council more than one time every six months. (f)  Meeting decorum. In order to ensure proper decorum and a businesslike atmosphere at all meetings of the city council or any committee thereof, no signs, placards, or similar displays that are larger than 17 inches by 24 inches, or that are attached to sticks, rods or poles or that are constructed of metal or wood shall be allowed within the city council chambers or in a city council meeting room during a city council or committee meeting unless the sign specifically illustrates, depicts or describes in the form of a map, plat, schematic drawing, picture, or similar depiction, a particular item that appears on the meeting agenda as an item for consideration by the city council or a committee thereof. In addition to the foregoing, any such sign, placard, or similar display that is otherwise authorized hereunder shall not be placed or displayed in a location or in a manner which blocks the view of any member of the audience, city staff, or the council. Any signs, placards, or similar displays that are prohibited hereunder, or any sign that is otherwise authorized hereunder which blocks a person's view as prohibited herein during the course of a meeting, shall be removed by the person carrying the sign upon request of the presiding officer or by an appropriate officer of the police department upon direction of the presiding officer. (g)  Violations of ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this section or for any person to disturb or interrupt any meeting of the city council or a committee thereof. The use of obscene or profane language, physical violence, or the threat thereof, or loud and boisterous behavior which the presiding officer shall determine is intended as a disruption of the meeting, or any failure to comply with any lawful decision or order of the presiding officer in connection with or during the course of a meeting, shall constitute a disturbance hereunder, and shall be considered to be a violation of this section. Any person violating the provisions of this section, including a person violating this section by creating a disturbance as defined herein, or by failing or refusing to comply with a lawful order of the presiding officer during a meeting of the mayor and city council or a committee thereof, may be ordered removed or ejected from the city council chambers or other meeting room by the presiding officer for the duration of the meeting or for such lesser period as the presiding officer shall determine. In addition, any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (Code 1986, § 2-24.1; Ord. No. O-04-11-23, 11-18-2004; Ord. No. O-12-03-08, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. O-2014-8, 3-20-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-17, 10-20-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-10, 6-18-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings, or processions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 2-50. - Presiding officer. (a)  The mayor shall preside at all meetings, preserve order and decorum, and shall appoint all committees, unless the council shall otherwise direct. (b)  In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall preside; and in the absence of both, a chairman shall be appointed by the council, vested with all the powers of the mayor during such absence. (Code 1962, §§ 2-12, 2-13; Code 1986, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-51. - Voting on questions, generally; show of hand votes; mayor's role; obligation of council members to vote on questions. (a)  All questions shall be put by the presiding officer. The members shall vote by a show of hands, with a majority of the members present and voting determining all questions unless otherwise provided. The mayor, at such officer's discretion, may call upon the mayor pro tem to take the chair, to allow the mayor to address the council or make a motion. The mayor may vote on any issue before the city council, unless he is otherwise disqualified. (b)  At any meeting of the governing body of the city, or any committee thereof, each council member present shall vote on each question that comes before the meeting unless a city council member is immediately and particularly interested in the question to the extent that such council member has a conflict of interest, or the appearance of a conflict of interest, with respect to such question, or unless a council member is excused from voting by a majority vote of the governing body. A motion to excuse a member from voting may be made by the council member seeking to be excused, must be made before the question is put to a vote, and shall be decided without debate, except that the council member making the motion may state briefly the reasons that the motion was made. (Code 1962, § 2-14; Code 1986, § 2-27; Ord. No. O-2012-18, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 2-52. - Record of votes.     Whenever it shall be required by any one or more members, the yeas and nays shall be recorded. (Code 1962, § 2-15; Code 1986, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-53. - Applications, etc., to be written.     Applications, petitions or other communications to the city council must be in writing; and in all cases the same must be referred to a committee before any action is taken thereon, unless the city council shall otherwise direct. (Code 1962, § 2-17; Code 1986, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-54. - Reconsideration of previous business.     Before the minutes of any preceding meeting of the city council are confirmed, any member may move to reconsider any question, motion, resolution, or other matter or thing in the minutes of such previous meeting contained; and if such reconsideration be voted by a majority of the members present, the subject matter of such reconsideration shall be first business in order to be disposed of. (Code 1962, § 2-19; Code 1986, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-55. - Robert's Rules of Order adopted.     The meetings of the city council shall be guided and governed by those parliamentary rules and regulations popularly known as "Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised," the same being adopted and made a part hereof as though set out fully herein, except as otherwise provided in the Charter or this Code. (Code 1962, § 2-9; Code 1986, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-56. - Council committees.     The mayor and city council may provide for the appointment of such committees as they deem necessary or desirable, including any standing committees or special committees. All committees and committee chairmen shall be appointed by the mayor and serve at his pleasure. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. (Code 1962, § 2-39; Code 1986, § 2-35; Ord. No. O-94-12-46, 12-22-1994; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-2015-14, 7-23-2015) Editor's note— Formerly entitled "Standing council committees—Enumerated", which was amended by Ord. No. O-2015-14. 
Sec. 2-57. - Same—Duties.     It shall be the duty of the standing committees to prepare business for the action of the city council and to report upon such matters as may be referred to them. (Code 1962, § 2-40; Code 1986, § 2-36) 
Secs. 2-58—2-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Public officers and employees generally, O.C.G.A. § 45-1-1 et seq.; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of all municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2(2). 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-88. - Personnel manual adopted.     The personnel ordinance adopted November 18, 1975, and amended September 19, 1977, September 24, 1979, October 8, 1979, April 27, 1981, May 25, 1981, November 23, 1981, October 25, 1982, and December 27, 1984, is hereby further amended by adopting the personnel policies, classification plan and pay plan for the city as set out in the personnel manual, dated January 1, 1987, consisting of section A, personnel policies, sections I through XVIII; section B, classification plan, sections I through III; section C, pay plan, sections I through III and section D, definitions and as subsequently amended, at least one copy of which is filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling. (Code 1986, § 17-8; Ord. of 12-27-1984; Ord. of 11-24-1986) 
Sec. 2-89. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-15, adopted July 23, 2015, repealed § 2-89, entitled "Appointive officers, specified; voice vote, etc." which derived from: Code 1962, § 2-43; Code 1986, § 2-1; Ord. No. O-87-03-05, adopted Mar. 23, 1987; Ord. No. O-87-04-08, adopted Apr. 27, 1987; Ord. No. O-89-12-42, adopted Dec. 18, 1989; Ord. No. O-91-03-07, adopted Mar. 25, 1991; Ord. No. O-95-02-05, adopted Feb. 27, 1995; Ord. No. O-95-12-44, adopted Dec. 21, 1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, adopted Dec. 16, 2004; Ord. No. O-2013-25, adopted Aug. 22, 2013; and Ord. No. O-2013-29, adopted Oct. 24, 2013. 
Sec. 2-89.1. - Appointment of city manager. (a)  The city council shall appoint the city manager who shall be in charge of running the day-to-day business and operations of the city. Such city manager shall be appointed and shall meet the qualifications as provided in section 3-101 of the City Charter. Such city manager shall be entitled to such compensation as may be established pursuant to section 3-101 of the City Charter. The city manager may be removed by the city council as provided in section 3-101 of the City Charter. (b)  With respect to the duties and responsibilities of the city manager, those shall be as established pursuant to section 3-102 of the City Charter and by such ordinances supplemental to the City Charter as may be adopted by the city council from time to time. (Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-89.2. - City departments. (a)  The city council hereby establishes the following departments within the city: (1)  Finance director; (2)  Police department; (3)  Fire and emergency services department; (4)  Community and economic development department; (5)  Planning and inspections department; (6)  Public works department; and (7)  Natural gas department. (8)  Human resources department. (b)  A job description, including the duties and responsibilities of such department heads, shall be provided in the city's personnel ordinance. (c)  The city manager shall be authorized to appoint, suspend, remove, or terminate such department heads in accordance with the personnel rules, regulations, policies and ordinances of the city. (Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-01, 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 2-89.3. - City clerk. (a)  In accord with the provisions of section 3-201 of the City Charter, the city manager shall appoint a city clerk, who shall not be a council member. (b)  The duties and responsibilities of the city clerk shall be established by the City Charter and by such other ordinances of the city council supplemental to such Charter as may be adopted from time to time by the city council. (c)  A job description, including the duties and responsibilities of the city clerk, which is consistent with the provisions of the City Charter, shall be provided in the city's personnel ordinance. (d)  The city manager shall be authorized to appoint, suspend, remove, or terminate the city clerk in accordance with the personnel rules, regulations, policies and ordinances of the city. The city clerk shall not be considered to be a department head of the city. (Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-89.4. - Municipal court judge.     The city council shall appoint a municipal court judge from time to time to carry out such duties as Municipal Court Judge of the City of Americus as are provided in article IV, chapter 1 of the City Charter. (Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-90. - Salaries of appointed officers.     No salary of any appointed officer shall be increased or diminished during his term of office, unless by unanimous consent of the city council. (Code 1962, § 2-44; Code 1986, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-91. - Code enforcement officer; authority to issue tickets, citations or summons; exception.     The code enforcement officer, during the term of his employment, shall be authorized to write tickets or citations on forms provided for such purpose preferring charges against individuals and other entities for alleged violations of this Code. The code enforcement officer shall also be authorized to issue summons to appear before the municipal court of the city to answer charges relating to alleged violations of this Code by person or other legal entities. The authority granted to the enforcement officer hereunder shall not include the authority to issue tickets or summons for violations of the traffic laws of this city unless the enforcement officer is otherwise authorized to do so by other state statute or city ordinance. (Code 1986, § 2-10.1; Ord. No. O-96-09-41, 9-19-1996; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 2-92. - City attorney.     The city council shall appoint a city attorney from time to time as provided in article III, section 3-301 of the City Charter. The city attorney shall meet with the city council at all regular meetings and all called meetings as such attorney may be requested. The city attorney shall render legal opinions to the city council and/or any city officer or employee on matters concerning city business. The city attorney shall be the attorney for all commissions and agencies of the city, unless otherwise provided by proper ordinance, and shall render legal opinions and services to those agencies. The city attorney shall render such other services and perform such other acts as may be desired by the city council for the best interest, welfare, and benefit of the city. (Code 1962, § 2-38; Code 1986, § 2-12; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 2-93—2-112. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY CLERK AND FINANCE DIRECTOR 
Sec. 2-113. - Duties of city clerk.     The city clerk shall: (1)  Attend all meetings of the city council; to record regularly and fairly all proceedings of the same in a book to be kept by such officer for that purpose, and to keep the same properly indexed. The city clerk shall also keep a book to be called the "ordinance book," in which such officer shall record all the city ordinances, and all the alterations of, and amendments to, the same hereafter enacted, and shall keep said ordinance book properly indexed. (2)  Issue all executions, summonses, notices, subpoenas, and processes of any kind that may be necessary in the enforcement of the rules, regulations, and ordinances of the city council. (3)  Be the keeper of the public seal of the city, and the custodian of all the records and other papers belonging to the city; shall be responsible for their safe keeping; and shall turn over all books, papers or other property of the city in such officer's hands to such officer's successor in office. (4)  Affix the seal of the city to any document. (5)  Furnish certified copies of records of such officer's office except such as are needed or requested by the city council per 100 words. (Code 1962, §§ 2-32, 2-33; Code 1986, §§ 2-6, 2-7; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 2-114. - Duties and fees of finance director. (a)  The finance director shall: (1)  Issue all licenses, badges and permits authorized or granted by the city council, and keep a record of the same. (2)  Keep an execution docket, in which such officer shall enter all executions issued by such officer. (3)  Receive, safely keep, and pay out all money belonging to the city, and keep regular books, showing such officer's receipts and payments of the same, and keep separate accounts of all funds arising for any general or special purposes. (4)  Not pay any money to any person who is indebted to the city council, but in all such cases the amount of the claim against the city council, when properly audited, must be placed as a credit on the indebtedness or claim due by such person to the city council. (5)  It shall be the duty of the finance director to make daily deposits of all revenue received by such officer each day. The finance director shall make no cash disbursements of any funds for the account of the city council, except as hereinafter provided; all disbursements, except as hereinafter provided, shall be paid by checks drawn by the finance director. The finance director shall maintain at all times and keep in such officer's vault a nominal cash balance of $500.00 to cover incidental expenses not practical to pay by check; and from this fund the finance director shall pay such small items not exceeding $50.00 of incidental expense as may be necessary from time to time, and said fund shall be replenished for any such expenditures so made from same, on presentation of voucher with supporting documents, to the city council which shall authorize the finance director to draw such officer's check against the general fund for the amount so properly expended. It shall also be the duty of the finance director to enter all cash receipts and disbursements daily in the cash records kept by such officer. All officers and employees of the city handling the revenue or funds thereof, shall turn over and deliver to the finance director each day all moneys, or funds received, taking such officer's receipt therefor. (b)  The books, accounts and vouchers shall, at all times, be open to the city council for inspection, and shall make out and submit to the city council monthly reports of such officer's receipts and disbursements. (c)  Fees for the following services performed by the finance director shall be as established by ordinance and shall be collected by the finance director: (1)  For issuing execution in any case. (2)  For filing and docketing executions in any case. (3)  For canceling fi. fas. of record. (4)  For drawing recognizance. (d)  The finance director is hereby authorized and directed to have entered of record on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of the superior court, all executions authorized to be issued under the charter and to pay the costs thereof. (Code 1962, § 2-33; Code 1986, § 2-7; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Secs. 2-115—2-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-142. - Adjustments, settlements of claims against city, agents, employees. (a)  Upon receipt of a claim from a person, business or other entity seeking damages for personal injury or property damage resulting from the alleged intentional or negligent misconduct of the city or its agents and employees, which is filed or submitted to the city in accord with O.C.G.A. § 36-33-5, such claim shall be immediately transmitted to the city manager of the city for investigation and consideration. Upon the completion of such investigation, in the event that the city manager determines that administrative adjustment or settlement of such claim is in the best interest of the city, he shall be authorized to administratively adjust or settle such claim with the claimant on behalf of the city, upon the following terms and conditions: (1)  Neither the claim itself, nor the administrative adjustment or settlement thereof, shall exceed the sum of $1,000.00; (2)  Only claims for personal injury or property damage resulting from the alleged intentional or negligent misconduct by the city or its agents or employees, while acting in the course of their employment with the city, shall be subject to settlement pursuant to this section; (3)  Prior to entering into the settlement of such claim in accord with the provisions hereof, the city manager shall determine that administrative adjustment or settlement of such claim is in the best interest of the city, will not work an economic or other hardship to the city, that the claim is meritorious, and that further unnecessary delay in settling such claim would be detrimental to the city; (4)  Prior to settlement, the amount claimed by the claimant shall be documented to the satisfaction of the city manager in writing, and the city manager shall not be authorized to settle such claim without such documentation in an amount at least equal to the amount of the final settlement; (5)  The payment of all settlement proceeds shall be paid from funds previously appropriated by the city council of the town in the city's budget for the current fiscal year for the payment of such claims; (6)  Prior to actual payment of the claim, the city manager shall require the claimant to execute a full and final release in favor of the city, its agents, employees, insurance carriers and any other person or entity who might potentially be liable to the claimant as a result of such claim. Such release shall also provide specifically that such release shall not be considered as an admission of any liability to the claimant by any of the releases named or referred to in the release documents; (7)  Any and all documents required to be executed effecting such settlement shall be prepared and approved by the city attorney prior to the execution thereof and the payment of any funds pursuant thereto; (8)  All such settlements shall be made within 30 days of receipt of the claim by the city, unless circumstances beyond the control of the city manager require a longer period of time, in which case, such shall be reported to the city council. (b)  The city manager shall notify the city council as soon as possible, but not to exceed 15 days within the date of the completion of such administrative adjustment or settlement, of the fact of adjustment or settlement and shall further maintain complete and accurate records in his office of all such matters. (c)  Nothing herein shall serve to extend or shorten any statutes of limitation which may be now or hereafter applicable to any claims or claimant herein described. In addition thereto, nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to alter, amend, change or abrogate the general provisions of state law requiring the filing of ante litum notice (O.C.G.A. § 36-33-6) with the city prior to the filing of suit against the city. Further, the provisions hereof shall not be construed as in any manner changing the official or officials of the city upon whom such ante litum notice or any civil action wherein the city is a named defendant is to be served in accord with state law. (d)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit or otherwise limit the authority of the city council from settling or otherwise resolving claims filed against the city in any other manner not provided for in this section. (Code 1986, § 2-13; Ord. No. O-87-08-17, §§ 1—4, 8-24-1987; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-143. - Procedures for sale of personal property owned by city. (a)  When the city deems it appropriate to sell personal property owned by the city, the finance officer, or his or her designee, shall proceed to sell such property using either of the following procedures: (1)  The finance officer, or his or her designee, shall submit photos, asset descriptions and minimum acceptable selling price to gov.deals.com, or any similar or successor corporation that offers items for sale for government entities utilizing an internet-based auction system; where such items will be auctioned over the internet for a fee to be paid by the city, and in connection with the sale of property under this optional provision, the governing body of the city shall be authorized to enter into a contract or contracts between the city and GovDeals, Inc., or any similar or successor corporation that offers items for sale for government entities utilizing an internet-based auction system regarding such sales; or (2)  The finance officer, or his or designee, shall advertise the sale of the property for public sale in the newspaper that is the official legal organ of the city not less than three times within 15 calendar days prior to the date of such public sale of such personal property. Said advertisement shall give a description of the property to be sold, the date, time and place of such public sale, that the property will be sold to the highest bidder, with the city reserving the right to reject any or all bids, that prospective purchasers may submit a written bid prior to the date and hour of sale or bid orally at the time the public sale is held, and that the sale will continue from day to day until said property is sold. (b)  All sales of personal property by the city under this section shall be for cash or credit card or certified funds and shall be final. The prospective purchaser is obligated to undertake all due diligence regarding the property to be sold so as to determine the condition of such property prior to the sale. All such property shall be sold in its "as is, where is" condition, and the city shall have no liability for defects or deficiencies in the property. (c)  No provision of this section shall prohibit the finance officer, or his or designee, from trading in surplus property on the purchase of new property in accord with the purchasing procedures established by the City of Americus Code of Ordinances. (Code 1962, § 2-5; Code 1986, § 10-5; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005; Ord. No. O-08-12-40, 12-18-2008) 
Sec. 2-144. - Policy for an economic development loan fund.     There is hereby established a policy for the administration of the economic development revolving loan fund of the city, to be applicable to the downtown area or coextensive with the boundary of the downtown development authority area of the city. (1)  Source of funds. The economic development loan fund shall consist of federal grants from the Department of Housing and Urban Development of the United States of America, program or miscellaneous income, and such other funds as may be available therefor. (2)  Object of benefit. Loan funds shall be used primarily to benefit the city's low-income and moderate-income population through economic development of the central business district within the downtown development authority boundaries. (3)  Security. Security for the repayment of all loan funds shall consist of a first or second security interest in the borrower's assets (whether real or personal property) being financed by such loan proceeds, or a security interest in whatever assets of the borrower that the city council may require in order to fully secure the economic development loan. Loans to a corporation shall be personally guaranteed by the shareholders of the corporation. If the borrower is not the owner of the real property to be improved with said loan funds, then, unless otherwise authorized by the city council, the owner of said real property shall guarantee repayment of said loan to the city and shall secure such guarantee by execution and delivery of a deed to secure debt with respect to such real property to the city. (4)  Annual interest rate. The interest rate shall be four percent per annum or such other interest rates that may be adopted in the future. (5)  Maximum loan amount. The maximum loan amount shall be $25,000.00; provided, however, under special circumstances whereby the city council in its sole discretion deems a larger loan is necessary to expedite the downtown development authority program in a timely manner or to bring an individual loan proposal package to completion, said maximum loan amount may be exceeded by the city council. The maximum loan amount shall not exceed 80 percent of the cost of the improvements financed by the loan. (6)  Use of loan funds. The use of loan funds shall be limited to: a.  Facade improvements, including signage. Historic preservation commission approval shall be obtained where required by ordinance. b.  Interior or exterior structural improvements, including roof, heating/air, plumbing and electrical systems or improvements thereto. Such systems and improvements shall become fixtures and remain with the property. c.  Provision of financial assistance by way of a loan for start-up operating costs and working capital. Start-up operating costs and working capital shall be limited to $10,000.00. The applicant shall provide all documentary information regarding the ownership of collateral and the market value of the collateral to be used as collateral in connection with the loan for start-up operating costs and working capital. The city shall be authorized to require an appraisal of such proposed collateral at the expense of the applicant, and the city shall be authorized to reject such loan application should such appraisal, if conducted, show that the proposed collateral is of insufficient value, as determined in the sole discretion of the city council, to properly collateralize the proposed loan. (7)  Length of loan. No loan may be amortized or repaid over more than ten years. (8)  Availability of loans. Loans shall only be made as funds are available to the city council from the economic development loan fund for such loans. (9)  Priority. a.  The priority for loan funds is the financing of projects that show job creation or job retention, especially jobs which employ low-income and moderate-income persons. In addition, for economic redevelopment activities, a commitment must be made by the recipient of the loan that 51 percent of the jobs created or retained by the economic development activities financed by the loan shall be reserved for low-income and moderate-income persons. b.  An equal priority for loan funds is the financing of projects that will benefit low-income and moderate-income persons. Such benefits shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the financing of a project to construct or renovate a structure to be used for job training for low-income and moderate-income persons. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall be sufficient if the recipient of the loan makes a written commitment to the city, where such written commitment is not prohibited by law, that of the persons benefited by the project, at least 51 percent of them will be low-income and moderate-income persons. c.  For the purposes of this section, the terms "low-income persons" and "moderate-income persons" shall be defined the same as they are periodically defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. (10)  Selection of projects. The loan review committee shall act as agent for the city in determining the selection of projects to be financed. The city council shall have final approval of all such loans and all agreements made in connection therewith. (11)  Responsibility and authority over final selection. None of the policies stated herein shall be construed to restrict the city council from having full responsibility and authority over the final project selection to be financed by the downtown development authority revolving loan fund. (12)  Repayment. Each loan made shall provide for the repayment of all principal and interest according to the amortization schedule approved by the city council, as well as for the payment of collection costs, attorney's fees, court costs and penalties for late payment in such amounts as may be agreed upon by the parties. (13)  Nonrefundable handling fee. Each completed loan application that is submitted for consideration must be accompanied by a nonrefundable handling fee in the amount established by ordinance that will cover the cost of credit checks, copies, postage, and other such costs that are incurred during the application process. (Code 1986, § 10-6; Ord. No. O-89-04-10, 4-24-1989; Ord. No. O-89-07-19, 7-24-1989; Ord. No. O-93-02-05, 2-22-1993; Ord. No. O-99-06-25, 6-24-1999; Ord. No. O-02-03-12, 3-21-2002; Ord. No. O-02-09-25, 9-19-2002; Ord. No. O-03-09-27, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 2-145. - Establishment of economic development revolving loan fund. (a)  There is hereby established an economic development revolving loan fund for the city. The purpose of this fund is to assist in the creation and the retention of jobs, primarily for low-income and moderate-income persons, employed or to be employed by existing or start up businesses located in the city where involvement by the city through financial assistance to the existing or start up business is deemed necessary for the project's viability. (b)  The loan fund shall be funded with the proceeds of federal grants from the Department of Housing and Urban Development of the United States, community development block grants from the state, program or miscellaneous income, and such other funds as may be made available by the city for such loan fund. (c)  The loan fund shall provide financial assistance for eligible activities, which shall include the following: (1)  Provision of assistance to public or private nonprofit entities in order to finance activities that will result in the direct creation or employment for low-income or moderate-income persons. (2)  Provision of assistance to public or private nonprofit entities in order to finance activities that will benefit low-income and moderate-income persons. Such benefits shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the financing of a project to construct or renovate a structure to be used for job training for low-income and moderate-income persons. (3)  Such assistance may not be in the form of outright grants, although it may consist of loans, interest subsidies, guarantees, and the financing of such activities as the: a.  Acquisition of real property; or b.  Acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or installation of buildings, except for buildings for the general conduct of government, such as: 1.  Public facilities, site improvements, and utilities; and 2.  Commercial, educational, or industrial buildings or structures or other commercial, educational, or industrial real property improvements. (4)  Provision of assistance to private, for-profit entities, when the assistance is necessary or appropriate to carry out an economic development project. Such assistance may not be in the form of outright grants, although it may also consist of loans, interest subsidies, guarantees, or technical assistance, or a combination thereof. In addition, financial assistance to private, for-profit entities shall be contingent upon firm commitments of financial participation from other sources such as private financial institutions, or the private entities themselves; and must create or retain permanent jobs. (d)  Passive income or real estate companies, lending and investment institutions, unregulated media such as newspapers and magazines, speculative ventures and charitable organizations shall not be eligible to receive loan funds. (e)  Regulations regarding the terms and conditions of such loans from the revolving loan fund, the selection process for such loans, nonrefundable handling fees, repayment terms, interest rate terms, maximum loan amounts, and other such requirements shall be established by the city council pursuant to a resolution approved by the city council for that purpose. (f)  All loans from the revolving loan fund shall be approved by the city council, and no proposed loan shall be presented to the city council for such approval unless such proposal has been reviewed and approved by the staff of the city department of community and economic development under procedures authorized in the resolution establishing the policies, terms, and conditions pursuant to which such loans may be granted. (Code 1986, § 10-7; Ord. No. O-93-12-41, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-08, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-94-02-09, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-99-06-26, 6-24-1999; Ord. No. O-02-09-25, 9-19-2002; Ord. No. O-03-09-27, 9-18-2003) 
Secs. 2-146—2-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ANNUAL BUDGET[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-12, adopted July 23, 2015, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 2-174—2-180, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1986, §§ 10-50—10-56; and Ord. No. O-92-11-107, adopted Oct 26, 1992. State Law reference— Budgets, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-174. - Budgets.     The city council shall review and adopt an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program budget, and a capital budget in such form or forms as the city council may from time to time require. such budgets shall be adopted by ordinance, and any amendments thereto shall be adopted by ordinance. (Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-175. - Fiscal year.     The fiscal year of the city shall be from January 1 to December 31 of each year. (Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-176. - Preparation of proposed budget.     On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year, which budget shall include both an operating budget and a capital budget. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or she may deem pertinent. The proposed budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-177. - City council action on budget. (a)  The city council may amend the budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of the City Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and for all capital improvements required for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves and revenues. (b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt a final budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the last day of the current fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to the City Charter. (c)  The amount set out in the adopted budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. The City Council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in the City Charter, or where the funds required for such improvement are otherwise provided for in accord with the City Charter or applicable state laws. (Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-178. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-179. - Required hearings.     The city council shall conduct such hearings prior to the adoption of the budget as it may deem appropriate; provided, however, that the hearings required by O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5 and O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6, and notice of such hearings as provided in such statutes, shall be the minimum requirements for hearings and notice thereof in connection with the adoption of such budget. Unless otherwise provided by law, nothing herein shall be construed to require the city council to provide a special public notice, other than that required of all meetings under O.C.G.A. Title 50, Chapter 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.), with respect to any budget amendments which are considered or to be considered by the city council during any fiscal year. (Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-180. - Tax levies.     The city council shall annually levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary to fund the budget. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other budgeted revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city. (Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-181. - Changes in appropriations.     The city manager may submit amendments to the budget of the city council at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his or her recommendations. The city council by ordinance may make changes or amendments in the appropriations contained in the current budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. Any such amendments to the budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. (Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-182. - Independent annual audit.     There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accounted selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit or any funds by the state of federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of the City Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. (Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-183. - Budget officer; appointment.     The city manager of the city shall be, and is hereby, appointed budget officer of the city as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4. (Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 2-184—2-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASING 
Sec. 2-199. - Agent authorized.     The city manager of the city shall be designated as the purchasing agent for the city and, within the guidelines of this article, shall prepare and promulgate administrative regulations to effect the purchasing policies of the city. (Code 1986, § 10-1; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-200. - Policy.     With regard to purchasing supplies, goods, services and equipment to be utilized or undertaken by or on behalf of the city, it shall be the policy of the city: (1)  To secure the best reasonable price for all supplies, goods, services and equipment consistent with the fiduciary role of the city; (2)  To secure competitive bids whenever such competitive bidding would be in the best interest of the city or whenever it is anticipated that the goods and service to be purchased will exceed $10,000.00 in costs to the city; however, competitive bidding shall not be required either where the goods and services to be purchased are provided only by a sole source otherwise meeting the other requirements of this section, or where goods and service previously purchased can be serviced, updated, upgraded, or repaired only by a sole source otherwise meeting the requirements of this section; (3)  To purchase from vendors located within the city, whenever the price is the lowest reasonable price, or whenever the price differential is no more than five percent of the total or $300.00, whichever is less; provided, however, in the event that there are no vendors located within the city which meet such price differential, then to purchase from vendors located within the county whenever the price is the lowest reasonable price or whenever the price differential is no more than five percent of the total or $300.00, whichever is less; (4)  To use the purchasing division of the department of administrative services of the state whenever it would be in the best interest of the city to do so; (5)  To award a contract for supplies, goods, services or equipment to the lowest responsible bidder whose bid is consistent with the quality, specifications and requirements of the city with respect to the particular supplies, goods, services or equipment bid upon. (Code 1986, § 10-2; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988; Ord. No. O-00-04-21, 4-20-2000; Ord. No. O-04-12-32, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 2-201. - Purchase orders resulting from competitive bids.     In the event that competitive bidding is required, whether by the city council or by the terms of this article, such bids shall be advertised for and obtained as provided by law or by city ordinance. Acceptance of a particular bid shall be by the execution of a purchase order in accord with the provisions of this article. In the event that a written contract in addition to such purchase order is required, such written contract shall be approved by the city council, as otherwise provided. (Code 1986, § 10-3; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988) 
Sec. 2-202. - Authorized purchases.     All purchases of supplies, goods, services and equipment by the city shall be accomplished with official purchase orders in the following manner: (1)  Regardless of whether or not a purchase of supplies, goods, services or equipment has been previously approved by its inclusion in the city budget for the relevant fiscal year, all purchase orders for such supplies, goods, services and equipment, which authorize a purchase in excess of $10,000.00, shall be approved by the city council at a regular or called meeting thereof. No such purchase order or contract executed in connection therewith shall be binding upon the city or enforceable against the city, unless and until the same is approved by the council as above provided. (2)  Except as otherwise provided herein, with respect to all purchase orders for the purchase of supplies, goods, services and equipment where such purchase order totals up to $10,000.00, the city manager shall be authorized to approve such purchase orders and the city shall be bound thereby. (3)  At his discretion, the city manager shall have the authority to delegate to the department heads of the city the authority to issue purchase orders in amounts of up to $1,000.00; provided, however, that such authority may be revoked at any time by the city council or by direction of the city council. (4)  Neither the city manager nor any department head may approve a purchase order for a purchase or a service which was not provided for in the city budget for the relevant fiscal year, unless such budget is amended by appropriate action of the city council to provide therefor; nor by such persons approve a purchase order which shall exceed in whole or in part the amount of funds then available in the city budget for the relevant fiscal year for the purchase or service which is the subject of such purchase order. (5)  The city manager shall be authorized, after consultation with and approval by the mayor, to approve purchases in an emergency situation without regard to the other requirements contained in this article, where the immediate procurement of the purchases or services is essential to prevent delays in work undertaken by or on behalf of the city which may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of the city or its citizens. (Code 1986, § 10-4; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-203. - Limitation of city's liability.     The city shall not be liable for any purchase made, work done or service rendered for which a purchase order has not been first issued and signed by the purchasing agent or designee as provided in this article. (Code 1986, § 10-4.1; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988) 
Sec. 2-204. - Cooperative purchasing plans.     The city or the city purchasing agent, if such purchase is otherwise authorized pursuant to this article, shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the city would be served thereby. (Code 1986, § 10-4.2; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988) 
Sec. 2-205. - Prohibition of interest.     Any purchase, purchase order or contract within the purview of this article in which any officer or employee of the city if financially interested, either directly or indirectly, shall be void, except that, before the execution of a purchase order or contract, the city council shall have the authority to waive compliance with this section when it finds that such action is in the best interest of the city. (Code 1986, § 10-4.3; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988) 
Sec. 2-206. - Authority of city council. (a)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed so as to limit the authority of the mayor and city council with respect to the approval of purchases by the city or the approval of proposed contacts by such body. (b)  Nothing herein shall be construed so as to alter, amend, modify or delete any requirement that all written contracts entered into by the city must be approved by the city council and must be executed by the mayor and attested to by the city clerk in order for the city to be bound thereby. (Code 1986, § 10-4.4; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988) 
Sec. 2-207. - Purchases of landscaping materials, supplies, and services required by natural disaster.     Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, in the event that a natural disaster occurs within the City of Americus and is so declared by the governing body of the city, the city shall be authorized, upon approval by the governing body of the city, to purchase landscaping trees, shrubs, bushes, plants, landscaping materials, landscaping services, and similar items, materials, or services (hereinafter referred to as "landscaping renovations") for planting, installation, and use upon publicly owned property damaged by such natural disaster without the necessity for competitive bidding for such landscaping renovation, unless competitive bidding is required in connection with such purchases by federal or state law, under the following circumstances: (1)  Any group of local citizens interested in the landscaping needs of the city, particularly as such needs relate to landscaping damages occurring to publicly owned property of the city damaged by a natural disaster, which takes steps to establish and constitute themselves as an Americus Re-Greening Committee, consisting of either local citizens, members of the governing body, or a combination thereof, may be recognized by the city as a private citizens' committee, but such committee shall be deemed to be solely a private committee and not a committee appointed by the governing body of the city, and neither shall such committee be deemed to be an agency or agent of the city; (2)  The existence of such committee shall be reported in writing to the city manager of the city upon the establishment thereof, and the city manager shall be authorized to provide such assistance, including technical assistance to the committee, as the city manager may deem appropriate once the committee is recognized by the city; (3)  Such committee shall be authorized to investigate, review and assess the damages and determine the required landscaping needs and landscaping renovations, including determining the quantity and type of landscaping trees, shrubs, bushes, plants, landscaping materials, landscaping services, and similar items, materials and services that are necessary in order to repair the damage to the landscaping caused by or resulting from the natural disaster with respect to such publicly owned property within the city; (4)  After such investigation, review and assessment, if the committee desires to provide its findings and recommendations to the city, the committee shall review the requirements of the landscaping renovations that the committee has determined to be necessary with any local and nonlocal vendors that the committee determines have or may have the capability and qualifications to provide such landscaping renovations as the committee may determine appropriate, in order that the committee may determine the best available price, the best material and service availability, and the vendor or vendors which can best meet the requirements found by the committee to be necessary in order to undertake and complete the landscaping renovations; (5)  After such determination, if the committee desires to provide its findings and recommendations to the city, the committee may make written recommendations to the governing body of the city regarding: a.  The required landscaping renovations; b.  The cost thereof; c.  The vendor or vendors that the committee has determined can best meet the requirements found by the committee to be necessary in order to undertake and complete the landscaping renovations; and d.  Any other matters that the committee may deem appropriate. (6)  The governing body shall be authorized to consider such recommendations, and may approve, disapprove, or modify and approve, such recommendations, and if the recommendations are approved or approved with modifications by the governing body, and if the landscaping renovations and purchases are to be made utilizing funds donated or granted to the city by other public agencies, public foundations, private entities, private foundations, or private individuals, the committee may act as agent for the city in procuring such landscaping renovations and purchases which are approved by the governing body, and the governing body shall be authorized to approve and authorize the expenditure of such donated or grant funds for such landscaping renovations and purchases without the necessity of utilizing a competitive bidding process. (Ord. No. O-07-09-33, § 10-2.1, 9-20-2007; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 2-208—2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
Sec. 2-301. - Short title.     This article shall be known as the "identity theft prevention program". (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-302. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2, in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft "red flags" and by responding to such "red flags" in a manner that will prevent identity theft. (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-303. - Definitions.     For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:     City means the City of Americus.     Covered account means: (i) an account that the city offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a mortgage loan account, utility account; and (ii) any other account that the City of Americus offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the City of Americus from identity theft, including, but not limited to, financial, operational, compliance, reputation or litigation risks.     Credit means the right granted by the City of Americus to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor.     Creditor means the City of Americus when it regularly extends, renews or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew or continue credit.     Customer means a person that has a covered account with the city.     Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted, using identifying information of another person without authority.     Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative or association.     Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and driver's license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security Number, mother's birth name and date of birth.     Red flag means a pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft.     Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-304. - Findings. (a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2, due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. (b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include, utility services and community development loans. (c)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts, have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. (d)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and a hard copy is filed in a secured location. (e)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): (1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; (2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; (3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; (4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-305. - Process of establishing a covered account. (a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account with the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer for utility accounts, a picture identification, Social Security Number, and lease document if currently renting. For loans, Social Security Number, consumer credit check, and financial statements/tax returns. Applicant shall also provide any information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and a hard copy filed in a secure storage area. (b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate the account number. (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-306. - Access to covered account information. (a)  Access to customer accounts shall be protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. (b)  Such protection shall be established through the security module of the accounting software. Modifications to security shall be performed by only authorized personnel. Security access shall be limited to the finance director and the information system administrator. (c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the finance director and the system security changed immediately. (d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-307. - Credit card payments. (a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. (b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. (c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-308. - Sources and types of red flags.     All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for "red flags" as indicators of possible identity theft and such "red flags" shall include: (1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. (2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include, but are not limited to: a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. (3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include, but are not limited to: a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. (4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include, but are not limited to: a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. For example, where there is: 1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used. e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. (5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or "phishing" relating to covered accounts. (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-309. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. (a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of "red flags" indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such "red flag" or combination of "red flags" suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such "red flags" to the finance director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile "red flags", the employee shall convey this information to the finance director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the finance director in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following actions, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director: (1)  Contact the customer; (2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or b.  Close the account. (3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; (4)  Notify a debt collector within 48 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; (5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or (6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of "red flags" indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such "red flag" or combination of "red flags" suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such "red flags" to the finance director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile "red flags", the employee shall convey this information to the finance director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the finance director, in his or her discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director: (1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; (2)  Deny the application for the new account; (3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or (4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-310. - Updating the program.     The governing body of the city shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant "red flags", in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the governing body shall consider the following factors in exercising its discretion in amending the program: (1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; (2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; (3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft; (4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and (5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-311. - Program administration.     The finance director is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager of the city ("CAO") is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with "red flag" requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the CAO, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the governing body for consideration. (1)  The finance director will report to the CAO at least annually, on compliance with the "red flag" requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; b.  Service provider arrangements; c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. (2)  The finance director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account, with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-312. - Outside service providers.     In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any "red flags" that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-313. - Treatment of address discrepancies. (a)  Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this section is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. (b)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: (1)  Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. (2)  City means City of Americus. (c)  Policy. In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the city service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: (1)  Compare the information in the consumer report or other identifying documentation with: a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(l); b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or (2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. (d)  Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: (1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; (2)  The city establishes a continuing relationship with the consumer; and (3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. (e)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. (f)  Methods of confirming consumer addresses. The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: (1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; (2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; (3)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or (4)  Using other reasonable processes. (Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Secs. 2-314—2-340. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2017-4, adopted April 20, 2017, repealed ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-16, and 6-36—6-52 and enacted a new ch. 6 as set out herein. Former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from The Code of 1962; the Code of 1986; Ord. of 4-22-1985; Ord. of 8-25-1986; Ord. No. O-88-02-08, adopted February 22, 1988; Ord. No. O-89-01-03, adopted January 23, 1989; Ord. No. O-90-12-20, adopted December 26, 1990; Ord. No. O-93-12-40, adopted December 27, 1993; Ord. No. O-95-12-42, adopted December 21, 1995; Ord. No. O-95-12-50, adopted December 21, 1995; Ord. No. O-96-06-24, adopted June 20, 1996; Ord. No. O-99-10-39, adopted October 18, 1999; Ord. No. O-01-12-42, adopted December 20, 2001; Ord. No. O-02-03-09, adopted March 21, 2002; Ord. No. O-03-01-04, adopted January 23, 2003; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, adopted January 20, 2005; Ord. No. O-05-11-41, adopted November 17, 2005; Ord. No. O-05-10-37, adopted October 20, 2005; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, adopted January 20, 2005; Ord. No. O-06-10-36, adopted October 20, 2006; Ord. No. O-08-05-12, adopted May 22, 2008; Ord. No. O-08-11-37, adopted November 20, 2008; Ord. No. O-09-06-18, adopted June 18, 2009; Ord. No. O-10-08-24, adopted August 19, 2010; Ord. No. O-10-11-42, adopted November 18, 2010; Ord. No. O-2012-14, adopted May 24, 2012; Ord. No. O-2012-31, adopted December 20, 2012; Ord. No. O-2014-20, adopted October 20, 2014; Ord. No. O-2015-8, adopted March 19, 2015; Ord. No. O-2015-15, adopted July 19, 2015; Ord. No. O-2016-4, adopted July 21, 2016 and Ord. No. O-2017-3, adopted March 23, 2017; Ord. No. O-2017-5, adopted June 22, 2017. State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulation of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Agent means an individual who does not have an ownership interest in the licensed premise, who meets the requirements of section 6-40 of this chapter, who is employed in a managing capacity and designated by the owner of the licensed premise to be licensee.     Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine from whatever source or by whatever process produced.     Alcoholic beverage means and includes alcohol, distilled spirits, malt beverage, hard cider, wine or fortified wine.     Amusement park means a place owned and operated permanently and exclusively for the purpose of providing amusement, attraction, and entertainment to the general public through the means of rides, live entertainment and games either on a seasonal or year round basis, which park has at least 25 rides and 50 games or attractions and the area of the amusement park is comprised of at least 80 acres exclusive of parking.     Applicant means the person making application for a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages and, if applicable, any individual designated by that person to be licensee.     Bar shall be an establishment that does not meet the definition of a restaurant, nightclub, lounge, farm winery or hotel, and serves alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises. A licensee of a bar shall obtain and keep in force and affect a food service permit. In being classified as a bar, the sales for alcoholic beverages must be a minimum of 75 percent of gross sales of the business.     Bottle house means any place of business open to the public or any private club providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business that allows guest, patrons or members to bring in and to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises.     Business area means any street length between intersections where 50 percent or more of the linear feet of that street length is in use for business purposes.     Business license manager or supervisor means the individual employed by the City of Americus who handles alcoholic beverage licenses, as such position presently exists, or by whatever name the position may be designated in the future.     Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and shall be publicly designated as a church.     City means the City of Americus.     Closed function means an event not open to the general public that must have a written, limited guest list prepared at least 48 hours in advance of the date on which the closed function is to occur, and which occurs on property owned and maintained by the city. No pay-at-the-door guest or drop-ins are to be permitted. Alcoholic beverages may be served without charge and consumed at closed functions, but the offer and sale of alcoholic beverages at such functions is prohibited.     College means only such state, county, city, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state, and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught.     Convenience store means a retail establishment whose primary business is the sale of pre-packaged or unprepared food and grocery items and which may also sell fuel products, household items, or tobacco products and other goods commonly associated with the same.     Conviction means adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly referred to as the State of Georgia First Offender Act, being O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60, or as may be amended from time to time.     Craft beer means an alcoholic beverage that is obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing six percent or more alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.     Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines.     Distance means the measurement in linear feet from the center of the primary entrance as designated by the fire marshal for the proposed premises of a licensee in a direct line to the closest point of the applicable structure at issue under sections 6-42 and 6-43 of this chapter. A radius shall be measured from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of any licensee. Should the proposed premises contain two or more customer entry doors, the distance shall be the shortest measurement in linear feet from the center of any door of customer entry as determined by city officials to the structure at issue. Applicant must provide a stamped survey, performed by a State Licensed Professional Surveyor, indicating the radius locations.     Drink means any spirituous liquor not in its original package served for consumption on the premises, which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid.     Family means any person related to the holder of an alcoholic beverage license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to the laws of descent and distribution of the State of Georgia.     Farm winery means a domestic manufacturer of wine in quantities of less than 100,000 gallons of wine per calendar year, that is licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1, or as may be amended from time to time. Provided a license is issued as required by this chapter, a farm winery is authorized to sell wine by the package, by the drink and operate a wine tasting facility on the premises of the farm winery without additional license requirements, except as is required in the city zoning ordinance.     Food caterer means any person whose primary business is the preparation of food for consumption off the premises.     Fortified wine means an alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. The term does not include hard cider.     Good cause for discontinuing operations shall mean the licensee discontinued operations for a period of more than three months as a direct result of reasons beyond his or her control such as: an Act of God; civil disobedience of someone other than the licensee; delays caused by a governmental entity; fire; flood; material shortages; a natural disaster; a riot; strikes; and/or war.     Good cause for failure to open shall mean the licensee was unable to open the business within the allotted time for reasons beyond his or her control such as delays caused by: an Act of God; a construction delay; civil disobedience of someone other than the licensee; delays caused by a governmental entity; fire; flood; material shortages; a natural disaster; a riot; strikes; and/or war.     Grocery store means a retail establishment whose primary function is the sale of packaged or unprepared food and grocery items for consumption off the premises and whose annual gross sales of alcoholic beverages do not exceed five percent of its total gross sales.     Growler means a container capable of being properly sanitized and which has a capacity that does not to exceed 128 fluid ounces.     Hard cider means an alcoholic beverage that contains at least one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume which is made by the fermentation of the natural juice of apples or pears.     Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least 40 people, where meals are regularly served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a bar, lounge, restaurant or nightclub on their premises; and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel.     Indoor entertainment hall means a publicly or privately owned licensed commercial establishment that satisfies all of the following requirements: (i) provides, professional, live musical entertainment or concerts, performed on-site indoors, at least three nights a week on average over the course of a calendar year; (ii) regularly serves prepared food, with a full service kitchen, consisting of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments; (iii) is prepared to serve food every hour it is open; (iv) derives at least 25 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods, admission charges, ticket sales, sale of merchandise, vending sales, attendance fees, or other recreational, promotional, or operational activities; (v) does not provide any sexually related adult entertainment at any time; (vi) has at least 40,000 square feet of enclosed heated space; (vii) has an occupant capacity of at least 3,500; (viii) is located on a major thoroughfare; (ix) does not provide the sale of alcohol on Sundays, unless such establishment qualifies for Sunday sales under state law and the provisions of this chapter of the Americus Code of Ordinances; and, (x) does not allow the admission of any natural person who is under the age of 21 years of age during hours when alcohol is served, except in accordance with the provisions of section 6-90 of this chapter. Indoor entertainment halls shall be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages through concession sales.     License means the authorization by the mayor and city council to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages either by the package or consumption on the premises.     License review board means the board created by the governing body of the City of Americus. (1)  There is hereby established a license review board. (2)  The license review board established by this section shall have the following duties: a.  To hear due cause hearings as provided in chapter 6 of this Code. b.  To consider and act upon any matters specifically delegated to the license review board by any other city ordinance or resolution or action of the city council. (3)  Applicants or licensee shall be given notice of the date, time and place when the license review board will consider the respective matter. (4)  The license review board, other than as expressly provided in chapter 6, shall have no authority or jurisdiction to hear, consider or render decisions of any kind with respect to the suspension, revocation, probation or other disciplinary action against a license or licensee. (5)  Any decision or recommendation of the license review board may be appealed to the city council pursuant to section 6-63. Any decision or recommendation of the license review board not appealed to the mayor and council must be approved by the city council or set down for a second due cause hearing before the city council. (6)  The decision of the city council on an appeal under this article shall be final unless appeal is made to the superior court of the county. Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the city council by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court within 30 days of the decision of the city council. (7)  The license review board shall have no jurisdiction or authority to hear any appeal from or to reverse, modify or set aside any decision of the city council. (8)  The license review board members shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council and shall be composed of five members. Three members of the license review board will serve two-year terms and two members will serve one-year terms. (9)  If there is a vacancy on the license review board by virtue of a member resigning, or for any other reason, then the mayor shall appoint a replacement for the vacant position. The replacement shall serve temporarily until the city council ratifies such appointment, and in such case, the replacement for that position shall become permanent. If the council fails to ratify such replacement, then the mayor shall appoint a different replacement until a new member for that position is appointed and ratified as provided herein. (10)  By majority vote, the city council may terminate any term of a license review board member prior to the expiration of such term. Terms of service by any board member shall terminate at the end of their respective terms. Any member of the license review board may be reappointed by the city council subject to the consecutive term rule below. There shall be a three consecutive term limit on the number of times such terms can be renewed. After three terms, the member is required to sit out one term prior to being reconsidered for a subsequent appointment. (11)  The license review board shall meet at such times as necessary, to be determined by such board, and shall render decisions in public on the date of the consideration by the board. The decision shall then be memorialized in writing and delivered to the affected parties after such decision is announced in public. (12)  The license review board shall select one of its members to serve as chair and one of its members to serve as secretary, to serve at the pleasure of the license review board. Minutes and records of all proceedings shall be kept and maintained in the office of the city clerk. (13)  Each member of the license review board shall either be a resident of the city or have an ownership interest as principal shareholder, general partner or sole proprietor in at least one business that is located in the city. No employee or elected official of the city shall be appointed to the board. The mayor may appoint and the city council may ratify the appointment of any person who is an alcoholic beverage license holder, provided that only three such license holders, if any, serve on the board.     Licensee means a person holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter.     Lounge means a separate room in which alcoholic beverages are sold, connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in a hotel as defined in this section with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 50 people. A lounge, as defined in this section, which is operated on a different floor in the premises, or in a separate building, or is not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant, shall be considered a separate establishment and shall pay an additional license fee therefor.     Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "beer" and "malt beverage" are interchangeable throughout this chapter. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.     Managing capacity means the president or chief executive officer of a corporation, or the managing member of a limited liability company, or the general partner of a limited partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages, or who is authorized to act on behalf of the licensee in any capacity at the location to be licensed or supervision of management of the operation, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed, whether or not such person is an employee of the licensee.     Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: (1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; (2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and (3)  In the case of wine, any vintner.     Minor means any natural person less than 18 years of age.     Nightclub means an establishment having a seating capacity of at least 100 people with all booths and tables being unobstructed and open to view, deriving its primary income from the sales of alcoholic beverages, and providing to its patrons a band and/or other professional live entertainment performed onsite, including, but not limited to, music, comedy, readings, dancing or acting. All nightclubs shall be equipped with air conditioning and shall maintain an adequate kitchen with a sufficient number of servers and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for their patrons, provided that nightclubs located in hotels having dining room and kitchen facilities may be excluded from the requirement of maintaining a kitchen in connection with such nightclub. The principal business of such nightclubs shall be entertainment, and the serving of food and spirituous liquors shall be incidental thereto.     Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container.     Package store means a business establishment whose primary business activity is the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package.     Permit holder means that person authorized with a server permit and designated by the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages at the licensed premise. There will be an annual fee for this permit that will be listed in the city fee schedule also approved each year.     Person means any individual, sole proprietor, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, limited liability company, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, general partnership or other group or combination acting as a unit, whether public, private or quasi-public. In the case of a general partnership, it includes all partners. In the case of a limited partnership, it includes the general partner. In the case of a corporation, it includes all principal shareholders. In the case of a limited liability company, it includes all members who are deemed to be principal shareholders under the definition of that term contained in this section.     Pouring license means a license that authorizes on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages.     Principal shareholder means a person who owns any shares of a corporation with less than 35 shareholders; or, if the corporation has more than 35 shareholders, a person who owns more than five percent of the shares of the corporation, except that a person who owns shares which are publicly traded shall not be deemed to be a principal shareholder or to have a beneficial interest in the corporation based solely on the fact of stock ownership. Principal shareholder shall also include a person who owns any membership interests in a limited liability company with less than 35 members; or, if the limited liability company has more than 35 members, a person who owns more than five percent of the outstanding membership interests in the limited liability company.     Private club means a non-profit association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city, which has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued under this chapter; and which complies with all requirements set forth in this section: it has at least 75 members who regularly pay monthly, quarterly, or semiannual dues; and, it is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other non-profit purposes; and, no part of its net earnings inure to the benefit of any shareholders or members; and, it owns, hires or leases a building or space therein for the reasonable use to its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and, it maintains and uses a sufficient number of servers and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guest; provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid or receives, directly or indirectly, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of spirituous liquors to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meetings or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club.     Private party function means an event held where alcoholic beverages are provided. The licensee must submit to and have the private party function approved by the supervisor of the city's business license office provided such function does not threaten the health, safety and welfare of the participants or public. In the event the private party function is not approved by the business license supervisor, the licensee may appeal said decision to the mayor and city council. The mayor and city council shall have authority to approve the private party function provided the function does not threaten the health, safety and welfare of the participants or public.     Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one or more than two families customarily reside and shall not include a mobile home, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, a boardinghouse or rooming house where there are five or more boarders or roomers, any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of any application for license, or any residence that shall be a nonconforming use in a commercial zone.     Properly sanitized means the container was: sanitized per the instructions of Star San sanitizer or any product that is the equivalent of Star San sanitizer; or, placed in an oven at a temperature of 340 degrees or higher for at least 60 minutes; or, washed in an automatic dishwasher for a full wash and heat dry cycle with or without the addition of detergent agents; or, sanitized in conformance with the sanitation requirements for glassware used in restaurants as set forth in the rules or regulations of the Sumter County Health Department.     Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of spirituous liquors by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property, or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee or his agent to the purchases, without any deduction there from whatsoever.     Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any alcoholic beverages by the drink.     Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served, without sleeping accommodations, such place seating a minimum of 40 or more people, and holding a certificate of approval from the county health department. A restaurant shall maintain a full-service kitchen which consists of, at a minimum, a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed and a refrigerator. In order to be classified as a restaurant under this chapter, the licensee must derive a minimum of 40 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales, over any 12-month period of time, from the sale of prepared meals or food. In the case of an audit, the relevant time period shall be the 12 months immediately preceding the commencement of the audit. If the restaurant being audited has been in operation as a restaurant for less than 12 months, the audit period shall be the period of time the entity has operated as a restaurant, and the restaurant must derive a minimum of 40 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales for that audit period from the sale of prepared meals or food, if the restaurant previously operated as another type of business, e.g., a bar as that term is defined in this section, total annual gross food and beverage sales for the time period it has been operated as a restaurant shall be the only data relevant to the audit and the data for the period it operate as another type of business shall not be examined during the audit.     Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale.     Retail sale means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. Such term shall also include, without limitation, the sale to any member of the public of any ticket or license, or the charging of any cover charge or fee, for admission to any event or premises where alcoholic beverages are available without further charge, as well as the sale of any ticket, stamp, token or similar item which may be redeemed or exchanged for alcoholic beverages.     Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale.     School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690, or as may be amended from time to time, including any public or private location that teaches the Georgia Pre-Kindergarten Program and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught and shall not include residences where home study programs are located.     Spirituous or alcoholic liquors means all beverages containing alcohol, obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume, including fortified wines.     Theater shall mean any theater located within the city limits seating more than 500 persons in its customary seating configuration and having the facilities for all of the following: (1)  The showing of films and movies; (2)  The staging of plays; (3)  The presentation of musical concerts and shows; and (4)  The presentation of other forms of entertainment where an admission fee is generally charged.     Underage person means any person below the age at which alcoholic beverages may be legally purchased in the State of Georgia, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, or as may be amended from time to time.     Wine means an alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or with natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. The term does not include hard cider.     Wholesaler means any person engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale of any alcoholic beverages as defined in this section. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Purpose of chapter.     This chapter has been enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purpose, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, to protect and preserve schools and churches, to give effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-3. - Compliance required. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter. (b)  The city shall have the authority to conduct an audit of the books and records of any licensee and/or require regular reporting of the books and records of any licensee to assure licensee's compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In such event, the city shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit or reporting requirements. In conducting such audit, the city may require the licensee to provide the books and records in electronic form if such books or records are maintained, in the regular course of business by the licensee, in electronic form. (c)  Some of the business operations described in this chapter must, to continue operating as that type of business, maintain: (1)  In the case of an indoor entertainment hall, 25 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods, admission charges, ticket sales, sale of merchandise, vending sales, attendance fees, or other recreational, promotional, or operational activities. (2)  In the case of a grocery store, the sales of alcoholic beverages do not exceed five percent of its total gross sales. (3)  In the case of a restaurant, the licensee must derive a minimum of 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales, over any 12-month period of time, from the sale of prepared meals or food. (d)  In determining whether these entities have complied with these percentages, the city shall be entitled to audit the books and records of the entities. The following shall be applicable to such audits: (1)  If the business has operated as that type of entity (e.g., a restaurant) for 12 months or more prior to the date on which the audit is commenced, the auditor shall consider the annual gross food and beverage sales, or the annual gross sales, or total gross sales, as the case may be, during the 12 months preceding the date on which the audit is commenced to determine whether the entity has maintained the required percentage set forth in the definition of that entity found in this chapter. (2)  If the business has operated as that type of entity for less than 12 months prior to the date on which the audit is commenced, the auditor shall consider the annual gross food and beverage sales, or the annual gross sales, or total gross sales, as the case may be, during the time that the business has operated as that type of entity to determine whether the entity has maintained the required percentage set forth in the definition of that entity found in this chapter. (3)  If the entity operated as one type of entity, e.g., a bar as defined in this chapter, and changed to another type of entity, e.g., a restaurant as defined in this chapter, the audit shall consider only the annual gross food and beverage sales, or the annual gross sales, or total gross sales, as the case may be, during the period it operated after the change of the type of entity to determine whether the entity has maintained the required percentage set forth in the definition of that entity found in this chapter. (4)  If the entity has failed to maintain the percentage required by the definition, the entity shall be placed on probation for a period of three months from and after the date the entity is notified of its failure to maintain the required percentage. The notification placing the entity on probation shall be in writing and provide the percentages determined as part of the audit. During that probationary time period, the entity can attempt to attain the percentage required by the definition for that entity. At the end of the probationary period, a second audit will be conducted. The second audit will audit only the annual gross food and beverage sales, or annual gross sales, or total gross sales, as the case may be, during the probationary period and whether the entity attained the percentage required by the definition for that entity during the probationary period. Should the entity fail to attain the required percentage during the second audit, the entity will be informed, in writing, that it can no longer operate as that type of entity, e.g., a restaurant that fails to maintain the percentage required by the definition for that entity will be notified that it can no longer operate as a restaurant and may operate only as a bar. Should the licensee change its entity, for instance from a restaurant to a bar, it shall be the licensee's responsibility to assure that it complies with all the requirements of these ordinances of the city, including, but not limited to, any licensing applicable to that entity. (5)  The entity may appeal the audit decision generated by a failure to meet the required percentage during the second audit. Any such decision to appeal must be made, in writing, and filed with the license review board no later than ten calendar days from and after the entity's receipt of the decision appealed. If the results of the second audit are mailed by the auditor to the licensee, that decision of the auditor is deemed received by the licensee three days from and after the decision is mailed and an additional copy filed with the city clerk. That notice of appeal must specify, in detail, why the entity believes the audit decisions are flawed. Where a hearing is scheduled by the license review board, the entity shall be provided written notice of such hearing no less than five calendar days prior to the date scheduled for the hearing. If the license review board upholds the auditor's decision, the entity shall have the right to appeal to the city manager. Any such appeal to the city manager must be in writing and filed with the city clerk and the city manager's office no later than ten calendar days from and after date on which the entity receives the decision of the license review board. If the decision of the license review board is mailed, that decision is deemed received by the licensee three days from and after the decision is mailed. The appeal to city manager shall contain the following: a detailed explanation of why the entity believes the audit results and the decision of the license review board is flawed; statistics showing the entity has complied with the percentage contained in the definition for that entity found in this chapter; a copy of the results of the first and second audits; and, a copy of the decision of the license review board. Failure of the entity to submit all of the appeal documents shall be fatal to the appeal. It shall be within the discretion of the city manager whether a hearing will be held on the appeal. If a hearing is scheduled by the city manager of the city, the entity shall be provided written notice of such hearing no less than five calendar days prior to the date scheduled for the hearing. (6)  The appeals shall consider only evidence of sales during the audit periods and shall not consider evidence of any sales during the appeal periods. (7)  The entity shall be allowed to operate during the time it is appealing the decision of the audit. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-4. - Territorial application of chapter.     The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply only within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-5. - Sale, possession, or consumption.     No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, possessed or consumed by any person on or in any public park or public property except as otherwise approved pursuant to section 6-71, 6-72 or 6-73 of the Code of Ordinances, Americus, Georgia. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Secs. 6-6—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
Sec. 6-31. - License required for manufacture, sale.     No alcoholic beverages shall be manufactured or sold at wholesale or retail, in the original package or by the drink, nor shall any bottle house be operated except under a license granted by the mayor and city council. A farm winery is required to obtain a license as provided in this chapter for the manufacture of wine, fortified wine, or hard cider. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) State Law reference— Local permit or license for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a). 
Sec. 6-32. - Separate licenses required for package sales and sales for on-premises consumption. (a)  A licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises shall have the right to serve malt beverages, wine, fortified wine, or hard cider or allow the consumption of malt beverages, wine, fortified wine, or hard cider on the premises during the same hours as are permitted under this chapter for the serving of distilled spirits by the drink. (b)  Licensees for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink that allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises and the sale of malt beverages by the drink shall not permit the sale of distilled spirits by the bottle or package. Such licensees shall have the right to sell wine, fortified wine, champagne, or malt beverages to the public by the bottle or package for consumption on the premises without the issuance of a separate retail license therefor. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) State Law reference— Governing authority to set forth ascertainable standards pertaining to the granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage permits or licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(b)(l). 
Sec. 6-33. - Sunday permits. (a)  A separate permit is required for the Sunday sale of any alcoholic beverages. (b)  Licensed establishments that derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food and licensed establishments that derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging may apply to the business license division manager for a permit for the purpose of selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. until Monday 1:00 a.m. No Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made by such an establishment without first having obtained the permit provided for in this subsection. A separate charge shall be made for issuance of such permit. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-34. - Application—Filing; form; contents; timing. (a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license required under this chapter shall make written application to the city at city hall for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and approved by the city. Such applications shall state the name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is other than an individual, the application shall state the owner of the license, the name of the proposed licensee and a d/b/a name of the proposed licensed premise, if applicable. The application shall state the address where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and principal shareholders; and such other information as may be required by the mayor and city council, the business license division manager, or the police department, and shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. (b)  All applications for a license under this chapter shall furnish all data, information and records requested by the city, through any authorized officer, such as the business license manager or chief of police, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. Applicants by filing an application agree to produce for oral interrogation any persons requested by the city through its duly authorized representative, such as the business license manager, chief of police, or city attorney, and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the issuance or denial of such license. The failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic denial, with prejudice, of such application. (c)  All applications for license, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interest in retail liquor stores. This shall include: (1)  The names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling at retail package liquor, together with any interest each person or any member of his immediate family has in any other retail liquor store; (2)  The ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; (3)  The amount of rental paid for such land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and what intervals it is paid; (4)  The names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sub lessor of such land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail liquor store is located; and (5)  Any other information called for by the business license office or its duly authorized representative, such as the business license division manager, the police department, or city attorney. (d)  Each application furnished under this section must be completed in its entirety before being accepted by the city for filing and processing. (e)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any new license under this chapter and as a prerequisite to the issuance of a renewed license under this chapter, all applicants and existing licensees shall be required to execute and deliver to the city a verified statement indicating receipt of this Code relating to alcoholic beverages. (f)  After staff has determined that an application is complete, the request shall be heard following advertising as set forth herein at the earliest regularly scheduled meeting of mayor and city council, or as soon thereafter as possible. A decision shall be rendered not later than 45 days after the public hearing but the failure to render a decision within such time period shall not result in the automatic issuance of the license for which application has been made. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-35. - Same—Investigation; report. (a)  All applications required by this chapter shall be investigated by the police department, including, but not limited to, an investigation into the criteria as outlined in sections 6-34 and 6-45 of this chapter. After such investigation, the police department shall report its recommendation to the business license manager. No further action shall be taken by the city or by the applicant with respect to any application until completion by the police department of its investigation. Once the applicant has submitted all of the required information and provided any additional information requested by the business license manager or the police department, the police department shall make its recommendation. (b)  All licensed premises shall be open for inspection by an inspector or member of the city police department, or any other person so designated by the mayor, council, city manager or chief of police. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-36. - Same—Advertisement of intent to engage in business. (a)  All applicants for license under this chapter shall give notice of the purpose of making such application by advertisement at least one time per week for two consecutive weeks in the legal organ published in the county in which the legal advertisements of the city are carried, which notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the officers, and the date and time the mayor and city council will hear the application. The advertisement referred to in this section shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital and lower case and shall be at least a one-inch column advertisement. (b)  The running of the advertisement required in this section in a newspaper may be concurrent with the time after the application for license is filed, and if the one day's advertisement in two weeks is not made before the filing of the application, the application shall state that the advertisement is being made. (c)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign or signs stating the following:"_________ license applied for. A hearing before the mayor and city council of the city shall be held on the ______ day of ______, 20___. All interested persons take notice." The sign or signs shall not be less than 18 inches by 24 inches, and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property which adjoins the location so as to be clearly legible to persons using such public areas. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-37. - Same—Public hearing; approval.     All applications, with the exception of renewals under section 6-59, for license under this chapter shall be acted upon by the mayor and city council after a public hearing after advertisement as required in this article. No license shall be issued until it has been approved by the mayor and city council. All reasons for denial or approval for license shall be recorded in the minutes of the hearing. Denial of application shall be provided to the applicant in writing providing the reasons for denial and mailed to the applicant. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-38. - Same—Acceptance and consideration after rejection.     When an application for license under this chapter is denied by the city, the city shall not accept or consider an application for a license under this chapter from that applicant or licensee within 12 months of the denial. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-39. - Architectural standards.     All applicants for license shall furnish plans and renderings of the new proposed premises with the application. Such premises shall be constructed, renovated or built so as to be equal to and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood or better. The exterior shall be of finished building material such as brick, stone or wood, but not concrete block. The applicant shall comply with all building, health and similar city, county and State codes. The applicant shall obtain and file with his application a certification of zoning certifying the property where the applicant shall operate his business to be zoned C-1, C-2, C-3, I, l-N, A-G, NS, or such other commercial districts as may be approved or adopted from time to time. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-40. - Citizenship, residence and age requirement. (a)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a corporation, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either the principal shareholder thereof, or an agent, as agent is defined in this chapter. (b)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a partnership, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either the general partner of the partnership, or an agent, as agent is defined in this chapter. (c)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a sole proprietor, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor, provided that the sole proprietor works in a full-time managing capacity on the licensed premises. If the sole proprietor does not work in a full-time managing capacity on the licensed premises, then the license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor and an agent, as agent is defined in this chapter. (d)  Each of the persons named in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section must be a U.S. citizen, or a legal alien for at least one year prior to making application. (e)  Each of the persons named in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section must be 21 years of age or older at the time the application for a license is filed. (f)  The principal shareholder in the case of a corporate applicant, the general partner in the case of a partnership applicant, the sole proprietor in the case of a sole proprietor applicant or the agent of such applicant shall be a resident of the State of Georgia at the time the application for a license is filed or renewed. (g)  The licensee shall notify the city in writing and shall keep such notification current, of the name, address and telephone number for such licensee and the agent of such licensee at such address and telephone number for the purpose of receiving communication and notices required under this chapter. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-41. - Location of business—districts where permitted. (a)  Wholesaler's license. No license shall be issued to a wholesaler of alcoholic beverages except where the wholesale business is to be located in the area of the city which is C-1 or C-2. (b)  License for on-premises consumption. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be issued unless the location has been zoned, C-1, C-2, C-3, I, l-N, A-G, NS, under the zoning laws of the city or is in use as a business under specific special use permit; provided, this subsection shall not apply to private clubs. No license shall be issued for a location that operates as a nonconforming use. (c)  Package distilled spirits. No license to engage in the retail sale of distilled spirits, in package form, shall be issued to any person for the operation of such business except within the areas zoned, C-1, C-2, C-3, I, l-N, A-G, NS. No license shall be issued for a location that is a nonconforming use. (d)  All licenses granted herein shall be further subject to O.C.G.A. 3-3-21, or as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-42. - Same—distance from residence; distance from housing authority. (a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted for any location that is a distance of 300 feet or less from a property line of a lot where a private residence is located. However, if the mayor and city council consider evidence that the property values of the residence or other residences will not be affected, that the quiet enjoyment of the premises by the residents thereof shall not be adversely affected and the grant of such license shall not have any other adverse affect on the private residence, then the mayor and city council may waive this provision. This provision shall not apply to private residences located on commercially zoned property or within the bounds of the Central Business Improvement District as it exists now or may change from time to time. No license in effect as of November 1, 2016 shall be revoked before the date of expiration thereof solely by reason of the location of the licensed premises being in violation of this section. This subsection shall not apply to any location for which a license has been issued prior to November 1, 2016, nor to the renewal of such license by the licensee or by any third party. (b)  No person shall knowingly and intentionally sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any housing authority property. This section shall not apply to any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply to any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises was lawful at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-43. - Same—distance from schools, churches, parks, hospitals and public buildings. (a)  No license shall be issued under this chapter where the place of business of the applicant is located within a distance of 300 feet of any school ground, college campus, church; provided, however, that at a public hearing by the mayor and city council, the mayor and city council may waive the distance requirement of this section if satisfactory evidence shall be produced that no adverse effect to property values or the use of the facilities for the aforesaid purposes would occur if a license was granted. This section does not apply to any school ground, college campus, and church within the bounds of the Central Business Improvement District as it exists now or may change from time to time. (b)  The provisions of subsection (a) above notwithstanding, in no event shall a license be issued for: (1)  The package sale of any distilled spirits within 300 feet of any church building, school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. (2)  The package sale of any distilled spirits, wine, fortified wine, hard cider, or malt beverages within 300 feet of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. This subsection shall not apply to any business having a license in effect on July 1, 1981. (3)  Any sale of any alcoholic beverage that violates any provision of state law. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-44. - Same—additional considerations.     The mayor and city council may take into consideration in its discretion the zoning of the surrounding area, the nature of the area, and the impact on traffic as factors in the consideration of a license application under this chapter. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-45. - Conditions disqualifying application. (a)  No application for any license under this chapter shall be granted, retained, renewed or transferred where the application or the evidence shows any of the following conditions to exist: (1)  Evidence that the applicant, licensee or any individual having an ownership interest in said license, has been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or crime of moral turpitude. (2)  Evidence that the applicant has had revoked within the last 12 months any alcohol-related license or permit issued under the police powers of any county, state, municipality, or other governmental entity. (3)  Evidence that the applicant or licensee is family, as family is defined in this chapter, to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof. This subsection shall not restrict a farm winery from selling at retail or wholesale. (4)  Evidence that the applicant or licensee has failed to answer any question on the alcoholic beverage application accurately or failed to provide accurate information to the mayor and city council, license review board, police department, business license division staff or any city official or city employee. (b)  In addition to the standards stated elsewhere in this chapter, the following standards may also apply to the issuance, retention, renewal, transfer or denial of a license for alcoholic beverages either by the package or for consumption on the premises: (1)  Evidence that the applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. (2)  Evidence that the applicant has insufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. (3)  Evidence that, despite compliance with the minimum distance requirement, the type and number of schools or number of churches in the vicinity causes underage persons to frequent the area. (4)  Evidence that the location and type of structure could create a difficulty in police supervision. (5)  Evidence that there are no licenses granted in the area or that the proposed area already is adequately supplied with such licenses. (6)  Evidence that a license for the location would be detrimental to the property values in the area. (7)  Evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking which would result in parking on the streets or adjoining property. (8)  Evidence that the conduct of the business creates a disturbance, congregation of intoxicated persons, congregation of underage persons, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises by underage persons, or causes the police to answer complaints or make extra surveillance of the premises. More than three underage persons without supervision of a parent or one authorized by a parent shall be prima facie evidence of a congregation of underage persons. (9)  Evidence of unusual police observation, responding to premises, or inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance regulating such business, if the applicant is a previous holder of a license. (10)  Evidence that the application is a guise or dummy application for another person who cannot meet the qualifications of this chapter for the issuance of a license. (11)  Evidence that the applicant or any corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, principal shareholder, general partner or managing agent is delinquent in the payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to the city, the county or the state. (12)  Evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold or furnished to an intoxicated person as prohibited under O.C.G.A 3-3-22 or to an underage person as prohibited by O.C.G.A 3-3-23 or O.C.G.A 3-3-23.1. (c)  The city manager shall have authority to deny an application for a new license under this chapter upon a showing that any one or more of the conditions in subsection (a) exists. Upon such a denial, the applicant shall have a right to an appeal pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 herein within ten days of the decision to deny on such basis. Upon the showing that any one or more of the conditions outlined in subsection (b) exists on an existing licensee, the licensee shall be entitled to notice and a hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 herein prior to any action taken on said license by the city. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Secs. 6-46, 6-47. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-48. - Wholesale licenses prohibited from holding interest in other licenses.     No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license under the terms of this chapter. This section shall not apply to farm wineries. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-49. - License to be obtained within two weeks of approval; issuance. (a)  All licenses must be obtained not later than two weeks from the date of approval of the application by the mayor and city council, and if not so obtained, the license granted by the mayor and city council shall be void. (b)  When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the city the required fee, the license shall be issued, subject to subsection (a). (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-50. - Completion of proposed licensed premises.     Where a building in which a retailer or bottle house operator intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of the application for such license, not in existence or not yet completed or renovated, a license may be issued for such location, provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-51. - Time limit for commencement of business; forfeiture for nonuse. (a)  All holders of licenses under this chapter must within three months after the issuance of such license open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within the three-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and revocation of the unused license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. The time period in which to commence operations shall not be extended and the license revoked unless the time period to commence operations is extended by: (1)  The license review board pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 of the Code of Ordinances, Americus, Georgia; or (2)  The city manager or his or her designee after the licensee produces written proof in the form of an affidavit on a form approved by the city manager or his or her designee showing good cause for failure to open. (b)  Any holder of a license under this chapter who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall upon completion of such three months automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of the failure to operate, be revoked without the necessity of any further action by the city. The license shall not be revoked under this subsection if, prior to the date which is three months from and after the cessation of business, the licensee produces written proof in the form of an affidavit on a form approved by the city manager or his or her designee showing good cause for discontinuing operations. In addition to such proof, the licensee shall provide an action plan concerning the date on which operations will be commenced. If the city manager or his or her designee finds that the licensee has produced the necessary proof showing good cause for discontinuing operations, the licensee shall have until the date set forth in his action plan to commence operations. Should the licensee fail to commence operations on the date set forth in the action plan, the licensee shall automatically forfeit his or her license. Nothing in this subsection shall relieve the licensee of his or her obligations to renew his or her license as set forth in this chapter. (c)  No license holder whose license is forfeited or revoked pursuant to this section may apply for a new alcohol license for a period of 12 months from and after the date of such forfeiture or revocation. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-52. - License fees; duration. (a)  The annual license fee for each classification of license under this chapter shall be set by the mayor and city council in the business fee schedule, or as maybe amended from time to time. (b)  The schedule of fees for each license classification under this chapter shall be on file at the Americus City Hall at the business license office. (c)  Any new license issued under this chapter shall be effective from the date of the license through December 31 of that year. Thereafter, the licensee shall be required to renew the license annually in January of each year. In the case of revocation or surrender of license before the expiration date of that license, the holder of the license shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. (d)  Each person manufacturing or selling distilled spirits in the city shall pay a license fee based on the annually adopted fee schedule for the city. (e)  On or after July 1 of a calendar year, all initial distilled spirits license and permit fees for that year shall be one-half of the basic fees set forth in subsection (d) of this section. (f)  Each person selling malt beverages, wine, fortified wine, and/or hard cider in the city shall pay a license fee based on the annually adopted fee schedule for the city. (g)  Any person holding a license granted under any subsection of this section 6-52 is eligible for applying for a license to sell and/or re-fill growlers. The fee for a growler license shall be the sum of $200.00 per calendar or any portion of a calendar year. The application shall be submitted on forms approved by the city manager or his or her designee. To be valid, the growler license must be approved by the mayor and city council. (h)  The total for off-premise license fees shall not exceed the statutory maximum prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-11-2(e), as amended. For retail package licenses, a half year is authorized as in subsection (e) of this section. (i)  All license fees required under this chapter shall be paid in cash or by certified check or by cashier's check. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-53. - Penalty for late fee payment.     Any licensee, person or entity who fails to pay any fee, tax or other payment due to the city of any kind when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax or other charge, a one-time separate penalty equal to ten percent of the required fee, tax or other charge received more than 30 days after the due date. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-54. - Payment of fees, number of licenses, renewal; annual sales statement, inspection of records. (a)  On an annual basis, the licensee shall submit renewed information and application on forms prescribed by the city no later than November 1 of each year in order to renew the license. The annual license fee under this chapter for those seeking renewal of a license accrues and is due and payable on December 31 of each year. The failure of the licensee to timely submit renewed information and application and/or the failure of the licensee to timely pay the annual license fee shall result in the expiration of the license. (b)  Upon expiration of the license, the licensee shall cease the sale of alcoholic beverages until the licensee obtains a valid license under this chapter. If the licensee fails to cease the sale of alcoholic beverages, the licensee shall be subject to the penalty as provided in section 6-53, in addition to other remedies under state or federal law and/or actions taken by the license review board and/or the mayor and city council. (c)  A person doing business at more than one place shall take out and pay for a separate license for each place of business. (d)  Each licensee shall provide the city with a certified statement prepared by his bookkeeper or accountant of the gross sales of the business for the preceding calendar year. Copies of the state sales tax returns for the same period shall be attached to the statement. Such statement must be properly notarized and certified to be true and correct by the licensee or his agent under penalty of law, and shall accompany the basic license fee payment on or before December 31 of each year. (e)  Any holder of or applicant for an alcoholic beverage license must make available for audit any and all records concerning such business upon request of the business license division manager or his/her representative. The books, records, inventory, stock and facilities of any alcoholic beverage license holder or applicant for same shall be open for inspection at any time for agents of the business license office and the police department. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-55. - Supplemental requirements for the sale of spirituous liquors for on-premises consumption.     No license for the sale of spirituous liquors by the drink or for the operation of a bottle house shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a bar, restaurant, hotel, or private club, lounge or nightclub as defined in this chapter. No bottle house shall operate unless it shall obtain a pouring license. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-56. - Event permits. (a)  In order to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages at an event authorized pursuant to section 6-71 of the Code of Ordinances, Americus, Georgia, the applicant, who is a licensed alcoholic caterer, intending to sell such alcoholic beverages must: (1)  Provide the city with a copy of a valid license from a county or municipality within the state which authorizes the applicant to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or by the package for consumption off the premises. (2)  Provide the city with a copy of valid annual off-premise license from the city which authorizes the applicant to sell alcoholic beverages in connection with an authorized catered function. (3)  Apply to the city for an event permit, providing the name of the applicant, the date, the applicant's address, the date or dates of the event, the time of the event, the applicant's alcoholic beverage caterer's license number. (4)  Pay an event permit fee as set forth in the fee schedule as approved by the mayor and city council. (5)  Pay local excise taxes on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the city. This subsection only applies to those licensed alcoholic beverage caterers who are domiciled in a local political subdivision other than the city. (6)  Maintain the original event permit in the vehicle while transporting the alcoholic beverages to the event and post it in a conspicuous location at the event for the duration of the event. (b)  In order to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages at an event authorized pursuant to section 6-72 of the Code of Ordinances, Americus, Georgia, the applicant intending to sell such alcoholic beverages must: (1)  Provide the city with a copy of a valid liquor license from a county or municipality within the state which authorizes the applicant to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or by the package for consumption off the premises. (2)  Provide the city with a copy of a valid annual off-premise alcohol license from the city; or, if the applicant does not have an off-premise alcohol license from the city, obtain one to submit with the application for an event permit. (3)  Apply to the city for an event permit, providing the name of the applicant, the date, the applicant's address, the date or dates of the event, the time of the event, the applicant's liquor license number. (4)  Pay an event permit fee as set forth in the fee schedule as approved by the mayor and city council. (5)  Pay local excise taxes on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the city. This subsection only applies to those applicants who are domiciled in a local political subdivision other than the city. (6)  Maintain the original event permit in the vehicle while transporting the alcoholic beverages to the event and post it in a conspicuous location at the event for the duration of the event. (c)  The event permit is valid for the duration of the authorized event and shall expire at the end of the event. The event permit is also only valid for the sale of the same type of alcoholic beverages that the applicant is allowed to sell under his or her liquor license or off-premise license. (d)  It shall be unlawful for any such applicant to employ any person who is less than 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. Any and all persons, regardless of the person's title or position, employed by the applicant who dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages at the event must have a valid server license issued by a governmental entity within the state. That server license must be carried by the licensee and available for review on request whenever the licensee is working at an event. (e)  It is unlawful for any person or entity to distribute or sell any alcoholic beverages in connection with an event approved under section 6-71 of the Code of Ordinances, Americus, Georgia, without first having obtained an event permit as provided in subsection (a) of this section 6-56. (f)  it is unlawful for any person or entity to distribute or sell any alcoholic beverages in connection with an event approved under section 6-72 of the Code of Ordinance, Americus, Georgia, without having obtained an event permit as provided in subsection (b) of this section 6-56. (g)  The event permit as contemplated by this section 6-56 shall be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the mayor and city council, or the city manager of the city or his or her designee. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-57. - Requirements for sale of alcoholic beverages at an amusement park. (a)  When an amusement park is not open to the general public, the amusement park may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages to its private party function participants. Alcoholic beverages shall not be removed from the amusement park premises, which premises shall not include the parking or amphitheater areas of the amusement park. (b)  When the amusement park is open to the general public, the amusement park may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at a private party function in restricted areas. Such restricted areas shall be: (1)  Not open to the general public; (2)  Not an amphitheater or parking for the amusement park; (3)  Contain a fence or barrier which limits access to the restricted area; and (4)  The location of the restricted areas has been submitted to and approved by the business license manager.     In the event a designated area is denied by the business license manager, the owner/licensee may appeal said decision within ten days of said decision pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 herein. The mayor and city council shall have the authority to approve a designated area provided it meets the standards of this subsection. Alcoholic beverages shall be limited to the restricted areas only and shall not be removed from the restricted areas. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-58. - Name of license and license number to be displayed     The license itself shall be prominently displayed so as to be visible to the public inside the licensed premises. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-59. - Renewal—Required annually.     All licensees under this chapter shall, in order to continue such business, renew their licenses annually. Renewing licenses are not required to meet the posting and advertising provisions of section 6-34 and 6-36 of this chapter or to appear before the license review board or the mayor and council when the following requirements are satisfied. If all of these requirements are met, the city manager or his designee shall be authorized to approve such renewal applications: (1)  Same applicant and information as contained in the formerly approved application. (2)  Updated background check for criminal record or alcohol violations in the past year conducted by police department which contains no disqualifying information. (3)  No prior, existing, or pending violations of the alcoholic beverage ordinance. (4)  Compliance with all state alcoholic beverage regulatory statutes and regulations. (5)  Timely payment of renewal fees and timely submission of renewed information. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-60. - Same—Application for existing licensed premises.     Any application for renewal of a license on an existing licensed location shall not be required to meet the distance requirements set forth in this chapter, if not originally in violation; provided, that no license may be issued in violation of state distance requirements. An application for license renewal filed under this section shall meet and qualify under all other requirements of this chapter for the granting of a new license. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-61. - Transfer of license, restrictions.     Licenses, under this chapter shall not be transferable as to location or ownership, except upon approval of the mayor and city council and issuance of and payment for the license, subject to the following: (1)  In case of the death of any person holding a license, or any interest therein, such license may, in the discretion of the city, be temporarily transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person, for a period of up to 60 days, provided that such transferee otherwise meets the requirements for holding an alcohol license under this section. (2)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners, who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. (3)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more principal shareholders in a corporation holding a license to withdraw from the corporation, who were principal shareholders at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the corporation. (4)  Should a transfer of location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee and the new location shall be considered under and meet the requirements of a new license under this chapter. Provided, however, where a transfer of an existing location is approved and there is no change in the ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. (5)  It shall be deemed a change of ownership when an owner or licensee adds an additional partner or partners or an additional principal shareholder or principal shareholders. (6)  All applications for transfer of location shall be posted as required by section 6-36. (7)  A change in ownership as set forth in this section requires an application for a new license and the payment of a new license fee according to the procedures in this chapter. (8)  It shall be the duty of each licensee to promptly report any changes of any kind in the ownership or distribution of ownership to the business license office. (9)  If a licensee desires to sell the business for which the license was issued, the purchaser of the business must be informed by the licensee that the purchaser of the business must make application for and obtain a license prior to operating the business. Any transfer of the business for which the license is issued without the new owners being licensed shall cause the automatic revocation of the license. (10)  In the event that an alcoholic beverage license is issued to a corporation and an agent, and the owner of the license desires re-issuance of the license under an alternative agent, such re-issuance shall not be deemed to be a change of ownership; provided however, that the owner of the license provide the name of a principal shareholder or alternative agent for purposes of background investigation, including fingerprinting of such person. No license under this chapter shall reissue to such designated alternative person unless and until the city grants approval of such background investigation. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-62. - Licenses constitute grant or privilege. (a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses constitute a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and related laws and other ordinances and resolutions of the city relating to such business. (b)  All licenses under this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "this license is a mere privilege subject to being revoked and annulled by the mayor and city council, and is subject to amendments to this chapter or state law upon hearing prior to revocation with or without cause." (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-63. - Procedure for suspension and revocation. (a)  No alcoholic beverage license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause, as defined in this section, after a hearing and upon written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge or charges upon which such hearing shall be held. Five days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the mayor or city manager may deem the circumstances to justify. (b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the violation of any laws, regulations, ordinances regulating such business; the violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business; the violation of any state or federal law; any change in the area where such business is located, which change is deemed by the city council to authorize the city council to refuse the issuance of a license, including those circumstances as outlined in section 6-45; the arrest or conviction of a drug-related, alcohol or sex-related crime, or a crime involving moral turpitude; or any violation of this chapter. (c)  The police department shall provide written notification to the city manager of any violation of this chapter or any facts that may constitute due cause for the suspension or revocation of a license. Such notification shall include facts constituting due cause and shall also include a history, if any, of previous violations of this chapter or previous findings of due cause for the probation, suspension or revocation of said license and the penalty, if any, imposed by the city for such violations or previous findings. (d)  Upon receipt of the notification as provided in subsection (c), the city manager shall place the matter for a first due cause hearing by the license review board, provided that the licensee has not been on probation or suspension within the last 24 months from the date of the writing as provided in subsection (c). (e)  If the licensee has been on probation or suspension within the last 24 months from the date of the writing as provided in subsection (c), then the city manager shall place the matter for a first due cause hearing by the mayor and city council, wherein the mayor and city council shall consider revocation of the license. (f)  Written notice of the time, place and purpose of the first due cause hearing and a written statement of the charge or charges shall be provided to the licensee. Five days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods shall be authorized as the mayor or city manager may deem the circumstances to justify. (g)  After the due cause hearing as provided in subsection (d), the license review board may place on probation with conditions, recommend suspension for a period of time not to exceed 12 months or recommend revocation of the alcohol license. The city manager shall send written notice to the licensee of the license review board's decision and prepare a written report to the city council regarding the decision. (h)  In the event that the license review board recommends that the alcoholic beverage license be on probation with conditions and/or be suspended for less than six months, the owner of the alcoholic beverage license, the licensee or both have no recourse to file an appeal with the city manager of such recommendation. In the event that the license review board recommends suspension for more than six months or revocation, then a second due cause hearing may be conducted before the mayor and city council after meeting appeal process and notice requirements. (i)  For those hearings conducted by the license review board wherein the license review board recommended suspension for six months or more or revocation, upon review of the city manager's report, the city council shall either approve such recommendations or cause the matter to be placed before the mayor and council for a second due cause hearing after meeting appeal process and notice requirements. (j)  In the event that the license review board recommends any probation, suspension, or revocation of a license under this section, the police department shall immediately place signage in or on the premises indicating that such recommendation has been made and the basis for such recommendation, pending review and approval by the mayor and council. Such signage shall remain in place until mayor and council shall take action on such recommendation. (k)  In all hearings held pursuant to this section, the proceedings shall be as informal as compatible with justice and the following procedures shall prevail: (1)  The charges and specifications against the licensee and the responses, if any, filed by the licensee shall be read into the record, unless expressly waived by the city representative and the licensee. (2)  The city representative shall present evidence and then the licensee shall present evidence, with the opportunity for each party to present rebuttal evidence, examination and cross examination of witnesses, and interrogation by the city manager or city council. No evidence shall be presented which is not relevant to the charges. Evidence of previous probation(s) and suspension(s) is relevant. (3)  The license review board and the mayor and city council, through the city manager, shall be authorized to issue subpoenas when such subpoena power is authorized by law. All testimony taken by the board shall be under oath. The board shall apply to the Americus Municipal Court for the enforcement of any subpoena issued by the board. (I)  After any due cause hearing under this section by the mayor and city council, if the mayor and city council determine that due cause exists, the mayor and city council may place on probation, suspend with or without conditions or revoke the license. The city manager shall send written notice to the licensee of the city council's decision. (m)  In the event a license to sell alcoholic beverages is suspended as a result of selling alcoholic beverages to an underage person, an intoxicated person or an unauthorized Sunday sale, a sign issued by the city business license office shall be placed at each entrance to the facility wherein alcoholic beverages were sold with a sign providing: "THE LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ISSUED TO OWNER AND LICENSEE OF THIS BUSINESS HAS BEEN SUSPENDED FROM ______________ TO ______________AS A RESULT OF SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO AN UNDERAGE PERSON. AN INTOXICATED PERSON OR AN UNAUTHORIZED SUNDAY SALE." (n)  In the event that the license to sell alcoholic beverages is revoked as a result of selling alcoholic beverages to an underage person, an intoxicated person or an unauthorized Sunday sale, a sign issued by the city business license office shall be placed at each entrance wherein alcoholic beverages were sold with a sign providing: "THE LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ISSUED TO OWNER AND LICENSEE OF THIS BUSINESS HAS BEEN REVOKED AS A RESULT OF SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO AN UNDERAGE PERSON, AN INTOXICATED PERSON OR AN UNAUTHORIZED SUNDAY SALE." The sign shall stay in place for the period of suspension or in the case of a revocation for a period of 30 days. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-64. - State revocation revokes city license.     Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to manufacture or deal in such products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the mayor and city council. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-65. - Removal of signs where license revoked, suspended or denied.     When any license for selling alcoholic beverages is revoked, suspended or denied, all signs indicating that such beverages may be sold or purchased, including any and all advertisement signs, shall be removed from such place of business, both outside and inside. Upon receipt by the police department of notice of such revocation, suspension or denial, the police department shall take the necessary steps to see that this section is enforced. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-66. - False information in application.     Any material omission, or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for any license issued under this chapter shall be unlawful, and shall be the cause for the denial thereof, and if any such license has previously been granted under these circumstances, such shall constitute due cause for the revocation of such license. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-67. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-68. - Joint sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink and by the package prohibited.     A pouring license shall not permit the sale of alcoholic beverages by the bottle or package. This section shall not apply to farm wineries selling wine, fortified wine, or hard cider by the package. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-69. - Mandatory workshop for licensee; mandatory training for permit holders. (a)  Licensee policy workshop. All applicants for an alcoholic beverage license or a renewal after January 1, 2016, shall attend an alcohol sales and service policy workshop for owners and managers, which workshop shall be provided by an external training firm, approved by the city manager, mayor and council or their designee. The applicant shall attend such workshop prior to the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license. Such workshop shall be at the applicant's expense and only require the applicants/licensee's attendance one time. If, at the time the application is considered by the mayor and city council, the applicant has not provided evidence that the applicant has successfully completed the alcohol sales and service training workshop, the application shall be denied. This provision shall not be waived. (b)  Training of permit holders. (1)  Licensees are required to provide information to all permit holders on provisions of the law of this state regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages to intoxicated and underage persons and the penalties for violating such laws. (2)  Licensees shall provide regular information and training to all permit holders on the methods, procedures and measures to be taken in order to request, obtain and examine proper identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages. (3)  Detailed records of such training, including the date, time, persons attending and substance of such training shall be maintained for a minimum of 48 months of the training. Evidence of such training records shall be made available upon request for inspection by the city. (c)  The failure of the licensee to comply with this subsection regarding the attendance of a policy workshop and the training of permit holders shall be grounds for due cause to suspend and/or revoke the license to sell alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-70. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2017-9, adopted September 21, 2017, repealed § 6-70. Former § 6-70 pertained to permit holders of licensees—Applications, issuance, and denials and derived from Ord. No. O-2017-4, adopted April 20, 2017. 
Sec. 6-71. - Closed functions. (a)  The requirements for obtaining a closed function permit are as follows: (1)  The organization sponsoring any closed function which seeks to serve alcoholic beverages must first apply for and obtain a special permit from the city manager or his/her designee in order to serve alcoholic beverages at the closed function. This permit must be posted in a conspicuous location at the closed function at all times during the event. The special permit shall specify the hours in which the closed function is permitted to function. (2)  The organization sponsoring any closed function which seeks to serve alcoholic beverages must hire an off-duty city police officer to monitor the function. The city manager or his/her designee shall have the discretion to allow the sponsoring organization to hire an off-duty police officer from another jurisdiction to monitor the function if the circumstances warrant. (3)  The special permit as contemplated herein shall be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the city manager or his/her designee. (b)  One-day alcoholic beverage permit for bona fide nonprofit civic organizations. In accord with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-9, the city shall be authorized to issue a permit to a bona fide nonprofit civic organization to sell and serve alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises where sold for a period not to exceed one day, subject to compliance with the provisions of this section. The sale and serving of such alcoholic beverages shall be made by the drink, and a permit shall be required hereunder at any event held or sponsored by such organization where alcoholic beverages are to be purchased or served, or both, whether such alcoholic beverages are purchased by the attendees by the payment of dues to the organization or as a result of the purchase of a ticket or the payment of an entry fee to the event. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any such organization which already has a valid alcoholic beverage license from the city shall not be required to obtain a permit hereunder. (2)  For purposes of this section, a "bona fide nonprofit civic organization", shall mean a nonprofit corporation licensed and authorized to do business in the State of Georgia which has been issued a letter or certificate of exemption from the payment of federal income taxes by the United States Internal Revenue Service under 26 U.S.C.S. § 501(c). Written proof of such exemption shall be filed with the application. (3)  The temporary one-day permit authorized by this section shall be applied for utilizing such forms as may be provided by the city finance director. Such application shall be submitted to the city finance director no later than 20 calendar days in advance of the event. The city shall approve or deny such application within five calendar days of the city's actual receipt of such application. Written notice of the decision approving or denying the application shall be provided to the applicant by the city finance director within such five-day period. Upon approval of such application, the city finance director shall issue a written permit on such forms as the city finance director may provide, and the written permit shall be displayed at all times at the location of the event. The application fee shall be $25.00. Such fee shall be submitted with the application, and if the application is denied, the fee shall be refunded to the applicant. The permit issued in accord with this section shall be valid only for the physical location specified in the permit. No permit shall be issued unless the sale of distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages is lawful in the place and during the time of day for which permit is issued. (4)  Final approval or denial of such applications based upon the provisions of this section, shall be by the city manager of the city No more than six permits shall be issued to any single organization under this section during any calendar year. There shall be no appeal from any denial of such an application. (5)  The application shall be signed on behalf of the organization by a person having written authority to sign and deliver such application to the city. The person signing such application shall, in all events, be an officer of the organization at the time such application is submitted. At the time of submission, the person signing such application on behalf of the organization shall submit a copy of such person's Georgia driver's license. Such applicant shall be a resident of the city and shall be responsible for the lawful and proper conduct of the activities of the organization pursuant the permit issued hereunder. (6)  No organization which has had its alcoholic beverage license suspended or revoked within the previous 24 months shall be eligible to obtain a permit under this section. No organization which has been determined by the city to have violated any of the provisions of this section with respect to a previous permit issued hereunder, shall be eligible to obtain a permit under this section for a period of 24 months after the date of such violation. (7)  No organization which is delinquent or past due on any monetary obligations owed to the city, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, business licenses, utility bills, sanitation fees, or any other taxes, fees or monetary obligations, shall be eligible for a permit under this section. (8)  The net proceeds from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the organization at such event shall be used only for the charitable purposes of the organization and for no other purpose. (9)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the remaining provisions of this chapter relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applicable to any organization obtaining a permit hereunder. In addition, if the person signing the application on behalf of the organization would be disqualified from obtaining an alcoholic beverage license under this chapter, then the organization shall not be eligible to obtain a permit hereunder. Any one-day permit issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked in accord with the provisions of this chapter in the same manner and for the same reasons as an alcoholic beverage license may be suspended or revoked for regular alcoholic beverage license holders hereunder. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any suspension of such permit may also be made by the chief of police immediately should the organization be found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this section during the period of time that the one-day permit is in effect. (10)  No permit issued hereunder shall be valid for the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages thereunder unless the applicant shall also have been issued a valid one-day permit for the same event by the Georgia Department of Revenue, and such one-day permit from the Department of Revenue shall also be displayed at the location of the event in the manner required by the Department of Revenue. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-72. - Approved events.     The possession, transportation, consumption, and sale of alcoholic beverages on any public property are permitted at: (1)  At an event at which the possession, transportation, consumption, and sale of alcoholic beverages on, in, or over public property is approved by the mayor and city council; or, (2)  At an event at which the possession, transportation, consumption, and sale of alcoholic beverages on, in, or over public property is approved by the city manager of the city or his or her designee. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-73 - Consumption of alcohol on city streets. (a)  Except for the area and circumstances specified in subsections (b) and (c) herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess an alcoholic beverage in an open container, either on their person, in a motor vehicle or otherwise on the streets, sidewalks, parks, squares or other public places within the city. (b)  Within the area of the central business district of the city: (1)  During a permitted "special event" of the Americus Main Street and/or Downtown Development Authority, any person licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages for on premises consumption may sell one alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup for removal from the premises; provided, however, that the alcoholic beverage is not placed in a can, bottle or other glass container and, further provided, that the licensee may dispense no more than one alcoholic beverage per person, and no person shall remove more than one alcoholic beverage from the premises; (2)  Any alcoholic beverage dispensed pursuant to this section shall not exceed 16 fluid ounces in size and no person shall possess an open container containing an alcoholic beverage in excess of 16 fluid ounces on the streets, sidewalks, parks, squares or other public places within the area described in this section; (3)  Unless specifically provided otherwise by ordinance, the regulations provided by this section shall be in full force and effect during any festival. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-74. - Wine tastings.     Upon filing an application and payment of a license fee of $75.00 per year, the city council may issue an annual permit to hold wine tastings. The permit shall allow the applicant to provide samples of wine to the public for consumption on the premises under the following conditions: (1)  The permit holder shall be a business licensed by the city to sell wine, in original packages for off-premises consumption. (2)  The permit holder shall maintain on the premises and offer for sale at all times a variety of wines from not less than 20 manufacturers of wine. (3)  The establishment where the wine tastings are to be held shall have minimum interior floor area of 1,200 square feet devoted to the storage, display and sale of wine. (4)  The permit holder for a wine tasting permit must hold and maintain during the term of the permit a valid current wine license in the state. (5)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in original packages for off-premises consumption. (6)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of a malt beverage and wine store operating in connection with a licensed retail liquor store. (7)  Wine tastings may only be conducted in connection with a bona fide instructional or educational promotion. The city shall be given written notice of each planned wine tasting event not less than 30 calendar days prior to such event on such forms as may be prescribed from time to time by the city manager or his designee. Should a special request for a wine tasting occur with less than 30 days' notice to the city, such notice shall be provided to the city as soon as the event is scheduled. (8)  All wines secured for tasting purposes must be obtained through a retail or wholesale wine outlet. (9)  Wine tastings must comply with all laws and regulations otherwise pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state. (10)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes and sections of this Code and other city ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited to, those dealing with hours of operation, zoning and distance requirements. (11)  Any violation of the foregoing provisions by the permit holder, or any violation of the city's alcoholic beverage ordinance or state law regarding alcoholic beverages by the permit holder shall authorize the placing of the permit holder's permit on probation, or the suspension or revocation of such permit, in accord with the provisions of this article of the City Code. (Ord. No. O-2017-11, 10-19-2017) 
Secs. 6-75—6-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 
Sec. 6-87. - Employment of minors.     No licensee shall allow or require beverages. It shall be unlawful for a beverages. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-88. - Serving customers.     Alcoholic beverages by the drink permitted to be sold under this chapter shall only be served by employees of the licensee. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) State Law reference— Employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises; O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42. 
Sec. 6-89. - Sale to underage persons, incompetents, intoxicated persons.     No licensee under this chapter and no employee of such a licensee under this chapter shall furnish, sell or knowingly allow the possession of any alcoholic beverages, whether by the package or by the drink to: (1)  Any person under the age at which such beverages may be legally purchased in the state; or (2)  Any person in an intoxicated condition; or (3)  Any person known to such licensee or his or her employee to be an habitual drunkard; or (4)  Any person known to such licensee or his or her employees to be of intemperate habits or of unsound mind. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) State Law reference— Offenses involving alcohol and underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 6-90. - Notice; allowing underage person on licensed premises. (a)  Licensees that own, operate or manage a nightclub, indoor entertainment hall, bar, lounge or package store and/or their employees shall not permit underage persons on the licensed premises unless such person is (1) accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; or, (2) unless such person is an on-duty employee of the licensee and is at least 18 years of age. However, an indoor entertainment hall may allow persons who are at least 18 years of age to be on the premises without a parent or legal guardian on specially designated days, whether they are designated "special events," "concert nights," or other similar term, not to exceed two days per calendar week, and only one of which may be a day other than Friday and Saturday, under the following conditions: (1)  Every patron must be required to present valid identification and proof that the patron is at least 21 years age at the point of sale within the indoor entertainment hall each time such patron attempts to purchase alcoholic beverages while on the premises. In lieu of checking identification and proof of age at the point of sale within the indoor entertainment hall, the licensee or the licensee's employees may check such identification and proof of age at the entrance to the indoor entertainment hall, provided that any person who is 21 years of age or older who enters the premises be provided with a handstamp, nonremovable wrist band, or similar method of confirmation that the patron is legally entitled to purchase alcoholic beverages while on the premises. In such event, no licensee or employee of licensee may sell, serve, or provide any alcoholic beverage on the premises to any patron who does not present such handstamp, nonremovable wristband, or similar method of confirmation that the patron is 21 years of age or older each and every time the patron attempts to purchase an alcoholic beverage. (2)  On days the indoor entertainment hall allows underage patrons on the premises in accordance with this section, no patron may be sold, served, or provided more than one alcoholic beverage during any single transaction. (3)  A conspicuous notice must be posted at the entrance to the indoor entertainment hall and at each point of sale within the indoor entertainment hall stating that it is illegal under state and local law for persons under the age of 21 years of age to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages, that it is illegal for any person under the age of 21 years of age to misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever, that it is illegal for anyone to purchase alcohol for or on behalf of any other person under the age of 21 years of age, and that any person found in violation of any such law will be subject to arrest and criminal prosecution. "Conspicuous notice" as used in this chapter shall mean a sign on white background with red or black print with the printed message being 28 point type or larger. (4)  On days the indoor entertainment hall allows underage patrons on the premises in accordance with this section, licensee must employ or otherwise provide at least two uniformed, off-duty Americus police officers to patrol the exterior of the indoor entertainment hall, including the parking lot. The city manager or his/her designee shall have the discretion to allow the sponsoring organization to hire off-duty police officers from another jurisdiction to monitor the function if the circumstances warrant. Such officers shall not enter the indoor entertainment hall unless requested by licensee or licensee's employees or unless the officers otherwise have reason to believe that illegal activity has taken or is taking place within the indoor entertainment hall or that the health or safety of the patrons is immediately at risk. (5)  The indoor entertainment hall must require that each person entering the premises provide valid identification and proof at the entrance to the premises that the person entering the premises is at least 18 years of age. No person under the age of 18 years of age may be admitted to the indoor entertainment hall without a parent or legal guardian. (b)  Each licensee shall post a conspicuous notice at the entrance to the indoor entertainment hall and at each point of sale within the indoor entertainment which shall contain the provisions of the laws of this state which deal with the unlawful sale of alcoholic beverages to underage persons and the penalties for violating such laws. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24.2. 
Sec. 6-91. - Purchase, consumption or possession by or for underage persons. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any underage person to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a place where underage persons knowingly are allowed and permitted to come and purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy any alcoholic beverage and furnish it to an underage person for consumption. (d)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of section 6-91 of this chapter shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: (1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; (2)  At a religious ceremony; or (3)  When the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverages to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. (e)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to obtain and examine proper identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age pursuant to the standard as set forth in O.C.G.A. 3-3-23(h), or as may be amended from time to time. The term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing the description of the person, the person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or state issued identification card for persons without a driver's license. "Proper identification" shall not include birth certificate, traffic citation and complaint form, or student (college/university) identification card. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) State Law reference— Offenses involving alcohol and underage persons. O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 6-92. - Same—Misrepresentation of age.     It shall be unlawful for any underage person to falsely misrepresent his/her age in any manner whatsoever. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-93. - Hours of operation. (a)  Alcoholic beverages by the package. Licensees for the sale of distilled spirits by the package shall not engage in the sale of such beverages except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Licensees for the sale of malt beverages, and/or wine, and/or fortified wine, and/or hard cider by the package shall not engage in the sale of malt beverages, and/or wine, and/or fortified wine, and/or hard cider by the package except between the hours of 8.00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m. Saturday. (b)  Alcoholic beverages by the drink. Sale of any alcoholic beverages by the drink for on-premises consumption: licensees shall not engage in the sale of any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. daily. All alcoholic beverages must be received by 12:30 a.m. and all patrons must be out of the premises by 1:00 a.m., provided that this subsection shall not apply to private clubs hereunder, and establishments holding a valid permit may be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7(1), or as may be amended from time to time. (c)  Wholesalers. The business hours of any wholesaler licensed under this chapter shall be sunup to sundown, exclusive of Sunday. (d)  Election days. The sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be permitted on election days as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20, as amended. (e)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent any restaurant that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine and/or bottle of fortified wine per patron for consumption off premises, provided that the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine on the restaurant's premises. The securing, resealing and transporting of said bottle of wine and/or bottle of fortified wine shall be in accordance with procedures outlined in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. (f)  Reserved. (g)  If future zoning designations are approved by the mayor and council for designated entertainment zones, the closing times for this designated area may be adjusted to a later time. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20 
Sec. 6-94. - Requirements of wholesalers generally.     All wholesalers shall be licensed under the provisions of this chapter and shall comply with this chapter before they can sell or deliver any distilled spirits to any establishment in the city. Deliveries and sales shall only be made to retailers properly licensed under this chapter for the operation of establishments in the city. Deliveries shall be made in a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as set out in this section and shall at all times when deliveries are being made be subject to inspection by any duly authorized authorities of the city. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-95. - Retailers to purchase from properly licensed wholesalers; exception.     Retail dealers in alcoholic beverages licensed under the applicable provisions of this chapter shall not buy nor accept deliveries of alcoholic beverages from wholesalers or other persons offering alcoholic beverages for sale except from wholesalers duly licensed under this chapter. Such retail dealers shall only accept deliveries of alcoholic beverages directly to the premises for which their license and permit was issued, and by no means other than a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as required by this chapter; except that, on written request to the business license division manager of the city and upon the granting of permission by the city in writing, deliveries may in special instances be made otherwise upon terms and conditions as prescribed by the mayor and city council as to each delivery. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-96. - Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises or unlicensed caterers. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverage by the package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to allow the sale or delivery of any alcoholic beverage by the drink to any area other than the premises covered by the license. (c)  It shall be unlawful for unlicensed individuals or caterers to sell alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-97. - Discrimination or interference by wholesaler.     No wholesaler may discriminate between retail dealers as to quantity, selections, and brands sold to the retail dealer, nor use any business technique so as to control the retail dealer's business and pricing policy, or in any way interfere with the free enterprise operation of the retail dealer. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-98. - Storage—Regulation generally.     All licensed retailers shall store all alcoholic beverages possessions on the premises for which the license was issued, and at no other place. All alcoholic beverages stock shall be available for inspection by authorized city officials. Any brand or type of alcoholic beverages found in any retailer's stock that is handled by a wholesaler who is not licensed to make sales and deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-99. - Breaking of packages; consumption on premises; possession of alcoholic beverages on unlicensed premises; spirituous or alcoholic liquors. (a)  No retail dealer shall knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking or opening of any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the premises where sold or allow or permit the drinking of the contents of such package or packages on the premises where sold. This section shall not apply with respect to sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises. (b)  A restaurant, eatery, cafe, diner or other eating establishment not licensed under this chapter for on-premise consumption shall not knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking or opening of any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the unlicensed premises or permit the drinking of the contents of such package or packages on the unlicensed premises. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee who is authorized to sell malt beverages, or hard cider, or wine, to sell, store or possess spirituous or alcoholic liquors without an appropriate license therefor. (d)  Upon the suspension, revocation, denial of renewal or denial of transfer of any alcoholic beverage license under this chapter, the licensee shall remove from the licensed premises all alcoholic beverages within 48 hours of the effective date of such suspension, revocation or denial. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 
Sec. 6-100. - Clear view of entrance and interior of licensed premises; lighting; private clubs. (a)  No licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall operate under the license unless the front entrance to the licensed premises is clearly visible from the public street; provided, however, this restriction shall not apply where the licensee is a hotel, motel, private club or is located in a shopping center or multiple-story business building or any building existing as of the adoption of this chapter. Clearly visible shall mean that not less than 60 percent of the front area shall be glass. Front area shall mean the width of the premises from the ceiling to the floor. (b)  No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any retail store for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. (c)  Private clubs which have been granted licenses under this chapter to sell distilled spirits at retail by the package shall not have an outside or street entrance for such retail outlet to sell to the general public, nor shall any such establishment make any sales to any member of the general public who is not a member of the private club. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-101. - Sanitary and fire protection regulations; disturbances; inspections. (a)  All premises licensed under this chapter shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of premises to include building, and property maintenance codes used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. (b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices on any licensed premises. (c)  The fire inspector or city building official shall inspect, at least annually, the premises licensed under this chapter to determine compliance with subsections (a) and (d) of this section and report its findings to the city manager. (d)  All premises licensed under this chapter shall conform at all times with all fire, building, life safety, and property maintenance codes of the city, county, and state. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-102. - Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages.     It shall be unlawful for licensees or their employees to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. This section shall not preclude the sale and/or refilling of any growler so long as such sale or refilling complies with section 6-111 of this Code. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-103. - Prices to be conspicuously displayed.     Each retail licensee for sale in the package shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the alcoholic beverages offered for sale; provided, however, a licensee, in lieu of having four copies of a printed list, may have the price placed on the bottles or on the bottom of the shelf where alcoholic beverages are exhibited for sale. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-104. - Exterior advertisements. (a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this Code section, a licensed retail dealer in distilled spirits may display at the licensee's place of business unilluminated signs, using letters not larger than eight inches in height, flat against the outside of the building, below the roof line, bearing the words "liquor," "beer," "wine," "champagne," or any combination thereof, and "package store" or "liquor store," together with the trade name of the retail dealer. In addition to such signs flat against the outside of the building, the retail dealer may display at a location on the tract of property upon which the business is located, but not affixed to the building, one unilluminated sign using letters not larger than eight inches in height bearing the words "package store" or "liquor store" and the trade name of the retail dealer. Subject to any more restrictive size limitations contained in the ordinances of the political subdivision in which the place of business is located, a sign not affixed to the building may be no larger than 16 square feet in area. (b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this Code section, a licensee shall be authorized by rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue to permit licensed retail dealers in distilled spirits to display signs inside and outside their retail establishments which advertise or promote any lottery authorized under Chapter 27 of Title 50, the "Georgia Lottery for Education Act," provided that such signs are in compliance with said Chapter 27 of Title 50 and the rules and regulations of the board of directors of the Georgia Lottery Corporation. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) State Law reference— O.C.G.A, § 3-4-3, Retail dealer's signs; signs advertising Georgia lottery. 
Sec. 6-105. - Coin-operated devices, similar machines on licensed premises.     No retail dealer in distilled spirits by the package shall permit on his premises any slot machines, other food or cigarette vending machines, or any mechanical music boxes or pinball machines of any kind or character or any machines operated for amusement purposes. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-106. - Possession or consumption on public property.     It shall be unlawful for any person to: possess or transport alcoholic beverages for the purpose of consumption on public property; possess or consume alcoholic beverages on public property; or, sell alcoholic beverages on any public property, with the following exceptions: at a closed function permitted pursuant to section 6-71 or at an event approved pursuant to section 6-72 of the Code of Ordinances, Americus, Georgia. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-107. - Public intoxication.     It shall be unlawful for any person to be on public property within the city limits while intoxicated. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-108. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-109. - Pricing of alcoholic beverages. (a)  This section shall be construed to cover, include and apply to every type of alcoholic beverage licensed to be sold in the city, including wine, fortified wine, hard cider, malt beverages and spirituous liquors. (b)  No licensee or holder of any license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or in any part thereof, or employee or agent of a licensee, shall: (1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to the general public. This subsection shall not apply to tasting rooms of farm wineries where wine is offered in a quantity to only taste the product. This subsection shall also not apply to those persons or entities who are engaged in the business of refilling growlers who are allowed to provide samples to taste the product as set forth in section 6-111 of this chapter. (2)  Deliver more than two alcoholic beverages to one person at one time, or allow any patron to possess more than two alcoholic beverages at one time. (3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during any 24-hour period during which the price schedule required by this section is in effect, except at private functions not open to the public. (4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons two or more or an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time at a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. (5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, by the pitcher or carafe, except to two or more persons at any one time. (6)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same 24-hour period for which the price schedule required by this section is in effect. (7)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game, event, competition, contest, or promotion that involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. (8)  Sell two or more alcoholic beverages for a price per beverage that is less than that charged for the one such alcoholic beverage. (9)  Require or encourage the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased. (10)  Knowingly allow an alcoholic beverage purchased on the premises to be removed from the premises without having been consumed. "Premises," for the purchase of this section, shall be construed to mean the entire area under the supervision, management or control of the licensee, excluding areas for parking of motor vehicles; and, in the case of licensees whose licensed location is located on a portion of the premises of a club, organization, establishment or entity offering outdoor recreation (for instance, golf or tennis), the word "premises" shall extend to cover all areas operated as a part of the club or entity excluding areas for parking of motor vehicles. (11)  Sponsor, conduct or allow contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. (c)  There shall be no advertisement or promotion in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, of any of the practices prohibited under this section. (d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, or to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as a part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine or fortified wine by bottle or carafe when sold with meals to more than one person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests, or to prohibit the sale of more than two drinks at one time which are to be consumed by the purchaser out-of-doors on the premises of the licensee, as described in this section, in connection with the purchaser's participation as a player of games of golf or tennis; otherwise, no food and alcoholic beverage package may be offered by any licensee; however, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to allow a licensee to circumvent the intent of this section by offering meals which include an alcoholic beverage as a device or scheme to promote drink sales at a price per beverage less than the daily listed price. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-110. - Additional activities prohibited; rationale and findings; exception. (a)  Rationale and findings. Whereas, Article III, Section VI, Paragraph VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, delegates authority to counties and municipalities "for the purpose of regulating, restricting, or prohibiting the exhibition of nudity, partial nudity, or depictions of nudity in connection with the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages;" and, Whereas, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit has upheld a municipal ordinance prohibiting the serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments; and, Whereas, the Supreme Court of Georgia has upheld a municipal ordinance prohibiting the serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments; and, Whereas, among the undesirable community conditions identified with live nude entertainment and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for the allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order; increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior, and acceleration of community blight; Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); 5634 East Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), affd, 2008 WL 4279670 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curium); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); and, Whereas, the Supreme Court of Georgia, in Chambers d/b/a Neon Cowboy v. Peach County, Georgia, 266 Ga. 318, 467 S.E.2d 519 (1996), held that local governments may adopt ordinances designed to combat the undesirable secondary effects of sexually explicit businesses, and further held that a governing authority seeking to regulate adult entertainment establishments must have evidence of a relationship between the proposed regulation and the undesirable secondary effects it seeks to control. The Georgia Supreme Court further held in the same opinion that in passing its regulations, a local government may rely on the experience of other counties and municipalities to demonstrate such a relationship; and, Whereas, the United States Supreme Court, in City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), held that a local government may rely on the experience of other Cities in enacting legislation to regulate adult entertainment businesses; and, Whereas, Federal and State appellate courts, have previously held that before enacting an ordinance to combat undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment, a legislative body is required to consider specific evidence of the undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments that it reasonably believes relevant to the interests it seeks to address by passing the ordinance; and, Whereas, based on the experiences of other municipalities and counties including, but not limited to, Fulton County, Georgia; Adams County, Colorado; New York City, New York; Indianapolis, Indiana; Dallas, Texas; Sandy Springs, Georgia; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; City of St. Mary's, Georgia; Hamilton County, Tennessee; Amarillo, Texas; Rome, Georgia; Gwinnett County, Georgia; Austin, Texas; Phoenix, Arizona; Manatee County, Florida; City of Garden Grove, California; Forth Worth, Texas; Houston, Texas; St. Cloud, Minnesota; Whittier, California; and the City of Los Angeles, California, which are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the City of Americus, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Americus note the documented negative economic, physical, and social impact adult entertainment businesses have on the community; and, Whereas, based upon the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, which experiences the mayor and city council of the city find are relevant to the problems faced by the city, and which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within this country, the mayor and city council of the city find that public nudity, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments offering adult entertainment, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Flanigan's Enterprises, Inc. of Georgia et al. v. Fulton County, Georgia, 596 F.3d 1265, 2010 WL 520542 (11th Cir. 2010); and, Whereas, the mayor and city council of the city find and declare that nudity and sexual conduct and depiction thereof, coupled with alcohol in public places, encourages undesirable behavior and is not in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare; and, Whereas, the mayor and city council of the city have chosen to avoid the disturbances associated with mixing alcohol and nude dancing by means of a reasonable restriction upon establishments which sell spirituous or vinous liquors or malt or brewed beverages; and, Whereas, the ordinance furthers important governmental interests of reducing crime and protecting property values which are unrelated to the suppression of speech; and, Whereas, it is the intent of the mayor and city council of the city to enact an ordinance, narrowly tailored, sufficient to combat the undesirable secondary effects of the serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages at adult entertainment facilities; and, Whereas, it is not the intent of the mayor and city council of the city, in enacting this article to deny to any person the right to speech or expression protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, nor it is the intent to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain or view any sexually oriented performance or materials protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, but to adopt a content neutral ordinance to combat the undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment where alcoholic beverages are served or consumed; and, Whereas, this section is enacted to further the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city; Now, therefore, this section is hereby enacted to further such health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. (b)  Activities prohibited; minimum clothing requirements; exception. (1)  No person shall suffer or permit any person to engage in live conduct exposing to public view the person's genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or buttocks or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola on the licensed premises. (2)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of any licensee to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of the licensee during such employees working hours. (3)  No drugs or illegal or controlled substances of any kind shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold upon the premises of any licensee, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein. (4)  No licensee shall allow any person to engage in specified sexual activities on the licensed premises. (5)  No licensee shall use any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, and or genitals. (6)  No licensee shall allow the holding, promotion, or sponsoring of any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in this section. (7)  Exception. Nothing contained in subsection (b) of this section shall apply to the premises of any theatre, concert hall, art center, museum, or similar establishment primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical performances, where the performances that are presented are expressing matters of serious literary, artistic, scientific, or political value. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-111. - Sale and refilling of growlers. (a)  The sale and refilling of growlers in compliance with this chapter is authorized for establishments holding a growler license issued pursuant to section 6-52(h) of this Code. (b)  The filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or any provision or section of this Code. (c)  Growlers may only be filled from kegs or containers procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. (d)  Growlers may only be filled with a malt beverage, craft beer, or hard cider. (e)  Only growlers that are properly sanitized may be filled and made available for retail sale. It shall be the responsibility of the entity filling the growler to sanitize such growler prior to filling it. (f)  Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. Each growler shall bear a twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug. At the time of the sale and/or refilling, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extend over the top of the twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that must be broken upon opening of the container or bottle. The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the business filling the growler. The containers or bottles shall be identified as a malt beverage or craft beer, contain the name of the malt beverage or craft beer, and bear the name, address and telephone number of the business selling the malt beverage or craft beer. (g)  Each growler filled with a malt beverage or craft beer must contain the following warning label: "GOVERNMENT WARNING: (1) According to the Surgeon General, women should not drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancy because of the risk of birth defects. (2) Consumption of alcoholic beverages impairs your ability to drive a car or operate machinery, and may cause health problems."     It shall be the responsibility of the entity filing the growler to assure each growler has, on its exterior, a warning label containing the language set forth in this subsection. (h)  Consumption of the contents of any growler on the premises where it was filled is strictly prohibited. However, the licensee may provide samples of any malt beverages or craft beer on tap. Each such sample shall not exceed one fluid ounce. The licensee shall not serve more than three samples to any individual within a 24-hour period. (i)  Sales of growlers shall be limited to the legal hours during which the licensee may sell such alcoholic beverages and must be removed from the premises before the applicable closing time. (j)  Any person filling a growler with a malt beverage or craft beer, or handling a growler after filled the growler is filled with either a malt beverage or craft beer must have a server license issued by the city in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 6, Alcoholic Beverages, of this Code. (k)  The refilling of growlers shall not be a violation of section 6-102 of this Code. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-112. - Liability of licensee for acts or omissions of employees.     Because employees of licensee are able to sell alcoholic beverages only as a result of the city issuing a license to the licensee, the licensee shall be liable for all acts or omissions of those employees that amount to a violation of this chapter. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Secs. 6-113—6-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOCIAL HOSTING 
Sec. 6-131. - Findings and intent.     The mayor and the city council finds and declares as follows: (a)  In 2007, the U.S. Surgeon General issued a report entitled "The Surgeon General's Call to Action to Prevent and Reduce Underage Drinking," which can be found at http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/topics/underagedrinking/calltoaction.pdf. ("Surgeon General's Call to Action"). (b)  "Early alcohol consumption by some young people will result in an alcohol use disorder—that is, they will meet diagnostic criteria for either alcohol abuse or dependence." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page four. (c)  "A higher percentage of youth in 8th, 10th, and 12th grades used alcohol in the month prior to being surveyed than used tobacco or marijuana, the illicit drug most commonly used by adolescents." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 5. (d)  Various surveys have found that: approximately ten percent of children who are nine to ten years old have started drinking alcoholic beverages; nearly 33 percent of youth start drinking alcoholic beverages before the age of 13; more than ten percent of youth who are 12 to 13 years old and over 33 percent of youth who are 14 to 15 years old reported drinking a whole alcoholic beverage in the year before they were surveyed, and the peak years of alcohol initiation are when youth are in 7th and 8th grades. Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page six. (e)  While adolescents typically drink alcoholic beverages less often than adults, when they do drink alcoholic beverages, adolescents tend to drink more alcoholic beverages at each event than adults. Surgeon General's Call to Action, at pages 6-7. (f)  Persons who are less than the age of 21 often possess or consume alcoholic beverages at social parties or gatherings held at or on private residences and other private property under control of a person who either has provided the alcoholic beverages or who knows or reasonably should know of such conduct, but fails to take steps to prevent it. (g)  "Annually, about 5,000 people under age 21 die from alcohol-related injuries involving underage drinking." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page ten. (h)  Underage drinking "[plays a significant role in risky sexual behavior, including unwanted, unintended, and unprotected sexual activity, and sex with multiple partners. Such behavior increases the risk of unplanned pregnancy and for contracting sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), including infection with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page ten. (i)  Underage drinking increases the risk of physical and sexual assault." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page ten. (j)  Underage drinking "can cause a range of physical consequences, from hangovers to death from alcohol poisoning." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 11. (k)  Underage drinking, "can cause alterations in the structure and function of the developing brain, which continues to mature into the mid-to late twenties and may have consequences reaching far beyond adolescence." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 11. (l)  Underage drinking, "creates secondhand effects that can put others at risk. Loud and unruly behavior, property destruction, unintentional injuries, violence, and even death because of underage alcohol use afflict innocent parties. For instance, about 45 percent of people who die in car crashes involving a drinking driver under the age of 21 are people other than the driver." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 11. (m)  Law enforcement agency responses to disturbances involving underage consumption of alcoholic beverages at parties or gatherings at or on private residences or other private property frequently require the use of extensive public resources. Further, when law enforcement personnel respond to such disturbances it limits their ability to respond to other service calls in the community, thereby placing the community at increased risk. Law enforcement is not currently reimbursed for their expenses when called to a party or gathering at or on a private residence or other private property. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-132. - Title.     This article shall be referred to as the "Americus Social Hosting Ordinance." (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-133. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, or as set forth in section 6-1 of this Code, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.     Dwelling unit means, without limitations, any of the following: (1)  Any single and multi-family residence including, but not limited to, any apartment, cabin, condominium, duplex, house, or log cabin, and the land on which it is located, whether owned, leased, rented, or occupied for no compensation by the occupant or occupants; (2)  Any mobile home and the land upon which the mobile home is located, whether or not rent is paid for the mobile home, for the land upon which the mobile home is located, or for both; (3)  Any recreational vehicle, whether located on privately-owned or publicly-owned property, and whether rent or not is paid for the recreational vehicle, and the land upon the recreational vehicle is located.     Gathering means an assembled group of people for the purpose of a social occasion or activity.     Legal guardian is a person who is lawfully vested with the power and charged with the duty of taking care of an underage person.     Other private property . (1)  The term "other private property" includes the following locations: a.  A hotel or motel room; b.  An assembly hall or meeting room; c.  A common room of a dwelling unit used for a party (e.g., a recreation room of an apartment building or a common room of a condominium complex); d.  A site in a privately-owned campground; e.  A privately-owned vacant lot; or f.  Privately-owned land or real estate of any type. (2)  Such locations constitute "other private property" under all of the following conditions: a.  The location is occupied by one or more persons on a temporary or permanent basis; b.  The location is occupied as a dwelling, permanent residence, or temporary residence, for a party or for any other social function; c.  The location is owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.     Parent means any person who is a natural parent, an adoptive parent, a foster parent, a step-parent, or who a person who stands in loco parentis.     Party means a gathering or event at which two or more persons assemble or gather for a social occasion or activity.     Person who has a right of possession means, with respect to a private residence or other private property, as follows: (1)  Owner of the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; (2)  The record owner of the title to the property as of the time of the party regardless of where that person currently resides; (3)  Tenant or lessee of the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; (4)  Landlord of another person who has a right of possession in the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; (5)  The person or persons who are in charge of the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; or (6)  Social host.     Private residence means the following: (1)  A dwelling unit, whether occupied on a temporary basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation, (2)  Any other item on the same land parcel as the dwelling unit, which includes, but is not limited to any of the following: an animal pen, an animal shed, a bam, a boat dock, a boat house, a cabana, an equipment shed, a free-standing office, a garage, a gazebo, a granary, a hot tub, a hunting cabin, a corn crib, a sauna, a stable, a studio, a swimming pool, a private office, a shed, a silo, a tent, a tool shed, a tree-house, a tractor, or a vehicle of any type or nature; (3)  Other items or areas accompanying or on the same land parcel as the dwelling unit, whether improved or unimproved, such as a yard (whether fenced or unfenced), patio, outdoor grilling or eating area, open fields, jetty, pier, dock, or lake shore; (4)  Water bodies contiguous to or on the same land parcel as a dwelling unit, such as a basin, bayou, brook, creek, dam, lagoon, lake, marsh, pond, river, stream, or swamp.     Reasonable steps means steps that include, but are not limited to: (1)  Controlling access to alcoholic beverages; (2)  Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages; (3)  Verifying the legal minimum drinking age of persons at the party or gathering by inspecting drivers licenses or other government-issued identification cards all of those persons in attendance; and (4)  Supervising and monitoring the activities of underage persons at the party or gathering.     Social host means: (1)  The person or persons who organize, supervise, officiate, conduct or control a party or gathering at or on or at a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by that person or those persons; (2)  The person or persons receiving money or any other type of consideration for granting access to a party or gathering at or on a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by that person.     Underage person means any person under the age of 21, (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-134. - Prohibition. (a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person who has a right of possession of a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property to knowingly host, permit, or allow a party or gathering to take place or continue at or on such private residence or other private property if any underage person at the party or gathering possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage and the person knows or reasonably should know, after taking all reasonable steps to prevent alcoholic beverage possession or consumption by the underage person, that the underage person is possessing or consuming any alcoholic beverage at the party or gathering. (b)  It shall be a violation of this article for a parent or legal guardian to allow any underage person under the care of that parent or legal guardian to allow to attend a party or other social gathering if that parent or legal guardian knows or reasonably should know that the underage person will possess or consume any alcoholic beverage at that party or social event. (c)  It is the duty of any person having a right of possession of a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property, who knowingly hosts, permits or allows a party or gathering at or on the dwelling unit, the private residence, or other private property, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by any underage person at the party or gathering. A breach of this duty shall be a violation of this article. (d)  Any violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended, shall also be a violation of this article. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-135. - Protected activities. (a)  Nothing in this article should be interpreted to prohibit legally protected practices held at or on a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property that includes the possession and/or consumption of alcohol by persons under the age of 21: (1)  As part of religious practices on private property; or (2)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state and the consumption occurs on private property pursuant to and in accordance with that prescription; or (3)  When the parent or legal guardian of the underage person physically gives the alcohol to that underage person when in their own residence and while in their presence and as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended. (b)  Notwithstanding the exemptions for protected activities found in section 6-135(a) of this article, if an underage person leaves said private property intoxicated where he or she was provided the alcohol and is found in public, then said furnishers of alcoholic beverages to that underage person shall be held responsible in the same manner as furnishers of alcoholic beverages to underage persons at non-protected activities. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-136. - Separate violation for each incident.     Each incident in violation of section 6-134 shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-137. - Enforcement authority.     The city police department, the city attorney, and any other person designated by the city manager are authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The city police department, the city attorney, and any other person designated by the mayor and the city council may exercise any enforcement powers provided by law. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-138. - Enforcement remedies. (a)  Criminal penalties. (1)  Consistent with O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10(a), the first violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 shall also be a violation of this article. Any person who violates O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 shall be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum fine for which the Georgia Statutes provide for a violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. (2)  Any parent who violates section 6-134(b) of this article may be assessed the maximum penalty for which the City Ordinances and Georgia Statutes provide for a misdemeanor. (b)  Civil penalties. (1)  Any person who violates section 6-134(a), (b) and/or (c) of this article has committed a public nuisance constituting an immediate threat to public health, safety and welfare, warranting summary abatement and is guilty of a civil violation. (2)  On the violation of section 6-134(a), (b) and/or (c), the violator shall be assessed a civil penalty for each such violation of not more than the maximum allowed by the city ordinances and the Georgia State Statutes. (3)  Violations of section 6-134 of this article shall be noticed by citation, issued by the city police department. The citation shall also give notice of the right to request a hearing to challenge the validity of the citation, the time for requesting that hearing, and that the person has a right to appeal. (Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 