CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ALPHARETTA, GEORGIA ____________ Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council ____________ > 
PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Alpharetta, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1989 Code, as supplemented through August 28, 2017, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1989 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross-references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Mary Margaret Bielby, Code Attorney, and Rebecca Evans, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Coty Thigpen, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Alpharetta, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; pre-chapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Alpharetta, Georgia. © Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Alpharetta, Georgia. 2018. ORDINANCE NO. 759 AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ALPHARETTA, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE     BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF ALPHARETTA, GEORGIA (the "City"):     Section 1. The code entitled "Alpharetta City Code" or the "Code of the City of Alpharetta Georgia") (hereinafter referred to as the "Code"), published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 48, each inclusive, is adopted.     Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 28, 2017, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to repeal any provision of the Unified Development Code of the City of Alpharetta, Georgia or any ordinances identified in Section 1-11 of the Code, which Section is hereby incorporated herein by reference.     Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance.     Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum required or permitted by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this Section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.     Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.     Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 28, 2017, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.     Section 7. This Ordinance shall become effective upon adoption.       SO ORDAINED this 21st day of May, 2018.     CITY OF ALPHARETTA, GEORGIA         Donald Mitchell, Mayor       ;b0;       COUNCIL MEMBERS       Jason Binder       ;sigr;         Dan Merkel       ;b0;     Attest: /s/ Coty Thigpen        Clerk   First Reading 5/7/18 Second Reading 5/21/18 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE     The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits."     In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. Ord. No. DateAdopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 754  4- 9-2018 Include 1 755  4-30-2018 Include 1 756  4-30-2018 Omit 1 759  5-21-2018 Include 1 733  2- 6-2017 Include 2 750  9-25-2017 Omit 2 751 10-16-2017 Include 2 768  8-20-2018 Include 2 770 11-12-2018 Include 2  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS[1] Footnotes: 
Subpart A - CHARTER 
ARTICLE I. - CREATION, INCORPORATION, [AND] POWERS 
Sec. 1.10. - Name.     This city and the inhabitants thereof, are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style of City of Alpharetta, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. (a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of [the] city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Alpharetta, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. A copy of the "Official Map" of the city is hereto attached and made a part hereof as if specifically described. Editor's note— The official map is not included herein. It is attached to the Charter on file in the city clerk's office. (b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. (c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the following described property is hereby removed from the corporate limits of the City of Alpharetta, and said corporate limits shall not include the following described property:     All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 522 and 543 of the First District, Second Section of Fulton County, Georgia along the north right-of-way line of the New Mansell Road, a public road in Fulton County, Georgia having an 80-foot right-of-way, and being more particularly described as follows:     Beginning in the northeast corner of Land Lot 543, said district and section, the same being the common corner of Land Lots 543, 544, 559 and 560; thence running in the direction of north 87 degrees 44 minutes 12 seconds west as measured along the north line of Land Lot 543, the same being the south line of Land Lot 544, a distance of 73 feet more or less to a point located at the intersection of the said north line of Land Lot 543 with the former northeast right-of-way line of Old Mansell Road, said Old Mansell Road, having been abandoned following the construction of the New Mansell Road; thence running in the direction of north 84 degrees 44 minutes 12 seconds west a distance of 55.03 feet to a point located along the former center line of Old Mansell Road; thence running along the following courses and distances as measured along the former center line of Old Mansell Road, now abandoned, and following the curvature thereof, to-wit: thence running in the direction of north 87 degrees 48 minutes 27 seconds west a distance of 298.77 feet to a point; thence running in the direction of north 89 degrees 42 minutes 38 seconds west a distance of 238.21 feet to a point; thence running in the direction of north 86 degrees 56 minutes 16 seconds west a distance of 175.69 feet to a point; thence running in the direction of south 89 degrees 52 minutes 6 seconds west a distance of 89.37 feet to a point; thence running in the direction of north 85 degrees 57 minutes 8 seconds west a distance of 94.15 feet to a point; thence running in the direction of north 85 degrees 52 minutes 37 seconds west a distance of 92.26 feet to a point; thence running in the direction of north 86 degrees 32 minutes 23 seconds west a distance of 435.96 feet to a point located in Land Lot 522; thence running in the direction of north 86 degrees 54 minutes 50 seconds west a distance of 27.27 feet to a point where the said former center line of Old Mansell Road intersects the present north right-of-way line of the New Mansell Road; thence running along the following courses and distances as measured along the north right-of-way line of New Mansell Road having an 80-foot right-of-way and following the curvature thereof, to-wit: south 83 degrees 15 minutes 57 seconds east a distance of 43.07 feet to a point; thence running south 83 degrees 17 minutes 53 seconds east a distance of 69.41 feet to a point; thence running south 83 degrees 51 minutes 3 seconds east a distance of 68.14 feet to a point; thence running south 83 degrees 57 minutes 0 seconds east a distance of 73.55 feet to a point located in Land Lot 543; thence running south 84 degrees 7 minutes 33 seconds east a distance of 45.52 feet to a point; thence running in the direction of south 84 degrees 30 minutes 58 seconds east a distance of 53.79 feet to a point; thence running south 84 degrees 20 minutes 27 seconds east a distance of 53.87 feet to a point; thence running in the direction of south 85 degrees 7 minutes 23 seconds east a distance of 51.80 feet to a point; thence running south 85 degrees 56 minutes 20 seconds east a distance of 51.64 feet to a point; thence running south 85 degrees 55 minutes 5 seconds east a distance of 51.83 feet to a point; thence running south 85 degrees 41 minutes 57 seconds east a distance of 48.95 feet to a point; thence running south 86 degrees 21 minutes 30 seconds east a distance of 887.62 feet to a point; thence running south 84 degrees 35 minutes 58 seconds east a distance of 14.33 feet to a point; thence running in the direction of south 84 degrees 35 minutes 58 seconds east a distance of 32.32 feet to a point; thence running south 84 degrees 35 minutes 58 seconds east a distance of 9.91 feet to a point; thence running in the direction of south 84 degrees 7 minutes 2 seconds east a distance of 15 feet more or less to a point, said point being the intersection of the north right-of-way line of the New Mansell Road with the east line of Land Lot 543; thence running in a northerly direction as measured along the east line of Land Lot 543, the same being the west line of Land Lot 560, a distance of 56.1 feet to a point located in the northeast corner of Land Lot 543, the same being the point of beginning.     The above described tract being according to a plat of survey as prepared by Travis N. Pruitt, Sr., R.L.S. 1729, dated April 16, 1981, revised April 24, 1981. (d)  In addition to the area now embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Alpharetta, the following described tract of land shall be included within said corporate limits:     All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 906, 967, and 968 of the 2nd district, 2nd section of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows:     Beginning at an iron pin found located at the common corner of Land Lots 907, 906, 967, and 966; running thence north 89 degrees 48 minutes east a distance of 490.0 feet to an iron pin set; running thence north 0 degrees 33 minutes west a distance of 1307.5 feet to an iron pin set; running north 89 degrees 46 minutes east a distance of 843.0 feet to an iron pin found; running thence south 0 degrees 45 minutes west a distance of 724.0 feet to an iron pin found; running thence south 87 degrees 37 minutes west a distance of 210.8 feet to an iron pin found; running thence south 2 degrees 04 minutes east a distance of 576.3 feet to an iron pin found; running thence north 89 degrees 08 minutes east a distance of 1106.7 feet to an iron pin set; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the westerly right-of-way of Cogburn Road (said road having a 60-foot right-of-way) the following distances: running south 11 degrees 27 minutes west a distance of 84.84 feet to a point, running south 16 degrees 10 minutes west a distance of 98.48 feet to a point, running south 20 degrees 12 minutes west a distance of 98.66 feet to a point, running south 23 degrees 49 minutes west a distance of 98.30 feet to a point, and running south 26 degrees 08 minutes 30 seconds west a distance of 301.46 feet to an iron pin found; running thence south 89 degrees 58 minutes west a distance of 653.9 feet to an iron pin found; running thence north 89 degrees 48 minutes west a distance of 1317.2 feet to an iron bar found; running thence north 0 degrees 17 minutes west a distance of 620.1 feet to an iron pin found, which is the point of beginning.     Said property being shown on a compiled plat for the City of Alpharetta, prepared by Rodney H. Reese, Georgia-registered land surveyor No. 2072, dated December 12, 1985. Total area equaling 52.85 acres. (e)  In addition to the area now embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Alpharetta, the following described property shall be included within said corporate limits:     All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 1135 of the 2nd District, 2nd Section, of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows:     Beginning at an iron pin found (one inch C/T) on the southwesterly right-of-way of Broadwell Road (60-foot right-of-way) where it intersects with the land lot line that divides Land Lot 1134 and 1171; thence south 89 degrees 45 minutes 32 seconds west 180.53 feet along the land lot line that divides Land Lots 1134 and 1171, to an iron pin found on the land lot line (3/4 inch C/T); thence north 04 degrees 13 minutes 00 seconds west 401.95 feet to an iron pin found (3/4 inch C/T) on the southeasterly right-of-way of Crabapple Road (50-foot right-of-way) at that point; thence northeasterly along said right-of-way 72 degrees 01 minutes 30 seconds east 197.97 feet to a P/K nail set at the intersection of the southeasterly right-of-way of Crabapple Road (50-foot right-of-way) and the southwesterly right-of-way of Broadwell Road (60-foot right-of-way); thence south 02 degrees 42 minutes 14 seconds east 461.71 feet to an iron pin found at the point of beginning, said tract being 1.843 acres and the same property shown on a survey prepared for Crabapple First Baptist Church, Inc., by Brumbelow-Reese and Associates, Inc., on December 1, 1994. (f)  In addition to the area now embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Alpharetta, the following described property shall be included within said corporate limits:     All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 1242, 2nd district of the 2nd section of Fulton County, Georgia totaling 7.592 acres and being located at 12270 and 12290 Broadwell Road, and being more particularly described on Exhibit "A" attached [to Ordinance 577, adopted Oct. 3, 2005] and incorporated herein by reference. (f)[(g)]  In addition to the area now embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Alpharetta, the following described property shall be included within said corporate limits:     All of that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 1239 of the 2nd District, 2nd Section of Fulton County, Georgia, and bounded on the south by Rucker Road, bounded on the east by the corporate limits of the City of Roswell, bounded on the west by the corporate limits of the City of Roswell, and bounded on the north by the current corporate limits of the City of Alpharetta. (1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1149), page 4540, § 1; 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 804), page 3673, § 1; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 72), page 3622, § 1; 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 806), § 1) 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. (a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. (b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Sec. 1.13. - Examples of powers.     The corporate powers of this city may include, but are not limited to, the following: (1)  Property taxes. To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; (2)  Other taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by state law; (3)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; (4)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city, to authorize the expenditure of money for any purpose authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the law of the State of Georgia, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; (5)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; (6)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; (7)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; (8)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under [title 22, O.C.G.A.], or under other applicable public acts as are or may be enacted; (9)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility. To fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same, and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; (10)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public service[s], [and] to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations by the Public Service Commission; (11)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities; (12)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, and to regulate the use thereof; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under [title 22, O.C.G.A.], or other applicable public acts as are or may be enacted; (13)  Building regulation. To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas and heating and air conditioning codes and to regulate all housing, building, and building trades; [and] to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures; (14)  Planning and zoning. To provide such comprehensive city planning for development by zoning, subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; (15)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkness [sic. drunkenness], riots, and public disturbances; (16)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawnshops, the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors, the use and sale of firearms, to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; [and] to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortune-telling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; (17)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; (18)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; (19)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke, chemical and other noxious fumes, vehicle exhaust and other air pollutants which are admitted into the air space of the city; and to regulate and control any and all chemical, trash, unclean, impure or corrupt material that may be exposed to the water flowing in, around and through the city; (20)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits, and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; (21)  Public hazards, removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; (22)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials, and to provide for the sale of such items; (23)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; (24)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a sewer service charge fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; and for enforcing payment of same; to charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees; and to charge the same from time to time such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; (25)  Nuisance. A nuisance shall be defined and abated as provided by [O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.], as amended; (26)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; (27)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's municipal court shall work out such sentence in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares in the city; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; (28)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license, or prohibit the keeping or running at large of, animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; [and] to provide punishment for violation of ordinance[s] enacted hereunder; (29)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city; (30)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; (31)  Pensions. To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for members of the governing authority and employees of the city as provided by [O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4], as amended; (32)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; (33)  Contracts. The City of Alpharetta shall have the power to enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations. (34)  City agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; (35)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; (36)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen and to organize and operate a firefighting agency; (37)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city; (38)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; (39)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; (40)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental to [the] health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; (41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers, unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. (1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 931), page 4336, § 1; 1989 Ga. Laws, page 5256, § 1; 1998 Ga. Laws, page 4852, § 1) 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of powers.     All powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 
Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; composition; number; election.     The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by article V of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City council terms and qualification for office. (a)  The mayor and the members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. Terms of office shall begin on the January 2 immediately following the date of election to office for all persons elected at regular elections. No person shall be eligible to serve unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for six months prior to the date of election, shall have attained the age of 21 years prior to the date of election, shall continue to reside in the city during that member's period of service, and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. (b)  No councilmember elected and qualified for three consecutive terms shall be eligible for the succeeding term. (c)  No mayor elected and qualified for two consecutive terms shall be eligible for the succeeding term. (1998 Ga. Laws, page 4853, § 4) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. (a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. (b)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in article V. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses.     The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation for their services in the following amounts: (1)  Mayor: $30,000.00 per annum, payable monthly; and (2)  Council[member]: $15,000.00 per annum, payable monthly. The mayor and councilmembers shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. (1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 865), page 4319, § 1; 1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 321), page 5224, § 1; 2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 828), § 1) 
Sec. 2.14. - Prohibitions. (a)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: (1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; (2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; (3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he is engaged without proper legal authorization, or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others; (4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm or corporation which, to his knowledge, is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; (5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; (6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he has a financial interest. (b)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest, and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. (c)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such government for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. (d)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable as to that party, at the option of the city council. (e)  Ineligibility of elected officials. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which he was elected. (f)  Political activities of certain officers and employees. No appointive officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office for the City of Alpharetta. (g)  Penalties for violation. (1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position, and shall be deemed to have forfeited his office or position. (2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his office or position as described in [subsection (g)](1) above shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigation[s].     The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council.     Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by article I. 
Sec. 2.17. - Oath of office.     The mayor and each member of council, before entering upon the duties of office, shall take and subscribe the following oath: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor or councilmember, as the case may be) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and [the Constitution] of the United States of America." 
Sec. 2.18. - Regular and special meetings. (a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. (b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. (c)  All meetings of the city council at which any official action is to be taken shall be public to the extent required by [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.], as amended; and notice of such meetings, whether regular or special, shall be made fully as is reasonably possible at least five days prior to such meetings. 
Sec. 2.19. - Rules of procedure.     The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
Sec. 2.20. - Quorum; voting. (a)  Four councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. (b)  In an emergency situation, which shall only be established by the following three types of circumstances arising, to-wit: (1)  Hospitalization; (2)  Death in the immediate family; [or] (3)  Ambulatory illness; the mayor or councilmember laboring under one or more of these hardships shall have the right to vote his conviction on any motion, resolution or ordinance by absentia. 
Sec. 2.21. - Ordinance form; procedure. (a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Alpharetta hereby ordains. . ." and every ordinance shall so begin. (b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided in [section] 2.23. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2.22. - Action requiring an ordinance.     In addition to other acts required by general state law or by specific provisions of this Charter to be done by ordinance, acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be done by ordinance. (a)  Advertising, notice and public hearings. Shall only be required for those actions by the city having as their purpose one or more of the following: (1)  Changing, amending or modifying this Charter or the official zoning map of the city; (2)  Annexing or de-annexing property; (3)  Calling of a special election or the holding of a general election. The advertising of any of the said actions shall be accomplished by publishing the notice of the proposed action in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Alpharetta, Georgia; and the notice shall be given in writing setting forth the date, time and place of the public hearing. All other ordinances shall be submitted, approved or disapproved, as hereinafter provided. (b)  The newspaper having general circulation within the city may be designated specifically by separate ordinance. 
Sec. 2.23. - Emergencies.     To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money, except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 2.24. - Codes of technical regulations. (a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally, except that: (1) the requirements of section 2.21(b) for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.25. (b)  Copies of all adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 2.25. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. (a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature, and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose, all ordinances adopted by the council. (b)  The city council may provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Alpharetta, Georgia." Copies of the Code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. (c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first Code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code currently in effect, and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
Sec. 2.26. - Chief executive officer.     The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. He shall possess all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this Charter. 
Sec. 2.27. - Powers and duties of mayor.     As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: (a)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; (b)  Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; (c)  Submit to the city council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city and, from time to time, such other information as the city council may request; (d)  Recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient; (e)  Call special meetings of the city council as provided for in section 2.18; (f)  Approve or disapprove ordinances as provided in section 2.28; (g)  Examine and audit all accounts of the city; (h)  Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever he deems it expedient; (i)  Perform other duties as may be required by general state law, this Charter or ordinance; (j)  Appoint councilmembers singularly or in committee to oversee and report on the functions of the various departments of the city; (k)  Employ city personnel, with the approval of a majority of the councilmembers including the mayor; (l)  Terminate city personnel, with the approval of a majority of the councilmembers including the mayor. For the purposes of [subsections] (k) and (l) above, approval must be obtained at a regular, special or executive session meeting of the city council. 
Sec. 2.28. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. (1)  Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented within five working days by the clerk to the mayor. (2)  The mayor, within ten calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the clerk with or without his approval, or with his disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, or if it is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law upon its return to the clerk. If the mayor shall fail to return the ordinance to the clerk within ten calendar days of receipt, it shall become law at 12:00 midnight on the tenth calendar day after receipt. If the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council, through the clerk, a written statement of his reasons for his veto. The clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. (3)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the clerk to the city council at its next meeting, and should the city council then or at its next general meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of four or more councilmembers, it shall become law. (4)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided herein. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to [the] city council as though disapproved and shall not become law unless overridden by the council as in subsection (3) above. 
Sec. 2.29. - Mayor pro tem; selection; duties.     The city council shall elect by majority vote from among its members a mayor pro tem, who shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the mayor's disability or absence, or upon a vacancy in the office of mayor. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 
Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. (a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all non-elective offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. (b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or general state law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of this city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. (c)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as [is] prescribed by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions and agencies. (a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions and agencies to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary, and shall, by ordinance, establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. (b)  All members of boards, commissions and agencies of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or general state law. (c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission or agency. (d)  No member of any board, commission or agency shall hold any elective office in the city. (e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or agency of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or general state law. (f)  No member of a board, commission or agency shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of this office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. (g)  Any member of a board, commission or agency may be removed from office for cause by a vote of four members of the city council. (h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by general state law, each board, commission or agency of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice chairman and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. The mayor and city council may, by resolution or ordinance, establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, or general state law, governing the conduct of affairs of each board, commission or agency within the city. (1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 808), page 5591, § 1) 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney.     The city council may appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk.     The city council may appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be [the] custodian of the official city seal; maintain city council records required by this Charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 3.14. - Tax collector.     The city council may appoint a tax collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city, and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale, or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
Sec. 3.15. - City accountant.     The city council may appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Sec. 3.16. - Personnel policies.     The city council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: (1) the method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; (2) the administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; (3) hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; (4) such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and (5) such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 
Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name.     There shall be a court to be known as the municipal court of the City of Alpharetta. 
Sec. 4.11. - Judge. (a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a judge. The method of selection and term(s) of such judge shall be provided by ordinance. (b)  The compensation of the judge shall be $25,000.00 per year, payable monthly or biweekly. The compensation of the judge may be changed by ordinance. (c)  The judge may be removed for cause as provided in sections 5.17 and 5.18. (d)  (1)  To be eligible to serve as judge of the municipal court, a person shall: (A)  Be a resident of the city; and (B)  Be a member of the State Bar of Georgia with a minimum of two years' practice as an attorney. (2)  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection, if no person is qualified to serve as judge or becomes a candidate for election or appointment to the office of judge, the mayor and city council may appoint a person meeting the qualifications of subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) of this subsection who resides outside of the City of Alpharetta but within the Atlanta Judicial Circuit. (3)  The provisions of this subsection, relating to the qualifications for the office of judge, may be changed by ordinance. (e)  Before entering on duties of his office, each judge shall take an oath that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in section 2.17. (1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 932), page 4338, § 1; 1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 828), page 3601, § 1; 1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 828), page 361, § 1; 1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 321), page 5225, § 2; 1998 Ga. Laws (Act No. 828), page 3600, § 1; 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 924), page 4271, § 1) 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening.     Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as designated by the judge, subject to approval of the city council. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 924), page 4271, § 1; 2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 331), page 4607, § 1) 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. (a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of city ordinances and such other offenses as allowed and provided by general state law. (b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $300.00 or 30 days in jail, or both, for any one single act of contempt. (c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $2,000.00 or imprisonment for 12 months, or both, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law, including the right to punish by forced labor on the city streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public works for a period not exceeding 120 days. The municipal court may, in addition, fix punishment for offenses committed under general law not exceeding those limits established by general law. (d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited through procedures established by general law. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be, on order of the judge, declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. (e)  The municipal court shall have the authority to sit as a committing court, and to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. (f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. (g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons[es], subpoena[s] and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by general state law. (h)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of this city granted by general state laws to mayors, recorders and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. (1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 72), page 3918, § 1; 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 924), page 4271, § 3) 
Sec. 4.14. - Appeal.     The right of appeal and any bond as may be required to secure the costs on appeal to the Superior Court of Fulton County from the municipal court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the probate court, provided that any person who fails to file his or her appeal within ten days of the date of conviction shall be deemed to have waived any such right. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 924), page 4271, § 4) 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court.     With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to the municipal court. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the chief clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 924), page 4271, § 4; 2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 331), page 4607, § 2) 
Sec. 4.16. - Absence of judge. (a)  Subject to subsection (b) of this section, in the event that the judge is absent, recuses himself or herself, or is otherwise unavailable for court, a substitute judge shall be selected by the court clerk from a list approved by the city council. The list shall include only individuals who meet the qualifications listed in subsection (b) of this section for appointed part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges. (b)  In addition to the judge provided for in section 4.11 of this Act, the municipal court may be presided over by such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as the city council, in its discretion, deems necessary to meet the needs of the court. All such judges shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and [shall] possess all qualifications required by law. Such judges need not be residents of the city. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. Judges shall serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 924), page 4271, § 4; 2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 331), page 4607, § 3) 
Sec. 4.17. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. (a)  Vacancy. The office of judge shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. (b)  Filling of vacancy. A vacancy in the office of municipal judge shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided by ordinance. (1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 828), page 3600, § 2) 
Sec. 4.18. - Solicitor and assistant solicitors. (a)  The municipal court shall have a solicitor and, if approved by the mayor and council, one or more assistant solicitors for the prosecution of offenses brought before the court. The mayor and city council may also appoint one or more special solicitors from the office of the city attorney to prosecute offenses arising out of the zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, or similar land use regulations. (b)  The solicitor and assistant solicitors shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. (c)  The term of office for [the] solicitor and assistant solicitors shall be the same as that provided for the judge, subject to good behavior and at the discretion of the mayor and city council. (d)  The qualifications for the office of solicitor and assistant solicitors shall be as follows: (1)  The appointee must be a lawyer and member in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia; (2)  The appointee must be of good moral character, as attested to by at least three citizens of the city; and (3)  The appointee must be a respected attorney among his or her colleagues in the legal profession and supply the judge with at least three statements of his or her legal reputation and proficiency as supplied by members in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia. (e)  The solicitor and assistant solicitors of the court shall receive compensation for services as recommended by the judge, and approved by the mayor and city council by ordinance. (f)  Before entering on the duties of office, the solicitor and assistant solicitors shall take an oath that they will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of said office to the best of their skill, knowledge, and ability without fear, favor, or partiality to any party. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the court and city council journal as required in this article and in section 2.17. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 924), page 4271, § 5) 
Sec. 4.19. - Duties.     It shall be the duty of the solicitor and assistant solicitors to investigate, prepare, prosecute, or otherwise dispose of all violations of state criminal statutes or ordinances as may be properly brought before the court. In addition, any appeals taken by persons aggrieved with court decisions shall be defended by the solicitor or assistant solicitors. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 924), page 4271, § 5) 
Sec. 4.20. - Absence of solicitor.     In the solicitor's absence or disability, an assistant solicitor shall act as solicitor. If there is no assistant solicitor, then the solicitor, if able, or the court clerk shall select from a list of attorneys, approved by the mayor and city council, a substitute solicitor. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 924), page 4271, § 5) 
Sec. 4.21. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; office of solicitor. (a)  The office of solicitor shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. (b)  A vacancy in the office of [the] solicitor shall be filled for the remainder of the judge's term, if any, as provided in this article. 
Sec. 4.22. - Chief court clerk. (a)  The municipal court shall have a chief clerk of court and, if approved by the city council, one or more deputy clerks. (b)  The chief clerk and deputy clerks shall be appointed by the city council. (c)  The term of office for the chief clerk and deputy clerks shall be according to their good behavior and at the discretion of the city council. (d)  The compensation of the chief clerk and deputy clerks shall be established by ordinance. (2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 331), page 4607, § 4) 
Sec. 4.23. - Duties of chief court clerk. (a)  The chief court clerk shall be the custodian of the official court records, [and shall] establish and manage case calendars and dockets, collect fines imposed by the court, transmit records of all cases bound over or appealed to the state or superior courts from the municipal court, and perform such other duties as may be provided by ordinance. (b)  The chief court clerk shall be a city employee and, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, shall serve as the city's director of municipal court services. The director of municipal court services shall provide administrative services to the municipal court, act as [a] liaison to the police department, supervise all other court personnel, and perform such other duties as may be provided by ordinance. (2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 331), page 4607, § 5) 
Sec. 4.24. - Vacancies; filling of vacancies; office of court clerk. (a)  The office of court clerk shall become vacant upon the clerk's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. (b)  A vacancy in the office of court clerk shall be filled as provided in this article. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 
Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law.     [Section 5.10 has been superseded and made obsolete by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. II, §§ I—II and the Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] 
Sec. 5.11. - Election of the mayor and city council.     The mayor and each councilmember shall be elected for staggered terms of four years, except that the initial terms of councilmembers for Districts 1, 2, and 3 shall be five years. Effective for all municipal elections occurring in 1992 and in subsequent years, the city shall consist of six election [districts] as provided in section 5.13 of this Charter. The initial election of councilmembers for Districts 1, 2, and 3 shall be held on the third Tuesday in October, 1992. The initial election for the mayor and councilmembers for District 4, 5, and 6 shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1995. Thereafter, a municipal general election shall be held [at a time and date pursuant to state law]. (1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 828), page 3600, § 3; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1226), page 6449, § 1) 
Sec. 5.12. - Special election; vacancies.     In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council, or those remaining, shall order a special election within 90 days to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office; the mayor and city council shall set their own rules governing said election; provided, however, if the office of a councilmember shall become vacant within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council, or those remaining, shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term for councilmember. If the office of mayor shall become vacant within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the mayor pro tem shall serve the remainder of the term, and his position as councilmember shall be filled by appointment by the city council. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with state law. (1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 828), page 3600, § 4) 
Sec. 5.13. - Councilmembers elected by districts. (a)  Effective for all municipal elections occurring in 1992 and in subsequent years, the territory of the city shall consist of six election districts to be [designated] respectively as Districts 1 through 6. (b)  The election districts shall be as follows: Election District 1: VTD: 00K5 AP01 (part) Tract: 0116.02 Block(s): 503, 504, 505, 506(A) VTD: 00X3 AP02 (part) Tract: 0116.01 Block(s): 105A, 115, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 403A, 405A, 405B, 407, 408A, 409, 410, 505A, 506 Election District 2: VTD: 00K5 AP01 (part) Tract: 0116.02 Block(s): 603A VTD: 00X3 AP02 (part) Tract: 0115 Block(s): 409A, 410, 411A, 411B, 411C, 412A Tract: 0116.01 Block(s): 101A, 101B, 102A, 103A, 104A, 106, 107, 108A, 110C, 110D, 111, 113, 114, 116, 122, 123, 124, 403B, 403C, 403D, 404A, 601, 602, 603, 604, 605, 606, 607, 608, 609, 610A, 611A, 612A, 623, 624, 625, 626 Election District 3: Fulton County VTD: 00K5 AP01 (part) Tract: 0116.01 Block(s): 202A, 302A, 303A, 305A, 305B, 503A, 504A Tract: 0116.02 Block(s): 301, 302, 402 VTD: 00X3 AP02 (part) Tract: 0116.01 Block(s): 304A Election District 4: Fulton County VTD: 00K5 AP01 (part) Tract: 0116.01 Block(s): 704 VTD: 00X3 AP02 (part) Tract: 0114.04 Block(s): 501A, 601, 602A, 602B, 604, 702A Tract: 0116.01 Block(s): 109A, 110A, 110B, 112A, 613A, 614A, 615A, 616A, 618A, 620A, 621A, 622 [Election] District 5: Fulton County VTD: 00K5 AP01 (part) Tract: 0116.02 Block(s): 304A, 401A, 401B, 901A, 902A, 903A, 904, 905, 906, 907A, 910A, 911A, 912A, 913A, 914A, 914B, 916A, 918A Election District 6: Fulton County VTD: 00K5 AP01 (part) Tract: 0114.08 Block(s): 201A, 202, 203A, 501A, 501B, 501C, 601A, 602A Tract: 0116.01 Block(s): 701, 702, 703 Tract: 0116.02 Block(s): 303, 401C, 401E, 403, 404, 501, 502A, 507, 601A, 601B, 602, 704A, 705A, 705B, 706, 707A, 708A, 709A For purposes of this subsection: (1)  The terms "tract," "block," and "VTD" shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; (2)  The term "precinct" is synonymous with the term "voting precinct," and means a geographical area designated by article 7 of chapter 2 or 3 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., within which all electors vote at one polling place; (3)  Precinct names and designations following VTD designations are included for convenience only; and in the event the description of any election district contains a conflict between the geographical boundaries of any VTD and the boundaries of the following named precinct, the geographical boundary of the VTD as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia shall control; (4)  Any part of the City of Alpharetta which is not included in any election district described in this subsection shall be included within that election district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; and (5)  Any part of the City of Alpharetta which is described in this subsection as being included in a particular election district shall nevertheless not be included within such election district if such part is not contiguous to such election district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that election district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia. (c)  Only the electorate of each of the six election districts shall be entitled to vote in the election for the councilmember to be elected from that district. In addition to the qualifications set forth in section 2.11 of the Charter, no person shall be eligible to serve as a councilmember unless he or she shall have been a resident of the election district in which he or she seeks election for a period of six months immediately prior to the election. The electorate of all six of the election districts shall be entitled to vote in the election for the mayor. (d)  The mayor and councilmembers in office prior to the 1992 municipal general election shall remain in office until their terms expire and their successors are elected and qualified. (e)  The election district boundaries of the city shall be reapportioned following the publication of each official federal decennial census of the population of the city. Such reapportionment shall be accomplished by the adoption of an amendment to this Charter. The reapportionment of election districts shall comply with the following specifications: (1)  Each election district shall be formed of contiguous territory, and its boundary lines shall be the centerlines of streets or other well-defined boundaries as utilized by the United States Bureau of the Census; and (2)  Such election districts shall be as nearly equal in population as practicable. (f)  Any reapportionment of election districts shall apply to the officials of the city elected at the next municipal general election following such reapportionment; provided, however, that any reapportionment ordinance shall not apply to any regular election or special election held within three months of the effective date of the Charter amendment. (1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1226), page 6449, § 2) 
Sec. 5.14. - Other provisions.     Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations [as] it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under state law, as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.15. - Non-partisan elections.     Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices, and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Sec. 5.16. - Election by plurality.     The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Sec. 5.17. - Grounds for removal.     The mayor, councilmembers, or judge may be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: (1)  Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; (2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; (3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; (4)  [Knowing violation of] any express prohibition of this Charter; (5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or (6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by state law. 
Sec. 5.18. - Procedure for removal.     Removal of an above-described officer may be accomplished by one of the following methods: (a)  By the vote of four councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer or the municipal judge is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer or judge shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer or judge sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Fulton County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. (b)  By information filed in the Superior Court of Fulton County, as provided by state law. (1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 828), page 3603, § 5) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
Sec. 6.10. - Property tax.     The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government; providing governmental services; for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations; and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods.     The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes.     The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by general state law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein, to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses, permits, [and] fees.     The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general state law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. The city council, by ordinance, may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises.     The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purpose[s] of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television [companies], gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or non-exclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years, and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book to be kept by him. The city council may provide, by ordinance, for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges.     The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tools for sewer, sanitary, [and] health services, or any other services rendered within and without the corporate limits of the city, for the total cost to the city of providing such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments.     The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes.     This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by state law, and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees.     The city council, by ordinance, shall provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, allowing exceptions for hardship; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds.     The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds.     Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short term notes.     The city must obtain and repay any short term loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year, or as is otherwise provided by present or future state law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Fiscal year.     The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by general state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.23. - Preparation of budgets.     The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of any annual operating and capital improvement budget, including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budget. 
Sec. 6.24. - Action by city council on budget. (a)  The city council may amend the operating and capital improvement budget; except, that the budget, as finally amended and adopted, must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves and revenues. (b)  The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than 15 days prior to the beginning of such fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose or activity as set out in the budget preparation under section 6.23. (c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. The operating and capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.25. - Tax levies.     As the next order of business following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy, by ordinance, such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.26. - Changes in appropriations.     The city council, by ordinance, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget, at any regular meeting, special [meeting] or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies or on a revised estimate of revenue. 
Sec. 6.27. - Independent audit.     There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state [or] federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
Sec. 6.28. - Contracting procedures.     The city council may, by ordinance, establish contracting procedures; provided, however, that no contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: (1)  It is in writing; and (2)  It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney, and as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate approval as to form; and (3)  It is reviewed as to substance by the city administrator or the director of the department most affected by the contract, signed by the city administrator or such director to indicate approval as to substance, and signed by the mayor; and (4)  If it involves the expenditure of more than $25,000.00, it is authorized by the city council, and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 2.19. (1998 Ga. Laws, page 4852, § 2) 
Sec. 6.29. - Centralized purchasing.     The city council may, by ordinance, prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city, including comprehensive bidding procedures for the purchase of assets, and the award of contracts; provided, however, that unless otherwise authorized by law, purchases or contracts involving the expenditure of more than $25,000.00 shall be awarded by competitive sealed bid or proposal and shall be approved by city council. (1998 Ga. Laws (Act No. 248), page 4852; Ord. No. 395, § 3, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 696, § 2, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 6.30. - Sale of city property. (a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as provided by general state law as now or later amended at [O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6]. (b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes by adoption of a resolution, finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes, and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. (c)  Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, alley, avenue or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver, in the name of the city, a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
Sec. 6.31. - Insurance.     The city shall maintain sufficient casualty and liability insurance coverage on all property owned and/or operated by city personnel to adequately indemnify the city on claims of loss by injured or aggrieved parties. The amounts of insurance coverage shall be set from time to time by the city council in the form of a resolution, as the need arises. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 7.10. - Eminent domain.     The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, water works, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be taken under [title 22, O.C.G.A.], subject to such amendments as shall be enacted, or any other Georgia law applicable now or provided in the future. 
Sec. 7.11. - Official bonds.     The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require, by ordinance, or as may be provided by state law. 
Sec. 7.12. - Prior ordinances.     All ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.13. - First election under the Charter. (a)  The first municipal election shall be the third Tuesday of October, 1982, at which time the mayor and three councilmember positions shall be filled. The councilmember post[s] to be filled at this election shall be those designated as numbers four, five and six and shall be the present councilmember positions whose terms expire in January, 1983. The position of judge of the municipal court and councilmember posts designated as numbers one, two and three shall be filled at the next regular election to be held on the third Tuesday in October in the year 1984. Councilmember posts one, two and three shall be those present councilmember positions whose terms expire in January, 1985. (b)  The present mayor and councilmembers elected as the governing body of the City of Alpharetta under the heretofore existing Charter of the city are hereby constituted as the official governing body of the city, and shall continue to serve in their elective offices until their successors are elected as provided herein; and the effective date of this Charter shall not create any vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember; and the city shall continue its present operation as usual. 
Sec. 7.14. - Pending matters.     Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue, and any such ongoing work or cases shall be dealt with by such city agencies, personnel or office[s] as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.15. - Penalties.     The violation of any provisions of this Charter for which [a] penalty is not specifically provided for herein, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 120 days, or both, or a sentence upon conviction to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares or other public works for a period not exceeding 120 days. (1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 72 (H.B. 411)), § 1) 
Sec. 7.16. - Construction. (a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. (b)  The word "shall" is intended to be mandatory, and the word "may" is not. (c)  The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine [shall include] the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.17. - Severability.     If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.18. - Repealer.     An Act incorporating the City of Alpharetta in the County of Fulton, approved March 3, 1961, (Ga. L. 1961, p. 2127), is hereby repealed in its entirety, and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 7.19. - Effective date.     This Act (Charter) shall become effective on July 1, 1981; but the heretofore existing Charter as pertains to elected officials shall not be repealed until the presently existing terms of the office[s] of mayor and councilmembers expire. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS     The Charter is derived from 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 704), page 4609. This table shows the location of amendments made to the Charter by the General Assembly. Ga. Laws Year Act No. Page Section  Section this Charter 1982 1149 4540 1 1.11 1984 865 4319 1 2.13 931 4336 1 1.13 932 4338 1 4.11 1986 804 3673 1 1.11 1988 828 3600 2 4.17 828 3600 3 5.11 828 3600 4 4.11 828 3600 4 5.12 828 3601 1 4.11 828 3603 5 5.18 4852 2 6.28 1989 72 3918 1 4.13 72(H.B. 411) 1 7.15 321 5224 1 2.13 321 5225 2 4.11 5256 1 1.13 1992 808 5591 1 3.11 1226 6449 1 5.11 1226 6449 2 5.13 1994 924 4271 1 4.11 924 4271 1 4.12 924 4271 3 4.13 924 4271 4 4.14 924 4271 4 4.15 924 4271 4 4.16 924 4271 5 4.18 924 4271 5 4.19 924 4271 5 4.20 1997 72 3622 1 1.11 1998 4852 1 1.13 4853 4 2.11 2003 331 4607 1 4.12 331 4607 2 4.15 331 4607 3 4.16 331 4607 4 4.22 331 4607 5 4.23 2004 828 1 2.13 2006 806 1 1.11  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION     This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. Legislation  Date Section  Section this Charter Ord. No. 395 9-2-1997 3 6.29 Ord. No. 696 11-3-2014 2 6.29  
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Act No. 1065, page 4669, approved by the governor on April 5, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as Subpart B, article I, §§ 1—9, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 1. - Definitions.     For purposes of this Act, the term: (1)  "Ad valorem taxes" means all ad valorem taxes for city purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Alpharetta, and including taxes to retire bonded indebtedness. (2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1065), page 4669, § 1; 1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 510), page 3501, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Age 65 or older—Regular homestead exemption.     Each resident of the City of Alpharetta who is 65 years of age or older is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Alpharetta ad valorem taxes, to be provided as follows: Tax Year Beginning Amount of Exemption January 1, 1995 $6,000.00 January 1, 1996 [$]8,000.00 January 1, 1977, and every year thereafter [$]10,000.00    The exemption granted in this section shall automatically increase to $15,000.00 for each taxable year in which the amount of the City of Alpharetta tax digest attributable to the residential classification increases by 30 percent or more over the amount of the 1990 City of Alpharetta tax digest attributable to the residential classification. The homestead exemption granted by this section shall be cumulative of any other homestead exemption applicable to the City of Alpharetta ad valorem taxes. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1065), page 4669, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Age 65 or older—Additional homestead exemption.     Each resident of the City of Alpharetta who is 65 years of age or older is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Alpharetta ad valorem taxes for $10,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead owned and occupied by such resident, if such resident's adjusted gross income, together with the adjusted gross income of the resident's spouse who also resides at such homestead, does not exceed the maximum amount which may be received by an individual and an individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act. As used in this section, the term "adjusted gross income" shall have the same meaning as defined in the United States Internal Revenue Code as that code is defined in code section [48-7-27] of the O.C.G.A., except that, for the purposes of this section, the term ["adjusted gross income"] shall not include income or benefits received as retirement, [or] survivor or disability benefits under the federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability, or pension system except such income which exceeds the maximum amount which may be received by an individual and an individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act. The homestead exemption granted by this section shall be cumulative of any other homestead exemption applicable to City of Alpharetta ad valorem taxes. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1065), page 4669, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Age 70 or older—Full value homestead exemption.     Each resident of the City of Alpharetta who is 70 years of age or older is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Alpharetta ad valorem taxes for the full value of the homestead owned and occupied by such resident, if such resident's adjusted gross income, together with the adjusted gross income of the resident's spouse who also resides at such homestead, does not exceed the maximum amount which may be received by an individual and an individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act. As used in this section, the term "adjusted gross income" shall have the same meaning as defined in the United States Internal Revenue Code as that code is defined in code section [48-7-27] of the O.C.G.A., except that, for the purposes of this section, the term ["adjusted gross income"] shall not include income or benefits received as retirement, [or] survivor or disability benefits under the federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability, or pension system, except such income which exceeds the maximum amount which may be received by an individual and an individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act. The homestead exemption granted by this section shall be cumulative of any other homestead exemption applicable to City of Alpharetta ad valorem taxes. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1065), page 4669, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Claims procedure.     The exemptions granted by this Act shall be claimed and returned as provided in code section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A. The exemptions shall be automatically renewed each year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. It shall be the duty of any owner who has claimed the exemption provided by this Act to notify the clerk of the City of Alpharetta or the designee thereof if that owner becomes ineligible for any reason to receive such exemption. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1065), page 4669, § 5) 
Sec. 6. - Application forms.     The clerk of the City of Alpharetta, or the designee thereof, shall provide application forms for the exemptions granted by this Act, and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the eligibility of the owner for the exemption. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1065), page 4669, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - Certain taxes not affected.     The exemptions granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect county taxes for county purposes, county school board taxes for educational purposes, or state taxes. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1065), page 4669, § 7; 1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 510), page 3501, § 2) 
Sec. 8. - Value subject to taxation.     The value of the homestead in excess of the amount exempted by this Act shall remain subject to ad valorem taxation. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1065), page 4669, § 8) 
Sec. 9. - Applicable tax years.     The additional exemption from taxes granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1997. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1065), page 4669, § 9; 1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 510), page 3501, § 3) 
Sec. 10. - Homestead exemption. (1)  Each resident of the City of Alpharetta is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Alpharetta ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes as follows: (A)  For the taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2010, and prior to January 1, 2011, in the amount of $35,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead; and (B)  For all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2011, in the amount of $40,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. (2)  The value of the homestead in excess of any exemption granted therefor shall remain subject to ad valorem taxation. (1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 832), page 4836, § 1; 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 604), page 4703, § 1; 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 490), § 1; 2009 Ga. Laws (Act No. 278), § 1) 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS     This table shows the location of related laws. Ga. Laws Year Act No. Page Section  Section this Related Laws 1994 1065 4669 1 1 1065 4669 2 2 1065 4669 3 3 1065 4669 4 4 1065 4669 5 5 1065 4669 6 6 1065 4669 7 7 1065 4669 8 8 1065 4669 9 9 1996 510 3501 1 1 510 3501 2 7 510 3501 3 9 1999 832 4836 1 10 2002 604 4703 1 10 2006 490 1 10 2009 278 1 10  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; incorporation of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited.     The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Alpharetta, Georgia," and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as "Alpharetta City Code" or the "City Code." (Code 1989, § 1-1) State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions.     The following rules of construction and definitions shall apply to all ordinances and resolutions of the city council, unless the context requires otherwise:     Bonds. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they are bound thereby. State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(1).     City. The term "city" means the City of Alpharetta, Georgia. Where appropriate, it shall also mean duly authorized officials, officers and employees of the city.     Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Alpharetta, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.     Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time, except hours, is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, as amended, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3).     Council, city council, governing authority, governing body. The terms "council," "city council," "governing authority" and "governing body" mean the city council of the City of Alpharetta, Georgia.     County. The term "county" means Fulton County, Georgia.     Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires an official or the head of a department of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the official or head of the department to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise.     Gender. A word importing one gender shall extend and be applied to the other genders, except where inappropriate.     Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.     Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.     Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, as the term "person" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee.     May. The term "may" is permissive.     Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.     Municipality. The term "municipality" shall be construed as synonymous with the term "city," "municipal corporation," or "town."     Number. A word importing only the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing.     Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed."     O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the latest edition of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended.     Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it.     Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable.     Owner. The term "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title.     Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, receivers, trustees and personal representatives, and to bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.     Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined.     Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.     Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property.     Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any open area.     Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.     Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory, not merely directive.     Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.     Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark intended as such when the person cannot write.     State. The term "state," in reference to a political entity, means the State of Georgia.     Statute reference. Whenever reference is made to, for example, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-1, it shall be construed to refer to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 1-1-1, as amended, or to whatever section is cited.     Street. The term "street" shall be construed to mean the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges, tunnels, parkways, public grounds or water, public rights-of-way and all other public highways within or belonging to the city.     Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others.     Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.     Title of officer or official. Whenever the title of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Alpharetta" were added.     Week. The term "week" means seven calendar days.     Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.     Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. (Code 1989, § 1-2) State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; state law references; editor's notes. (a)  The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or subsections, nor as any part of the section or subsection, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. State-enabling legislation references, state law references, and editor's notes which appear before or after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. (c)  All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters, articles, and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. (Code 1989, § 1-3) State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of Code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. (a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. (b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect. (c)  An ordinance which is in conflict in its entirety with a subsequent ordinance shall be deemed to be repealed in its entirety, even if no specific repealer is stated. If an ordinance is only partially in conflict with a subsequent ordinance, only the portion of the previous ordinance in conflict with the subsequent ordinance shall be deemed to have been repealed, even if a specific repealer is not stated. (Code 1989, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability.     It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. (Code 1989, § 1-5) State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. (a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included herein, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and added hereto. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. (b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of The Code of the City of Alpharetta, Georgia is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provision may then be set out in full as desired. (c)  In the event a new section not theretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of the City of Alpharetta, Georgia is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section (or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. (d)  All sections, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. (Code 1989, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. (a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. (b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. (c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: (1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; (2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; (3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; (4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and (5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. (Code 1989, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. (a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: (1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; (2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or (3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. (b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. (c)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. (d)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. (e)  Unless a higher penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city or county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1989, § 1-8) State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); authority to punish ordinance violations by requiring labor, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; sentences and fines which may be imposed, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances.     The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof, and not as new enactments. (Code 1989, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code, ordinances or other public documents. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, or in any other manner alter any ordinance book or minute book, or any notice posted by the city for the benefit of the public, or any other document or record of the municipal government of the city. (Code 1989, § 1-10) State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. (a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: (1)  Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; (2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; (3)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; (4)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing salaries of or providing policies and programs for providing retirement, disability or death benefits for officials, officers or employees of the city; (5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; or any ordinance levying any tax; (6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; (7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; (8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; (9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; (10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; (11)  Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundary of the city; (12)  Any zoning ordinance, or any ordinance regulating subdivisions, or any ordinance regulating signs, or any ordinance regulating building design standards; (13)  Any resolution of the city not in conflict with this Code; (14)  Any ordinance enacted after March 13, 1989. (b)  All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. (Code 1989, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - Interpretation of Code.     In all interpretations of this Code and ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. State Law reference— Similar provisions as to state laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-13. - Substantive compliance with Code.     A substantial compliance with any requirement of the Code or ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment. 
Sec. 1-14. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.     The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof, and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-15. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. (a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. (b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-16. - Supplementation of Code. (a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. (b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. (c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: (1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. (2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. (3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. (4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). (5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-17. - Ordinances not affected by adoption of the Code. (a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: (1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; (2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; (3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; (4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless superseded; (5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures for any city officer or city employee; (6)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; (7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; (8)  Any appropriation ordinance; (9)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; (10)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; (11)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a planning commission, including joint commissions; (12)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; (13)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city; (14)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; (15)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein; (16)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or prescribing street grades in the city; (17)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; (18)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; and (19)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature, or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. (b)  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance, or part thereof, that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq.; administrative powers generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - CITY COUNCIL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3; meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); requirement to prescribe the times, places and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-1. - Council meetings—Days and times. (a)  The regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Monday of each month. A regular city council public hearing shall be held on the fourth Monday of each month. If the meeting or public hearing falls on a legal holiday, the meeting or public hearing shall take place on the next day that is not a legal holiday. (b)  Regular meetings of the city council and regular city council public hearings shall be held at the hour of 6:30 p.m., or such other hour as the council may designate from time to time by resolution. (c)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the council from holding special meetings as provided in the Charter, or from scheduling public hearings on other dates. (Code 1989, § 2-1; Ord. of 3-14-1988(2), §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 327, § 1, 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 6-19-1995; Ord. No. 581, § 1, 2-20-2006; Res. No. 1829, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 2-2. - Same—Parliamentary procedure.     "Roberts Rules of Order, Newly Revised," as modified by this section, shall constitute the rules of parliamentary procedure for all public meetings of the city council. It shall be the duty of each councilmember (including the mayor) to vote for or against every question properly presented to the council for vote, and no councilmember shall have the right to abstain, except that a councilmember may abstain from voting to approve the minutes of a meeting that the councilmember did not attend. In the event that a councilmember has a conflict of interest (as defined in the city Charter, any city ordinance or applicable law), the councilmember shall not abstain, but shall recuse himself from participating in the consideration of the question. The recused councilmember shall not be considered "present" for the purpose of determining if the matter has sufficient votes for passage. Except for penalties that may be applicable with respect to the violation of a conflict of interest rule, there shall be no penalty imposed for a violation of this section. (Code 1989, § 2-2; Res. of 5-11-1987; Res. No. 383, 1-20-1991; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 8-21-2000) 
Sec. 2-3. - Ordinance form; procedure. (a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be in writing. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. (b)  An ordinance may be introduced by the mayor or any councilmember and the title thereof read by the city attorney at a regular or special meeting of the city council; provided, however, that upon the request of the mayor or any councilmember, such ordinance shall be read in its entirety. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by simple majority vote of those present and voting; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances as provided in the Charter. Prior to introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember, file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate, and post upon the city's website. (Ord. No. 724, 4-18-2016) 
Sec. 2-4. - Public comment at city council meetings. (a)  Public comments on agenda items. Comments from the public are permitted on each agenda item before final vote is taken. Persons desiring to speak on an agenda item shall obtain recognition of the mayor prior to speaking, and shall state their names and home addresses for the record. On agenda items other than land use matters, unless permitted by majority vote of the city council, no persons shall speak to the city council for more than three minutes on any item. If the agenda item is a zoning or other land use matter, the mayor shall impose such reasonable time limitations on the public discussion as the mayor deems appropriate. To the extent reasonably possible, equal amounts of time shall be made available to those speaking for and against the matter. On land use matters, the applicant and the adjacent property owners shall be afforded the first opportunity to speak, and, if reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the general public may then speak. The mayor, or a majority of the council upon motion, may end the public debate on any matter when the comments have become repetitive, or where the views of each side have been fairly presented. Once public debate has ended, no further public comment is permitted except upon majority vote of the city council. A motion to extend the time for any one person to speak, to end public debate, or to reopen public debate shall be a non-debatable motion. (b)  Public comments on non-agenda items. Immediately following the close of new business, the mayor shall permit comments from the public on non-agenda items pertaining to legitimate city business. However, no formal action shall be taken by the city council on any non-agenda item except in cases of an emergency. Unless otherwise extended by majority vote of the city council, no person shall speak to the city council for more than three minutes. A motion to extend the time for individual comments shall be a non-debatable motion. Any person desiring to speak during the citizens' comments portion of the meeting shall submit a completed speaker card to the city clerk prior to the meeting. The speaker card shall set forth the name, address and telephone number of the speaker, and the topic to be discussed. No speaker cards will be accepted after the meeting is convened. The mayor shall recognize the speakers in the order in which the speaker cards were submitted to the clerk. All comments shall be directed to the mayor or other presiding officer at the meeting. The clerk shall inform each speaker when the speaker's time has expired, and shall inform the mayor when the time allotted for citizens' comments has concluded. (Code 1989, § 2-3; Res. No. 662, §§ I, II, 6-30-1997) 
Sec. 2-5. - Elections; "incumbent" label on ballot.     It shall be lawful to have the word "incumbent" follow the name of any person who is running and is legally holding office at the time of any legal or special election held in the city. (Code 1989, § 2-4; Ord. No. 158, § 1, 10-23-1978) 
Sec. 2-6. - City administrator—Duties.     The duties delegated to the city administrator are as follows: (1)  To prepare studies and reports as requested by the mayor and/or city council; (2)  To prepare and make application for county, state and federal grants as requested by the mayor and/or city council; (3)  To conduct research as requested by the mayor and/or city council; (4)  To prepare and maintain an office memorandum system, purchase order system and information office control system; (5)  To administer and ensure compliance with all contracts entered into by the city; (6)  To direct the activities of all employees of the city; (7)  To prepare an annual budget and direct the financial activities of the city; (8)  To direct the daily business operations of the city; and (9)  To perform any other duties hereinafter delegated to the city administrator by the mayor and/or city council. (Code 1989, § 2-5; Ord. No. 189, 6-30-1983) 
Sec. 2-7. - Same—Fixing of salary.     The city council may change the city administrator's salary without the passage of an ordinance. Such change will be accomplished by a majority vote of the city council. (Code 1989, § 2-6; Ord. of 7-9-1984) 
Sec. 2-8. - Credit card payments.     All sums due the city, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees, permit fees and registration fees, may be paid by the use of credit cards. The city finance director, with the approval of the city administrator, shall establish the procedures for acceptance of credit card payments for amounts due the city. The mayor is authorized to enter into agreements with credit card issuers to facilitate the acceptance of credit card payments by the city. (Code 1989, § 2-7; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 6-24-1996) 
Sec. 2-9. - Discounted fee.     A credit card may provide for the acceptance of the credit card payments from the credit card company at a discount from the face amount of the payment or for the withholding of administrative fees from the face amount of the payment. Such discounted fee is granted in exchange for the improved governmental cash flow, reduction of administrative expenses and increased public convenience as a result of credit card payments. (Code 1989, § 2-8; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 6-24-1996) 
Sec. 2-10. - Surcharge.     A surcharge equal to the administrative fees charged by the credit card issuer to the city shall be imposed upon any person making a payment by credit card, when such surcharges are permitted by the operating rules and regulations of the credit card issuer. (Code 1989, § 2-9; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 6-24-1996) 
Sec. 2-11. - Cancellation.     Any agreement with a credit card issuer for the acceptance of payments via credit shall contain a provision that the agreement may be canceled at any time by the city. (Code 1989, § 2-10; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 6-24-1996) 
Sec. 2-12. - Final payment.     No person making payment by credit card to the city is relieved from liability for the underlying obligation except to the extent that the city actually receives final payment of the obligation in cash or its equivalent. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, the underlying obligation for the money due is not extinguished. All applicable penalties, interest and collection fees on the unpaid amount shall be due from the person making the payment by credit card. Such penalties, interest and fees on an unpaid amount shall accrue from the date the unpaid obligation was first due under the applicable statute or ordinance. The city shall follow the collection procedures for the unpaid amount that would have otherwise been applicable had the credit card payment not been attempted. (Code 1989, § 2-11; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 6-24-1996) 
Sec. 2-13. - Records management plan. (a)  The city administrator, or his designee, is hereby designated as the records manager for the city. (b)  The retention schedules for local government records, attached to Ordinance Number 1117 as exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference, are hereby adopted as the records retention schedules for the city. (c)  All records shall be maintained in accordance with the approved retention schedules, and the city shall conform to the guidelines adopted from time to time by the state technology authority for the maintenance and security of its records. (Code 1989, § 2-12; Res. No. 1117, §§ 1—3, 2-21-2005) 
Sec. 2-14. - Limitation on powers of eminent domain.     The city council shall not exercise its powers of eminent domain solely for the purpose of transferring ownership of property from one private individual or entity to another private individual or entity solely for the purposes of economic development, job creation, and increasing the local tax base. (Code 1989, § 2-13; Res. No. 1153, 7-25-2005) 
Sec. 2-15. - Official legal organ for publication of legal notices.     The Alpharetta-Roswell Revue and News is designated as the official legal organ for the publication of city legal notices. (Code 1989, § 2-14; Res. No. 1371, 9-15-2008) 
Secs. 2-16—2-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Cities authorized to establish municipal courts, Ga. Const. art. VI, § 1, ¶ 1; cash bonds in cases involving offenses against municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-10; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 32-31-1 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 2-34—2-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL JUDGE 
Sec. 2-55. - Method of selection.     The office of judge of the municipal court shall be filled by mayor and city council appointment immediately following the expiration of the term of the municipal judge. (Code 1989, § 2-41; Ord. of 3-28-1988(1), § 1; Ord. No. 660, § 1, 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 2-56. - Qualifications.     The qualifications for municipal judge shall be the same as for the mayor and city councilmembers; provided, however, it shall not be a requirement that the municipal judge be a resident of the city. In addition, the municipal judge shall be a member of the state bar with a minimum of two years' practice as an attorney. (Code 1989, § 2-42; Ord. of 3-28-1988(1), § 4; Ord. No. 660, § 2, 12-19-2011) State Law reference— Requirements for municipal court judges, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1.1. 
Sec. 2-57. - Term of office.     The term for the office of municipal judge shall be the same as for the mayor and councilmembers. (Code 1989, § 2-43; Ord. of 3-28-1988(1), § 2; Ord. No. 660, § 3, 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 2-58. - Filling of vacancy.     In the event that the office of municipal judge shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the mayor and council shall appoint the successor to fill the remainder of the term of the municipal judge. Such successor shall serve for such term as the council provides, up to the remainder of the term of the municipal judge. (Code 1989, § 2-44; Ord. of 3-14-1988(1), § 1; Ord. No. 660, § 4, 12-19-2011) State Law reference— Municipal election code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-59. - Removal.     The municipal judge may be removed by the mayor and council; provided, however, that a minimum of five votes shall be required for such removal. (Code 1989, § 2-45; Ord. No. 682, § 1, 10-17-2013) 
Sec. 2-60. - Compensation.     The compensation of the judge shall be established from time to time by the mayor and council as part of the annual budget process. (Code 1989, § 2-46; Ord. of 3-28-1988(1), § 3; Ord. No. 562, § 1, 12-13-2004; Ord. No. 660, § 6, 12-19-2011) 
Secs. 2-61—2-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF MUNICIPAL COURT SERVICES AND OFFICE OF COURT ADMINISTRATOR/MARSHAL 
Sec. 2-79. - Creation.     There is created the department of municipal court services and the office of court administrator/marshal. The department of municipal court services, under the supervision and direction of the court administrator/marshal, shall be responsible for providing administrative and logistical support services to the municipal court, supervising all persons serving probationary sentences from the municipal court, and exercising such additional duties and responsibilities as shall be designated by the city council and through the city administrator. (Code 1989, § 2-61; Ord. No. 266, § 1, 11-27-1989; Ord. No. 278, § 2, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 2-80. - Appointment of court administrator.     The court administrator/marshal shall be recommended by the city administrator, appointed by the city council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The court administrator/marshal shall be jointly supervised by the city administrator, the solicitor and the municipal judge. The court administrator/marshal shall receive compensation and expenses as authorized by the city council. The court administrator/marshal shall be the executive head of the department of municipal court services, and shall devote his full time to his official duties. (Code 1989, § 2-62; Ord. No. 266, § 2, 11-27-1989; Ord. No. 278, § 2, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 2-81. - Duties of court administrator/marshal.     The court administrator/marshal shall perform the following duties, as well as such other duties as may be delegated to him by the city council: (1)  Supervise and direct the operations of the department of municipal court services; supervise other personnel assigned to work in the department of municipal court services, including assigning job duties and evaluating job performance; develop and implement operational procedures for the department of municipal court services; ensure proper maintenance and handling of case files and court records; coordinate with appropriate individuals to provide for proper exchange of information and/or to resolve court-related problems; and perform similar activities. (2)  Assist with the preparation of cases for court hearings to include reviewing cases for proper documentation, obtaining required records and reports, preparing accusations for signature, and discussing cases with the city solicitor, attorneys, and others, as needed; subpoena and interview witnesses to prepare for court proceedings; assist police officers with case preparation or testimony; assist with pre-trial conferences; review jail cases to recommend the scheduling of special hearings, as needed; and perform similar activities. (3)  Attend court sessions and assist with the proceedings, to include resetting cases for trial calendars, verifying the presence of witnesses for cases, interviewing witnesses on minor cases, aiding the solicitor with prosecution, recording the disposition of cases on the trial calendar, assisting the public with case-related problems, and reporting the failure of officers to appear in court to the chief of police; and perform similar activities. (4)  Process the transfer of cases to other appropriate courts, to include preparation of commitment for cases to be transferred, reviewing case files for proper documentation, delivering bonds to the sheriff's office, advising bonding companies of cases transferred, and maintaining files on transferred cases; and perform similar activities. (5)  Coordinate the processing of failure-to-appear cases to include notifying bonding companies on bond forfeitures, issuing warrants or license suspensions at the direction of the judge, maintaining contact with other agencies to facilitate locating wanted persons, and making extradition arrangements when necessary; and perform similar activities. (6)  Serve court-issued warrants and other legal process; apprehend the subjects of such warrants and legal process as necessary; and perform all other functions and duties to carry out the foregoing and effectively serve as marshal of the court. (Code 1989, § 2-63; Ord. No. 266, § 3, 11-27-1989; Ord. No. 278, § 1, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 2-82. - Qualifications of court administrator/marshal; oath.     The court administrator/marshal shall be certified by the Georgia Peace Officers' Standards and Training Council, and shall have such other training, background experience and knowledge as the city council deems appropriate. Before entering on the duties of his office, the court administrator/marshal shall take an oath that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of his skill, knowledge and ability without fear, favor or partiality to any party. (Code 1989, § 2-64; Ord. No. 266, § 4, 11-27-1989; Ord. No. 278, § 2, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 2-83. - General provisions. (a)  This division shall not be construed as limiting or affecting the authority of the municipal court. (b)  Any and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this division are hereby repealed. (Code 1989, § 2-65; Ord. No. 266, § 5(a), (b), 11-27-1989) 
Secs. 2-84—2-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
Sec. 2-110. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     City boards means those boards and commissions of the city not established pursuant to a specific state-enabling act. City boards and commissions presently include the planning commission, the board of appeals and the design review board.     Governing authority means the governing authority of the City of Alpharetta, which consists of a mayor and six councilmembers.     State - enabled boards means those boards and commissions within the city that are established pursuant to state-enabling acts containing mandatory provisions relative to the number of members, the method of appointment, the terms and certain minimum qualifications. The state-enabled boards presently include the recreation commission, the development authority and the downtown development authority. (Code 1989, § 2-81; Ord. No. 317, § 1, 5-24-1993) 
Sec. 2-111. - Number of members, method of appointment and terms. (a)  State-enabled boards. The number of members, method of appointment and terms of members of state-enabled boards shall be as established in the state-enabling act creating such board. The current members of each state-enabled board, together with their respective dates of appointment, dates of term expiration, and, if applicable, the names of the councilmembers responsible for the appointments, are set forth in exhibit A attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived. Any board member whose term has expired shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed pursuant to the provisions of the state-enabling act and city ordinance applicable to such board. (b)  City boards. All city boards shall consist of seven members and two alternates. The mayor and each councilmember shall appoint one member to each board, to serve concurrently with and at the pleasure of the mayor or councilmember making the appointment. Alternates shall be elected by majority vote of the governing authority to serve at the pleasure of the majority. Unless sooner removed, each board member's term shall expire at the end of the term of the elected official responsible for his appointment. When a board vacancy occurs as a result of the expiration of an elected official's term, the successor to such elected official shall fill the vacancy by appointment at the first council meeting of the elected official's new term. Each alternate shall continue to serve until a majority of the governing authority names a replacement. No alternate shall have the automatic right to succeed any board member. The first appointments under this article shall be made at the July 12, 1993 council meeting. A list shall be read into the minutes of the meeting setting forth the city board members who are, effective July 12, 1993, appointed or reappointed, as the case may be, to their respective boards, to serve at the pleasure of the mayor or councilmembers listed opposite such board members' names. Also listed shall be the alternates who are, effective July 12, 1993, appointed or reappointed, to serve at the pleasure of the majority. (Code 1989, § 2-82; Ord. No. 317, § 2, 5-24-1993) 
Sec. 2-112. - Qualifications.     In addition to the minimum qualifications for state-enabled board members set forth in the respective state-enabling acts, all state-enabled board members and city board members shall have the additional qualifications set forth in this section. All board members shall be at least 18 years of age. All board members shall be residents of the city, except for one member of the recreation commission who shall reside within the attendance district of Milton High School. No city employee or city official, elected or appointed, shall be eligible to serve as a board member. No individual shall serve on more than one board at any one time. Any board member desiring to run for city office shall resign from the board not less than 90 days prior to the election date. (Code 1989, § 2-83; Ord. No. 317, § 3, 5-24-1993) 
Sec. 2-113. - Powers, duties and jurisdiction.     The powers, duties and jurisdiction of boards and commissions shall be as set forth in the applicable state-enabling act and/or city ordinance pursuant to which the board or commission was established. (Code 1989, § 2-84; Ord. No. 317, § 4, 5-24-1993) 
Sec. 2-114. - Bylaws.     The bylaws of each board and commission shall be established and approved from time to time by the city council, as provided in the city Charter. (Code 1989, § 2-85; Ord. No. 317, § 5, 5-24-1993) 
Sec. 2-115. - Maintenance of current list of board members.     The city clerk or his designee shall be responsible for maintaining a current list of all members of boards and commissions, which list shall be presented to the mayor and council prior to the first regularly scheduled council meeting for each calendar year. (Code 1989, § 2-86; Ord. No. 317, § 6, 5-24-1993) 
Sec. 2-116. - Existing ordinances.     The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to repeal in their entirety the existing city ordinances establishing various boards and commissions. However, the provisions of this article shall be deemed to amend and supplement the existing ordinances, and in the event of any conflict, the provisions of this article shall control. (Code 1989, § 2-87; Ord. No. 317, § 7, 5-24-1993) 
Sec. 2-117. - Deadline for appointment.     In the event of a vacancy in a city board, the most senior alternate shall serve until a new board member is appointed in accordance with the provisions of this article. All board vacancies shall be filled no later than 45 days after the vacancy, except that a vacancy resulting from the expiration of an elected official's term or from a vacancy in an elected official's office shall be filled no later than 45 days after such official's successor takes office. In the event that an elected official fails to make an appointment within the deadline provided in this article, the alternate then serving shall automatically succeed to fill the board vacancy. For the purposes of this article, an appointment occurs when the mayor or councilmember responsible for making the appointment reads the name and address of the appointee into the record at a city council meeting, or delivers a letter or other written statement signed by the elected official to the city clerk setting forth the name and address of the appointee. (Code 1989, § 2-89; Ord. No. 353, § 1, 9-26-1994) 
Secs. 2-118—2-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-74-1 through 36-74-3. 
Sec. 2-150. - Short title; authority.     This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Alpharetta Code Enforcement Board Ordinance." This article is authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-74-1 et seq. (Code 1989, § 2-116; Ord. No. 442, § 1, 6-5-2000) 
Sec. 2-151. - Intent.     It is the intent of this article to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by the creation of an administrative board with authority to impose administrative fines and other non-criminal penalties to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective and inexpensive method of enforcing any codes and ordinances in force in the city, where a pending or repeated violation continues to exist. (Code 1989, § 2-117; Ord. No. 442, § 2, 6-5-2000) 
Sec. 2-152. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     City of Alpharetta codes and ordinances means city zoning ordinances and resolutions, ordinances and resolutions enacting subdivision regulations, environmental ordinances and resolutions, state minimum standard codes provided for in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, ordinances and resolutions enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, other ordinances and resolutions regulating the development of real property, and ordinances and regulations providing for control of litter and debris, control of junked or abandoned vehicles, and control of overgrown vegetation. Notwithstanding the above, the term "City of Alpharetta codes and ordinances" shall not include: (1)  Those codes and ordinances requiring a permit, unless the alleged violator has failed to secure all necessary valid permits under said codes and ordinances; or (2)  Any local amendments to the state minimum standard codes provided for in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25 that have not been adopted in conformity with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(c).     Code inspector means any authorized agent or employee of the City of Alpharetta whose duty it is to ensure code compliance.     Enforcement board means the city code enforcement board.     Mayor and council means the mayor and council of the City of Alpharetta.     Violation involving the health or safety of a third party means a violation that creates a legitimate concern for the health and safety of a third-party occupant of a dwelling place or that creates an immediate and substantial danger to the environment. (Code 1989, § 2-118; Ord. No. 442, § 3, 6-5-2000) 
Sec. 2-153. - Organization of the code enforcement board. (a)  The enforcement board shall consist of seven members appointed by resolution of the mayor and council. The mayor and council may also appoint up to two alternate members for the enforcement board, to serve on the board in the absence of board members. (b)  Members of the enforcement board shall be residents of the city. In making appointments to the enforcement board, the mayor and council shall make good faith efforts to appoint one or more individuals who have experience or expertise relevant to one or more of the municipal codes that are within the subject matter jurisdiction of the enforcement board, including individuals with property management and litter control experience; provided, however, that the authority and jurisdiction of the enforcement board shall not in any way be limited due to the absence from its membership of one or more individuals with such experience or expertise. (c)  Member terms, generally. (1)  The initial appointments to the enforcement board shall be as follows: three members appointed for a term of two years each, and four members appointed for a term of four years each. (2)  Upon the expiration of the initial terms specified in subsection (c)(1) of this section, all terms shall be for three years. (3)  A member may be reappointed by resolution of the mayor and council. (4)  An appointment to fill any vacancy on the enforcement board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. If any member fails to attend two of three successive meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chairperson, the enforcement board shall declare the member's office vacant, and the mayor and council shall promptly fill such vacancy. (5)  The members shall serve in accordance with the policies and procedures of the city and may be suspended and removed for cause. The mayor and council may, with or without cause, refuse to reappoint any member of the enforcement board at the expiration of his term of office. (d)  The members of the enforcement board shall elect a chairperson, who shall be a voting member, from among the members of the board. The presence of four or more members shall constitute a quorum of the enforcement board. Members shall be compensated in the same manner as members of other boards and commissions of the city. (Code 1989, § 2-119; Ord. No. 442, § 4, 6-5-2000) 
Sec. 2-154. - Enforcement procedures. (a)  It shall be the duty of the code inspector to initiate enforcement proceedings pursuant to the various codes; however, no member of the enforcement board shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. (b)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, if a violation of any code or ordinance is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator and give him a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the code inspector shall proceed with enforcement through the appropriate court or shall proceed with enforcement through the enforcement board. If the code inspector proceeds through the enforcement board, the code inspector shall notify the enforcement board and request a hearing. The enforcement board shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be hand-delivered or made as provided in section 2-159 to said violator. At the option of the enforcement board, notice may additionally be served by publication as provided in section 2-159. If the violation is corrected and then recurs, or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code inspector, the case may be presented to the enforcement board, even if the violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and the notice shall so state. (c)  If a repeat violation is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. The code inspector, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, shall notify the enforcement board and request a hearing. The enforcement board shall schedule a hearing and shall provide written notice pursuant to section 2-155. The case may be presented to the enforcement board even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and the notice shall so state. (d)  If the code inspector has substantial reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately notify the enforcement board and request a hearing. (Code 1989, § 2-120; Ord. No. 442, § 5, 6-5-2000) 
Sec. 2-155. - Conduct of hearings. (a)  Upon request of the code inspector, or at such other times as may be necessary, the chairperson of the enforcement board may call a hearing of the enforcement board; a hearing also may be called by written notice signed by at least three members of the enforcement board. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings by the enforcement board, and all hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. The mayor and council may provide or assign clerical and administrative personnel to assist the enforcement board in the proper performance of its duties. (b)  Each case before the enforcement board shall be presented by the city attorney or by the code inspector or other member of the administrative staff. (c)  The enforcement board shall proceed to hear the cases on the agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The enforcement board shall take testimony from the code inspector and alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. (d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the enforcement board shall issue findings of fact, based on evidence of record and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with powers granted in this article. The findings and conclusions shall be by motion approved by a majority of those members present and voting, except that at least four members of the enforcement board must vote in order for the action to be official. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed if the order is not complied with by said date. A certified copy of such order may be recorded in the public records of the city and county and shall constitute notice to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns if the violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding upon the violator, and, if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns. If an order is recorded in the public records pursuant to this subsection and the order is complied with by the date specified in the order, the enforcement board shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required to issue such an order acknowledging compliance. (Code 1989, § 2-121; Ord. No. 442, § 6, 6-5-2000) 
Sec. 2-156. - Powers.     The enforcement board shall have the power to: (1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings, which rules shall, at a minimum, ensure that each side has an equal opportunity to present evidence and argument in support of its case; (2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings, with the approval of the court with jurisdiction over a criminal violator of the municipal code or ordinance. Subpoenas may be served by an officer of the police department or by any other individual not less than 18 years of age; (3)  Subpoena evidence to its hearings in the same way as provided in subsection (2) of this section, with the approval of the court with jurisdiction over a criminal violator of the municipal code or ordinance; (4)  Take testimony under oath; and (5)  Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance. (Code 1989, § 2-122; Ord. No. 442, § 7, 6-5-2000) 
Sec. 2-157. - Administrative fines and liens. (a)  The enforcement board, upon notification by the code inspector that an order of the enforcement board has not been complied with by the set time, may order the violator to pay an administrative fine in an amount specified in this section. (b)  Fine amounts. (1)  An administrative fine imposed pursuant to this section for a violation involving the health or safety of a third party shall not exceed $1,000.00 per day. (2)  An administrative fine imposed pursuant to this section for a violation that is not a violation involving the health or safety of a third party shall not exceed a total of $1,000.00. (3)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the enforcement board shall consider the following factors: a.  The gravity of the violation; b.  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and c.  Any previous violations committed by the violator. (4)  The enforcement board may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this section. (c)  A certified copy of an order imposing an administrative fine may be recorded in the public records of any county, and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the superior court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including a levy against the personal property, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the enforcement board may request the city attorney to foreclose on the lien. (Code 1989, § 2-123; Ord. No. 442, § 8, 6-5-2000) 
Sec. 2-158. - Appeals.     An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final administrative order of the enforcement board to the superior court. Such an appeal shall be a hearing de novo. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the order to be appealed. (Code 1989, § 2-124; Ord. No. 442, § 9, 6-5-2000) 
Sec. 2-159. - Notices. (a)  All notices required by this article shall be provided to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt requested; by hand-delivery by any law enforcement officer, code inspector, or other person designated by the city; or by leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above 15 years of age, and informing such person of the contents of the notice. (b)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, at the option of the enforcement board, notice may also be served by publication, as follows: (1)  Notice may be published once during each week for four consecutive weeks (four publications being sufficient) in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements are printed in the county. Proof of publication shall be made by affidavit of a duly authorized representative of the newspaper; (2)  Notice by publication may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (a) of this section. Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand-deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (a) of this section, together with proof of publication as provided in subsection (b) of this section, shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this section have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. (Code 1989, § 2-125; Ord. No. 442, § 10, 6-5-2000) 
Sec. 2-160. - Provisions supplemental.     It is the intent of this article to provide an additional or supplemental means of obtaining compliance with local codes. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city, through its code inspector, from enforcing its codes by any other lawful means, including criminal and civil proceedings; provided, however, that the city shall not pursue a specific instance of an alleged violation of an ordinance against one violator before both the enforcement board and a magistrate, municipal or other court authorized to hear ordinance violations. (Code 1989, § 2-126; Ord. No. 442, § 11, 6-5-2000) 
Secs. 2-161—2-188. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF ETHICS AND CONDUCT[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 755, § 1, adopted Apr. 30, 2018, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. V, §§ 2-189—2-204, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1989, §§ 2-141—2-147, 2-149—2-155, 2-157, 2-158; Ord. No. 587, §§ 1—7, 9—15, 17, 18, adopted May, 1, 2006; and Ord. No. 662, §§ 1—7, 9—15, 17, 18, adopted May, 21, 2012. State Law reference— Code of ethics for governmental service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; conflicts of interest, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-10 et seq. 
Sec. 2-189. - Purpose.     Recognizing that stewardship of the public interest must be their primary concern, city officials will work for the common good of the people of Alpharetta and not for any private or personal interest, and they will assure fair and equal treatment of all persons, claims and transactions coming before the city council, boards and commissions.     The purpose of this code of ethics is to: (1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; (2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; (3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and (4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. (Ord. No. 755, § 1, 4-30-2018) 
Sec. 2-190. - Scope.     The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. These laws include, but are not limited to: the United States and Georgia Constitutions; laws pertaining to conflicts of interest, election campaigns, financial disclosures, employer responsibilities, and open processes of government; and city ordinances and policies. (Ord. No. 755, § 1, 4-30-2018) 
Sec. 2-191. - Definitions.     Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics:     City official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean the mayor and members of the city council. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council.     Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body.     Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city.     Financial interest means any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit to the official, other than the duly authorized salary or compensation for the official's services to the city, or to any person employing or retaining the services of the official or to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest.     Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws.     Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value.     Reasonably foreseeable means a result or event that can be reasonably anticipated or expected, and is more than hypothetical or theoretical.     Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public.     Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: (1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or (2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed (a) $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or (b) ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; (1)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or (2)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. (Ord. No. 755, § 1, 4-30-2018) 
Sec. 2-192. - Conduct. (a)  Conduct of city officials. The professional and personal conduct of city officials must be above reproach and avoid even the appearance of impropriety. City officials shall refrain from abusive conduct, personal charges or verbal attacks upon the character or motives of other members of council, boards and commissions, or the staff. (b)  Respect for process. City officials shall perform their duties in accordance with the processes and rules of order established by the city council and boards and commissions governing the deliberation of public policy issues, meaningful involvement of the public, and implementation of policy decisions of the city council by city staff. (c)  Conduct of public meetings. City officials shall prepare themselves for public issues; listen courteously and attentively to all public discussions before the body; and focus on the business at hand. They shall refrain from interrupting other speakers, making personal comments not germane to the business of the body, or otherwise interfering with the orderly conduct of meetings. (d)  Decisions based on merit. City officials shall base their decisions on the merits and substance of the matter at hand. (e)  Communication. City officials shall publicly share substantive information that is relevant to a matter under consideration by the council or boards and commissions which they may have received from sources outside the public decision-making process. (f)  Policy roles of city officials. City officials shall respect and adhere to the structure of government of Alpharetta as outlined in the city Charter and policies and procedures. In this structure, the city council determines the policies of the city with the advice, information and analysis provided by the public, boards, commissions, and city staff. (g)  Liaison responsibility. City officials serving as liaisons to city departments shall serve to facilitate communications and information from those departments to city council, but shall not direct the activities of the department directors. City officials shall not interfere with the day-to-day administrative functions of the city or the professional duties of city staff; nor shall they impair the ability of staff to implement council policy decisions. (h)  Independence of boards and commissions. Because of the value of the independent advice of boards and commissions to the public decision-making process, city officials of council shall refrain from using their position to influence unduly the deliberations or outcomes of board and commission proceedings. (i)  Positive work place environment. City officials shall support the maintenance of a positive and constructive work place environment for city employees and for citizens and businesses dealing with the city. City officials shall recognize their special role in dealings with city employees and refrain from creating the perception of inappropriate direction to staff. (Ord. No. 755, § 1, 4-30-2018) 
Sec. 2-193. - Prohibitions. (a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. (b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, or where it is reasonably foreseeable to a reasonable person that the decision will have a financial effect to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest unless it can be demonstrated that the financial effect is indistinguishable from the effect on the public generally, shall fail to disclose for the record the substantial interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. (c)  Where the substantial interest of a city official has not been disclosed as required by subsection (b) of section 2-193 by reason of a city official's absence from the meeting referred to therein, the city official shall disclose the interest and otherwise comply with subsection (b) of section 2-193 at the first meeting of the council, board or commission, as the case may be, attended by the city official after the meeting referred to in subsection (b) of section 2-193. (d)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. (e)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. (f)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. (g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. (h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. (i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. (j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. (k)  No city official shall utilize the city's name or logo for the purpose of endorsing any business. (l)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. (m)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. (n)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. (o)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. (p)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. (q)  A city official shall represent the official policies or positions of the city council, board and commission to the best of their ability when designated as delegates for this purpose. When presenting their individual opinions and positions, city officials shall explicitly state they do not represent their body or the city, nor will they allow the inference that they do. (r)  In keeping with their role as stewards of the public interest, members of council shall not appear on behalf of the private interests of third parties before the council or any board or commission, or proceeding of the city, nor shall members of boards and commissions appear before their own bodies or before the council on behalf of the private interests of third parties on matters related to the areas of service of their bodies. (Ord. No. 755, § 1, 4-30-2018) 
Sec. 2-194. - Conflict of interest. (a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. (b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. (c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. (Ord. No. 755, § 1, 4-30-2018) 
Sec. 2-195. - Board of ethics. (a)  The board of ethics of the city (the "board") shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as follows: the mayor and councilmembers shall each designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of 14 individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board is appointed. The city clerk shall maintain a listing of these qualified citizens. Upon receipt of a properly verified complaint and timely forwarding of that complaint to the city official charged in the complaint, the mayor and council, at the next regularly scheduled public meeting or at a specially called public meeting, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until five members of the board have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chair. (b)  All members of the board shall be residents of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. (c)  The selected members of the board shall serve until the complaint is resolved, at which time the selected members shall no longer be in the pool of 14. The mayor and councilmembers who originally designated the departing members shall designate their replacements. (d)  No person shall serve as a member of the board if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. (e)  Members of the board with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board for that complaint. An alternate member of the board shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. (f)  The members of the board shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide meeting space for the board and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. (g)  No person shall serve on the board who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. (h)  No person shall serve on the board who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the City of Alpharetta. (i)  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board. (j)  Members of the board may be removed with or without cause by majority vote of the city governing authority. (k)  The city attorney shall be available to provide legal advice to the board and shall attend all meetings and hearings of the board to insure that all proceedings are conducted properly and in accordance with applicable law. The proceedings of the board shall, to the extent authorized by law, remain confidential and not be disclosed to third parties. All meetings or public hearings where evidence is taken shall be open. Deliberations may be conducted in executive sessions. Any final report or recommendation to the mayor and council shall be conducted in an open meeting. The mayor and council shall be the body to take final action as provided in section 2-199. (Ord. No. 755, § 1, 4-30-2018) 
Sec. 2-196. - Receipt of complaints; initial review. (a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the city clerk. All complaints shall be submitted in writing and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the city clerk or the clerk's designee shall forward a copy of the complaint to the mayor and council and city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. The charged official may, but is not required, to file a response to the board. If a response is provided, it shall be filed not later than ten calendar days after receipt of the complaint. The response shall be submitted in writing and signed under oath and shall address why the complaint is invalid on its face. All determinations under this section shall be made not later than 30 days after the filing of the complaint. (b)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board shall conduct an initial review to determine whether the complaint on its face is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The board is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. The board shall report in writing to the city council any complaint dismissed under this section. For complaints that are not dismissed or adjudicated within the deadline under this section, the board shall proceed as set forth in section 2-197. (c)  The board is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. (Ord. No. 755, § 1, 4-30-2018) 
Sec. 2-197. - Further proceedings on complaints. (a)  If the board does not dismiss the complaint pursuant to section 2-196 or if no action is taken within the deadline stated in this section, the city clerk or board shall cause the complaint to be formally served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after the determination of the board. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. The official shall, within 20 days of service submit a response to the board addressing the charges. Such response shall be in writing, and under oath. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The board is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. The board shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the board shall be rendered to mayor and council within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the board, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this section of the article shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board or the city council to act upon any complaint. (Ord. No. 755, § 1, 4-30-2018) 
Sec. 2-198. - Right to appeal. (a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. (b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of Fulton county within 30 days after the decision of the board. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. (Ord. No. 755, § 1, 4-30-2018) 
Sec. 2-199. - Penalty.     Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: (1)  Public reprimand or censure by the city council; or (2)  Request for resignation by the vote of city council. (Ord. No. 755, § 1, 4-30-2018) 
Sec. 2-200. - Implementation.     Ethical standards shall be included in the regular orientations for candidates for city council, applicants to boards and commissions, and newly elected and appointed officials. Members entering office shall sign a statement affirming they have read and understood the city code of ethics and conduct. (Ord. No. 755, § 1, 4-30-2018) 
Chapter 3 - RESERVED 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alcoholic beverage means all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine and fortified wine as defined in this section.     Alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer licensed to sell alcohol and who provides alcohol at special events or special events facilities.     Art gallery means a retail establishment primarily engaged in, and which derives at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from, the sale or display of art books, paintings, sculptures, or other works of art; but specifically excluding libraries, book stores, theaters, and establishments where the display of works of art is incidental to its primary use.     Art studio means a retail establishment primarily engaged in providing instruction in painting, sculpture, drawing, photography, craft work, fiber art, or other visual or graphic art techniques, and which derives at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of such services and art products related to such services; but specifically excluding body art studios and tattoo parlors.     Beer and malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, also known as Japanese rice wine.     Brew pub means any eating establishment in which malt beverages are manufactured, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in section 4-188. In calculating the total annual gross food and beverage sales for any such establishment for the purpose of determining whether the establishment constitutes an eating establishment as defined herein, barrels of malt beverages sold to licensed wholesale dealers, as authorized pursuant to section 4-188(2)d, or to the public for consumption off the premises in accordance with section 4-188(2)a and (2)d, (3) and (4), shall not be used.     Cigar shop means a retail establishment that derives not less than 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of cigars and cigar-related products for consumption on or off the premises, and that does not sell, or permit the use of, (i) vape products such as electronic smoking devices, component parts or e-liquids, or (ii) hookah products such as "hookahs", glass pipes or bongs.     Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wine.     Eating establishment means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food.     Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid to any member, officer, agent or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for such person by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body of the club out of the general revenue of the club, and shall not include a commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulation shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages.     Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy.     Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of partnership or corporation, all partners, officers and directors of the partnership or corporation.     Liter means a metric measurement currently used by the United States.     Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term "manufacturer" also means: (1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying or blending any distilled spirits; provided, however, that a vintner who blends wine with distilled spirits to produce a fortified wine shall not be considered a manufacturer of distilled spirits; and (2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and in the case of wine, any vintner.     Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container.     Premises means the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether a room, shop, building, restaurant or club, wherein activities permitted by this chapter are conducted.     Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: (1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; (2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; and (3)  Owns, hires or leases a building space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with: a.  A suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; b.  A sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and c.  No member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary.     Retailer or retail dealer , except as to distilled spirits, means any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term "retailer" or "retail dealer" means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale.     Supermarket means a retail market which: (1)  Does not sell or offer for sale any of the following: distilled spirits, tobacco products, lottery tickets or related games of chance; (2)  Maintains at all times that it is open an inventory of saleable food products including meats, dairy, vegetables, fruits, dry goods and beverages; (3)  Has an interior floor space and storage areas of at least 15,000 square feet, of which more than 50 percent of such interior floor area is devoted to the display for sale of food products; (4)  Sells prepared food; (5)  Has a full service kitchen consisting of at least a four-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator; and (6)  Employs not less than 15 employees who work at least 35 hours per week on the premises.     Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers or to retail consumption dealers.     Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of the term "wine" contained in this section.     Wine bar means a type of eating establishment with a floor area not exceeding 2,000 gross square feet, which serves food and only beer, wine and non-alcoholic beverages, and where the sale of food consumed on the premises constitutes at least 40 percent of gross sales of the establishment. (Code 1989, § 3-1; Ord. No. 218-A, §§ 1.002, 1.031, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 679, § 2, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 722, § 1, 3-21-2016; Ord. No. 733, § 1, 2-6-2017; Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-16-2017) State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-2, 3-4-1. 
Sec. 4-2. - Sale subject to conditions; license constitutes privilege. (a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the city under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions hereafter provided. (b)  All licenses shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the terms of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city ordinances and state law. (c)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "LICENSE NON-TRANSFERABLE, SUBJECT TO BE REVOKED IF ABUSED." (Code 1989, § 3-2; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.001, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 573, 9-6-2005) State Law reference— Dealing in alcoholic beverages declared a privilege, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1; discretion and due process; authority of city as to licensing, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 4-3. - Sale or possession for purpose of sale without license or beyond boundaries of premises covered by license.     No person shall sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage unless such person has a license from the city to sell or possess for sale alcoholic beverages, or sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. (Code 1989, § 3-3; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.003, 9-22-1986) 
Sec. 4-4. - Display of license at place of business.     The city license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view at the place of business of the licensee. (Code 1989, § 3-4; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.004, 9-22-1986) State Law reference— Display of license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-3. 
Sec. 4-5. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale.     A separate application shall be made for each location and a separate license shall be obtained. (Code 1989, § 3-5; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.005, 9-22-1986) 
Sec. 4-6. - License applications. (a)  All persons, as owners, desiring to engage in activities permitted by this chapter, shall make written application to the council for the appropriate license on forms prescribed by the director of public safety, and filed with the director of public safety. All applications shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of $350.00 to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded, but the $350.00 investigative fee shall be retained. (b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to: the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers, the name and address of the agent for service of process, the name and address of the manager, and the names and addresses of all shareholders holding more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the city clerk with the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change. The applicant shall also disclose whether the applicant (its partners, if a partnership; its officers, manager, and shareholders having more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock, if a corporation) has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor, or a violation of any municipal ordinance. (c)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicants before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. (d)  The department of public safety or its designee shall review the application to determine compliance with city regulations and laws and to investigate the character and reputation of the applicant. If the director of public safety or his designee determines that the application appears to meet the requirements of applicable law, the director of public safety shall forward the application to the city clerk, who shall schedule and conduct a public hearing as provided in subsection (f) of this section. (e)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the state bureau of investigation and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as specified in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(c). (f)  The city clerk shall prepare and cause to be published a notice of each pending application, which notice shall include the date the application will be considered by the city clerk, the location or street number of the premises where the applicant proposes to conduct activities permitted by this chapter, and the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the name of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the president, secretary and treasurer of such corporation. The applicant shall pay the publication costs. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and shall appear once a week for two weeks immediately preceding consideration of the application by the city clerk. Each applicant for a license for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages shall, at such applicant's expense, post on the premises where the activities permitted by such license are to be conducted, continuously for a period of not less than ten days prior to consideration of the application by the city clerk, a notice of the pending application, meeting the following minimum specifications: this notice shall be painted or printed in black letters three inches or more in height, against a white background, on a wooden or metal sign, and having a surface of not less than 12 square feet, and shall be placed with the base of the sign not more than three feet from the ground on the most conspicuous part of the premises, facing the most frequently traveled road, street or highway abutting same, and not more than ten feet therefrom. The sign shall state clearly the nature and purpose of the application, the date and hour and place of the city clerk hearing, and the name of the person making the application. If, after conducting the public hearing, the city clerk determines that the application meets the requirements of this chapter, the city clerk shall place the application on the consent agenda of the next available city council meeting. The license shall be issued following approval of the consent agenda. (g)  The city shall have the authority to prescribe forms for new or renewal applications. All applicants shall furnish data, information and records as required by the city and shall ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish such data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. (h)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an original, renewal or transfer application for a license shall be cause for the denial or revocation thereof. (i)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may not re-apply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. (j)  Each applicant shall certify that the applicant has read this chapter, and if a license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the premises and shall require each of the licensee's employees to be familiar with this chapter. (Code 1989, § 3-6; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.006, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 513, § 1, 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 566, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 573, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 679, §§ 1, 3, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 4-7. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the department of public safety.     Sworn officers of the city department of public safety shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of law. (Code 1989, § 3-7; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.007, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 679, § 1, 7-15-2013) Editor's note— Ord. No. 679, § 1, adopted July 15, 2013, changed the title of section 3-7 from "Inspection of licensed establishments by the police department" to "Inspection of licensed establishments by the department of public safety." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 4-8. - Audits.     The city shall have the authority to conduct an audit of the books and records of any licensee to ensure the licensee's compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In such event, the city shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. (Code 1989, § 3-8; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.008, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 573, 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-9. - Licensing qualifications. (a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. (b)  No retailer or consumption on premises license will be granted to any person who is not a resident of a county or municipality within the state where the sale of distilled spirits is authorized. (c)  (1)  If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be waived for a corporation, if the following shall be established: a.  All majority stockholders of the corporation shall meet all the provisions of this section other than those provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section; and b.  The corporation: 1.  Is qualified and registered to do business within the state; 2.  Has and continuously maintains in the county a registered agent who is a resident of the county, and upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee may be served; 3.  Consents to being subject to the jurisdiction and venue of the courts in this county. The licensee shall file written proof of compliance with the foregoing, as well as its agent's written consent to serve as agent and its consent to be subject to the jurisdiction and venue of the courts in this county with the director of public safety in such form as the director of public safety may prescribe; and c.  The corporation must meet one of the following criteria: 1.  The corporation must have a net worth of not less than $5,000,000.00 as determined on the basis of the corporation's most recent audited financial statement, prepared within 12 months of the date upon which the applicant applies for a license hereunder; 2.  The corporation owns real property within the city in which it holds an equity value of not less than $1,000,000.00 and the city shall be the sole determinant of such equity value; or 3.  The corporation must have obtained a surety bond issued by a surety company authorized to do business in this state or have established a joint trust account with a licensed and insured bank or savings institution located in this state for the purpose of indemnifying the city from damages it may suffer as a result of a violation of this chapter or any obligation arising therefrom. The amount of the bond or trust account shall be an amount not less than $75,000.00. Should the corporation obtain a surety bond, it shall be in favor of the city and the city may bring an action under the bond to recover damages suffered. Should the corporation choose to set up a trust account, it shall be set up jointly in the name of the corporation and the city, and shall require the authorization of both the corporation and the city before any funds may be withdrawn therefrom. (2)  If the licensee shall be a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and to the majority stockholders, if such stockholders are individuals; provided, however, that if stock in the corporation is traded on any of the national stock exchanges, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this section. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, then the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this section. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to one of the partners. (d)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who, within five years prior to the filing of the application for such license, has been convicted under any federal, state or local law, of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or of any felony. For the purposes of this section, a plea of nolo contendere shall constitute a conviction. (e)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is a city employee or an elected or appointed city official, or who is a spouse or minor child of a city employee or an elected or appointed city official. It shall be unlawful for such person to have a financial interest in any such city license, or in any establishment licensed under the provisions of this chapter. (f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any city license revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. (g)  The director of public safety may decline to issue a license when any person having any interest in the operation or control of such establishment does not meet the same character requirements as herein set forth for the licensee. (h)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee may be served. This person must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the director of public safety in such form as the director may prescribe. (i)  In determining whether or not any license shall be granted, in addition to the other provisions of this chapter, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: (1)  If the applicant holds or has previously held a license to sell alcoholic beverages, whether or not such applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such license or the business conducted pursuant to such license; and (2)  Whether the applicant has previously had a license to sell alcoholic beverages suspended or revoked. (Code 1989, § 3-9; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.009, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 515, § 1, 1-21-2003; Ord. No. 679, § 4, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 4-10. - Compliance and fee payment prior to license issuance; term of license; proration of fees; no refund. (a)  Before a license shall be granted, the applicant shall comply with all city rules and regulations pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages, and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the scale fixed, from time to time, by the city council and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. (b)  All licenses shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a license before July 1 shall pay the full license fee without proration. License fees for licenses granted on or after July 1 shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year. A partial month shall be counted as a full month. (c)  License fees are not refundable. (Code 1989, § 3-10; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.010, 9-22-1986) 
Sec. 4-11. - Nonprofit civic organization's temporary permit.     Any bona fide nonprofit civic organization may be issued a temporary permit authorizing the organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or to sell wine at retail for off-premises consumption, or both, for a period not to exceed three days, subject to all laws and ordinances regulating the time for selling such beverages. The temporary permit shall be valid for only the place specified in the permit and no more than two permits may be issued to the applicant organization in any one calendar year. The organization must make application to the director of public safety and pay the fee that may be established from time to time by the city council. As used in this section, the term "bona fide nonprofit civic organization" means an entity which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of 26 USC § 501(c), 501(d) or 501(e). (Code 1989, § 3-11; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.036, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 679, § 5, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 4-12. - Excise tax—Malt beverages. (a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon the sale of malt beverages within the city, a specific excise tax as follows: (1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. (2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. (b)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages. Each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city shall file a report with the city by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the city by the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made, the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. (c)  Wholesale dealers failing to remit excises taxes due and payable to the city as outlined in subsection (b) of this section shall be charged a ten percent penalty, and interest shall accrue at the rate of one percent per month (12 percent per annum) until all fees are collected by the city. (Code 1989, § 3-12; Ord. No. 141, § 1, 4-28-1975; Ord. No. 573, 9-6-2005) State Law reference— Local excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 
Sec. 4-13. - Same—Wine. (a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon the sale of wine within the city a specific excise tax in the amount of $0.22 per liter, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. (b)  The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to: (1)  Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only; (2)  Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state under the Constitution of the United States; (3)  Wine sold to persons outside the state for resale or consumption outside the state; or (4)  Wine which contains less than one-half of one percent alcohol. (c)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer of wine. Each wholesale dealer selling wine within the city shall file a report with the city by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of wine, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the city by the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. (d)  Wholesale dealers failing to remit excise taxes due and payable to the city as outlined in subsection (c) of this section shall be charged a ten percent penalty, and interest shall accrue at the rate of one percent per month (12 percent per annum) until all fees are collected by the city. (Code 1989, § 3-13; Ord. No. 104, § 35, 2-14-1967; Ord. No. 573, 9-6-2005) State Law reference— Local excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 4-14. - Same—Distilled spirits sold by the package. (a)  There is hereby levied and imposed a specific excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the package within the city in the amount of $0.22 per liter of distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. (b)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer of distilled spirits. Each wholesale dealer selling distilled spirits within the city shall file a report with the city by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of distilled spirits, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the city by the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. (c)  Wholesale dealers failing to remit excise taxes due and payable to the city as outlined in subsection (b) of this section shall be charged a ten percent penalty, and interest shall accrue at the rate of one percent per month (12 percent per annum) until all fees are collected by the city. (Code 1989, § 3-14; Ord. No. 573, 9-6-2005) State Law reference— Local excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the package, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 
Sec. 4-15. - Same—Distilled spirits sold by the drink. (a)  There is hereby levied and imposed a specific excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits in the amount of three percent of the charge to the public for the beverages. (b)  The excise tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented beverage. (c)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the retailer or retail dealer of distilled spirits sold by the drink. Each retailer or retail dealer selling distilled spirits by the drink within the city shall file a report with the city by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of distilled spirits sold, by the drink, during the month. Each such retail dealer shall remit to the city by the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. (d)  Retailers or retail dealers collecting the tax authorized by this section shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. (e)  Retail dealers failing to remit excise taxes due and payable to the city as outlined in subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall be charged a ten percent penalty, and interest shall accrue at the rate of one percent per month (12 percent per annum) until all fees are collected by the city. (Code 1989, § 3-15; Ord. No. 573, 9-6-2005) State Law reference— Local excise tax on distilled spirits sold in private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
Sec. 4-16. - Same—Distilled spirits in private clubs. (a)  The excise taxes imposed in sections 4-12, 4-13 and 4-14 are applicable to sales of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits to private clubs located within the corporate limits of the city. Those taxes are imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealers in malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits, respectively. (b)  The three percent excise tax imposed in section 4-15 on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink is applicable to private clubs located within the corporate limits of the city. Those taxes shall be paid by the licensed private club selling mixed drinks. (c)  Each private club selling distilled spirits by the drink within the city shall file a report with the city by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of distilled spirits, sold by the drink, during the month. Each such private club shall remit to the city by the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. (d)  Private clubs collecting the tax authorized by this section shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. (e)  Private clubs failing to remit excise taxes due and payable to the city as outlined in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section shall be charged a ten percent penalty, and interest shall accrue at the rate of one percent per month (12 percent per annum) until all fees are collected by the city. (Code 1989, § 3-16; Ord. No. 573, 9-6-2005) State Law reference— Local excise tax on private club distilled spirits sales required, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-60. 
Sec. 4-17. - Distance requirements. (a)  No person may sell or offer to sell alcoholic beverages: (1)  Within 200 feet of any private residence, unless such residence is itself in a commercial district; (2)  Within 300 feet of any public library or branch thereof; (3)  Within 300 feet of the property line of any church, shrine, chapel of a mortuary or other place used exclusively for religious services, and any school grounds or college campus; (4)  Within 300 feet of that portion of a public park which is habitually used for recreational purposes; or (5)  Within 200 feet of a regular stop as designated by the county board of education where a school bus for the transportation of school children in the public schools of the county shall take on or discharge school children. The schools or colleges referred to herein shall include only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. A school bus stop is defined as a designated place where five or more children board the bus. (b)  For premises that are located or proposed to be located in the central business district (as defined in section 1.4.2 of the Unified Development Code), distance shall be measured from such residence, library, property line, park or school bus stop by the straight line distance to the nearest public sidewalk, street or highway, then along such sidewalk, street or highway by the nearest route to the front door of the premises from which alcoholic beverages are to be sold. For premises that are located or proposed to be located in all other areas of the city, distance shall be measured from such residence, library, property line, park or school bus stop by the straight line distance to the point of the premises nearest to such residence, library, property line, park or school bus stop. Every license application shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises, showing the distance of the uses described in this section and a certificate of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer that the location complies with these distance requirements. (c)  The distance requirements of this section pertaining to colleges are intended to apply to the main or primary campus or grounds of a college. For various reasons, a college may occasionally lease subordinate space away from its main campus or grounds to conduct its activities (a subordinate facility). For the purposes of determining compliance with the distance requirements of this section, a subordinate facility shall not be considered a college if all of the following conditions are met: (1)  The college is occupying the subordinate facility as a tenant under a lease agreement; (2)  The amount of square footage leased to the college at the subordinate facility is less than 20 percent of the cumulative square footage of the buildings occupied by the college at its primary facility; (3)  The subordinate facility is located in a commercially-zoned district; and (4)  The subordinate facility is not adjacent or contiguous to the primary facility of the college. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted with respect to an establishment that is located in the same building as a subordinate facility or within 50 feet of a subordinate facility. (d)  The city council, after notice and a public hearing, may grant a variance to the minimum distance requirements between a private residence and an establishment seeking an on-premises consumption license if there exists one or more of the conditions set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section, and all of the conditions set forth in subsection (d)(2) of this section: (1)  a.  The establishment is designed to be an integral part of planned mixed use development; b.  The establishment is located within a shopping center with an aggregate leasable area of 50,000 square feet or more; c.  The primary entrance of the establishment is not directly visible along the line of measurement and is physically separated from the residence; d.  There are other licensed establishments of a similar nature in the immediate vicinity; e.  The residence is not a single-family detached residence. (2)  a.  There are practical or economic difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the distance requirements; b.  The request is not based primarily on the desire to reduce the cost of developing the site; c.  The proposed variance will not substantially diminish property values in, nor alter the essential character of, the area surrounding the site, and will not substantially interfere with or injure the rights of others whose property would be affected by the variance; d.  The proposed variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, result in additional expense, or the creation of nuisances, or conflict with other applicable law. (e)  The city council, after notice and a public hearing, may grant a variance to the minimum distance requirements between a school grounds or college campus and an eating establishment (as the term "eating establishment" is used in section 4-47) seeking an on-premises consumption license, provided that all of the conditions set forth below exist: (1)  The location for which a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption is being sought has previously been operated as an eating establishment licensed by both the city and the state for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption within the five years immediately preceding the application for the new license; (2)  The primary entrance to the eating establishment is physically separated, either by a street, a fence, shrubbery, a parking lot, another building, or some other form of physical barrier, from the school grounds or college campus which is in close proximity to the eating establishment; (3)  There are practical or economic difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the distance requirements, including the fact that the proposed premises from which alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption would be sold already contains a commercial kitchen; (4)  The request is not based primarily on the desire to reduce the cost of developing the site; (5)  The proposed variance will not substantially diminish the property value in, nor alter the essential character of, the area surrounding the site, and will not substantially interfere with or injure the rights of others whose property would be affected by the variance; (6)  The proposed variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, result in additional expense, or the creation of nuisances, or conflict with other applicable law; (7)  The proposed variance will have no material effect on the use of the property on which the school grounds or college campus is located as either a school grounds or college campus. (Code 1989, § 3-17; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.011, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 512, § 1, 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 524, § 1, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 532, § 1, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 643, § 1, 7-19-2010) State Law reference— Sales near churches, etc., O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-18. - Condition of premises. (a)  All licensed premises shall be kept clean and shall be in full compliance with all ordinances and regulations of the city, county and state. (b)  The county health department shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed premises to determine whether the licensed premises is in compliance with all city, county and state health rules and regulations, and report any violation to the city clerk. (c)  The city department of public safety shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed premises to determine whether the licensed premises is in compliance with all city, county and state fire regulations, and report any violations to the city clerk. (d)  The director of public safety or his designee shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed premises to determine whether the licensed premises is in compliance with all technical codes of the city. (e)  The city department of public safety shall have the authority to inspect periodically the licensed premises to determine if the licensed premises is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter, and report any violation to the city clerk. (Code 1989, § 3-18; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.012, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 679, §§ 1, 6, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 4-19. - Renewal of license.     All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. A licensee who desires to renew his license shall file a renewal application accompanied by the requisite license fee with the city upon forms prescribed by the city on or before November 15 of each year without penalty, and not later than December 15. Applications for renewal filed after November 15 and on or before December 15 shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the license fee. No renewal license shall be granted on applications filed after December 15, but such applications shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been issued. Failure of a licensee to comply with any section of this Code shall subject the licensee to non-renewal of the license. (Code 1989, § 3-20; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.014, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 573, 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-20. - Transfer of license. (a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. (b)  In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death, or until expiration of the license, or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur, provided that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization with the city clerk. (c)  In the event that a license is surrendered, or a licensee severs such person's association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined to be the date of severance, provided that no such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made, such application indicating that no change of ownership has occurred, except as excepted herein. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. (d)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license, nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing such person's stock holdings to a total of ten percent or more of any class of stock. (e)  Should a transfer of location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. (f)  Except as provided above, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license issued hereunder automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. (g)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used and a fine as provided in section 1-8. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the city for one year from the date of the violation. (Code 1989, § 3-21; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.015, 9-22-1986) 
Sec. 4-21. - Prohibited sales. (a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law, no licensee shall sell or permit to be sold alcoholic beverages to any person under 21 years of age. (b)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises the sale, barter, exchange, giving, providing or furnishing of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication. (c)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (d)  No licensee authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the package shall sell or permit to be sold any single beer, wine cooler or similar alcoholic beverage that is customarily packaged for sale as part of a four-pack, six-pack, 12-pack, or similar package, unless such single beer, wine cooler or similar alcoholic beverage is displayed for sale in an enclosed case, cabinet or other structure located not closer than 20 feet from the front door of the premises and not closer than 20 feet from any cash register in the premises. The intent of this subsection is to prohibit sales of single beers, wine coolers or similar alcoholic beverages from open, cooled containers such as ice-filled buckets, tubs, or barrels and to prohibit such sales from other containers located within 20 feet of the front door and cash registers of the premises. (Code 1989, § 3-22; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.016, 9-22-1986) State Law reference— Local authorization as to Sunday sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7. 
Sec. 4-22. - Under-age persons on licensed premises. (a)  No licensee shall permit any person under 21 years of age to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises unless such person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or custodian; provided, however, that such person shall be permitted in eating establishments or private clubs as defined herein without being accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or custodian, and provided further, that this section shall not apply to persons who are employees under the terms of this chapter. (b)  No licensee shall allow or require a person in such person's employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. (c)  No licensee shall employ any person under the age of 21 years to work as an entertainer in any licensed establishment, unless such person has obtained written, notarized permission from such person's parents or legal guardian, nor shall any licensee allow any such person to work without such proof of permission. (d)  In the event a supermarket, convenience store, brewery or drugstore employs persons under 21 years of age who will or may sell or handle alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises, the following regulation is hereby imposed: All employees under 21 years of age shall request proper age identification from any person attempting to purchase alcoholic beverages and appearing to be 25 years of age or less. (e)  In addition to the above, the following regulations shall be imposed and shall apply to all persons becoming employed by such a supermarket, convenience store, brewery or drugstore: (1)  For the first six months of employment, an employee under 21 years of age shall be on probationary status. During probationary status, the employee shall be trained and supervised periodically with respect to the procedure for requesting proper age identification and declining to sell alcoholic beverages to those under 21 years of age failing to produce proper identification. (2)  During an employee's probationary status period, the employee's supervisor shall periodically monitor and review the employee's request of proper age identification and decision to sell or not to sell alcoholic beverages to various customers. Should an employee, during his probationary status period, be found to sell or attempt to sell alcoholic beverages to any person under 21 years of age, the supermarket, convenience store, brewery or drugstore employing such employee shall be required to terminate the employee. (f)  In addition to the above requirements, all supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries and drugstores selling alcoholic beverages of any kind shall post a notice no smaller in size than eight inches by ten inches in a conspicuous place on the premises, which provides as follows: "Pursuant to local ordinance, employees are required to request proper age identification before selling alcoholic beverages." (Code 1989, § 3-23; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.017, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 260, § 1, 7-10-1989; Ord. No. 359, § 1, 4-10-1995) State Law reference— Furnishing, etc., to minors, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; persons under 18 years of age not allowed or required to serve, sell, or take orders for alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Sec. 4-23. - Advertising. (a)  Except as otherwise authorized in this section, no outdoor advertising or signs promoting the sale of alcoholic beverages, or the prices of such beverages, shall be permitted on the exterior of any licensed premises, or on the windows or elsewhere in the premises that may be viewed from the outside. The posting of signage identifying the name of the licensed premises, which may include "beer," "wine," or similar terms, shall not constitute a violation of this section. (b)  Lighted signs advertising beer and wine may be placed on the furthest back wall of a licensed premises. (Code 1989, § 3-24; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.018, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 679, § 7, 7-15-2013) State Law reference— Advertisement of prices, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-26. 
Sec. 4-24. - Required signs; posted information. (a)  In addition to other postings required herein or by law, all licensees shall post in a prominent location on licensed premises, in a manner whereby it may be easily viewed by patrons, an approved sign setting forth or summarizing the laws of the city and the state in regard to the sale of alcoholic beverages to underage, intoxicated or pregnant persons. Each such sign shall be of a size and configuration approved by the director of public safety, and shall include either the language of the applicable Code sections or summaries approved by the director of public safety. The department of public safety is authorized to design and have printed approved signs, which shall be made available to licensees at a price to be established by the director of public safety. (b)  All licensees shall display in prominent places or on their menus, their current prices of alcoholic beverages, by the drink. Any price change must remain valid for seven consecutive calendar days. The licensee shall furnish to any customer who so desires an itemized bill of charges, which shall not exceed the established price list. (c)  All licensees shall indicate plainly the price of all alcoholic beverages exposed for sale by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below the space in which the containers are placed. (Code 1989, § 3-25; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.019, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 679, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 4-25. - Contents of bottles.     Except during the initial bottling by the manufacturer, it shall be unlawful for any licensee to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. (Code 1989, § 3-26; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.020, 9-22-1986) 
Sec. 4-26. - Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession by person under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages.     The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-30-23, as amended from time to time, shall govern with respect to underage sales and possession of alcoholic beverages. (Code 1989, § 3-27; Ord. No. 679, § 8, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 4-27. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only.     No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person not a wholesaler licensed by both the state and city under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed by both the state and city under this chapter. Retail and wholesale dealers licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be required to demonstrate compliance with this section to the city upon written receipt of a request for information. (Code 1989, § 3-28; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.022, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 573, 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-28. - Revocation, suspension or other penalty. (a)  The city clerk shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an alcoholic beverage license or impose other penalties upon the licensee under the conditions set forth in this section. However, no revocation, suspension or other penalty shall be imposed without first providing a licensee the notice, hearing and appeal rights as more specifically provided in section 4-29. (b)  Sufficient grounds for the suspension or revocation of a license or the imposition of other penalties include, but are not limited to, the following: (1)  A licensee has failed to open for business within six months after approval of the license; provided, however, prior to the expiration of such period, the city clerk may extend the time in which a licensee is required to open for business by up to six months, upon the timely receipt of a written request from a licensee for such an extension. (2)  After opening for business, a licensee has ceased to operate the business for a period of three consecutive months. (3)  A licensee's state license or permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages has been revoked. (4)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has sold alcoholic beverages during a period of suspension. (5)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application or renewal process. (6)  A licensee has failed to pay any fee, license fee, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this chapter or any other licensing ordinance of the city. (7)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known to be under the age of 21 years. (8)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication. (9)  A licensee has failed to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license as set forth in section 4-9. (10)  A licensee has violated any other law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of establishment license to sell alcoholic beverages or which is reasonably related to the operation of such establishments. (11)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any other provision of this alcoholic beverage chapter. (c)  Subject to the notice, hearing and appeal rights of a licensee as provided in section 4-29, the city clerk is authorized, but not required, to revoke the license of any licensee found to be in violation of this chapter. In lieu of revocation, the clerk is also authorized to suspend the license of a licensee violating any provision of this chapter. In the event that the clerk elects to suspend a license, such license shall be suspended for three days for the first violation and 30 days for a second violation occurring within any consecutive 12-month period. For a third violation occurring within any consecutive 12-month period, the license shall be revoked. In lieu of revocation or suspension, the city clerk is also authorized, but not required, to accept a voluntary offer of a civil monetary penalty from the licensee, not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. No licensee or any other applicant may apply for a license for the same premises during any period of suspension or revocation. In determining the severity of any sanction imposed under this section, the city clerk may take into consideration any documented evidence that the licensee has, on prior occasions, undertaken proactive efforts to promote compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including the provisions of this chapter prohibiting the sale or serving of alcohol to minors. Documented evidence of such activities shall include, but shall not be limited to, written evidence that the licensee has promptly reported violations or attempted violations of this chapter. (Code 1989, § 3-29; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.023, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 359, § 2, 4-10-1995; Ord. No. 373, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 722, § 2, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 4-29. - Hearing procedures; appeal. (a)  Prior to imposing any sanction authorized by section 4-28, the city clerk shall provide written notice to the licensee specifying the licensee's alleged violations of this chapter and the date, time and place of the hearing to be held before the city clerk to determine if the violations have occurred. The date of the hearing shall be not less than five nor more than 30 days after the date of the written notice. At the request of the city clerk, the city council may appoint a hearing examiner to perform the duties of the city clerk under section 4-28 and this section. Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the city clerk, which shall be consistent with rules applied in administrative proceedings, and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. All testimony shall be sworn. The city shall have the responsibility to present evidence sufficient to carry the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence. Following the hearing, the city clerk shall prepare a written order to include findings, conclusions and sanctions (if any). A copy of the order shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee the same date it is filed in the office of the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city administrator and the director of public safety. (b)  The order issued by the clerk in accordance with the procedures outlined above shall be stayed for a period of ten days after the issuance of the order. During this ten-day period, the licensee shall have the right to file an appeal to the city council. If the licensee files a timely appeal, the city clerk's order shall be stayed until the appeal is heard or withdrawn. If the licensee does not file a timely appeal, the city clerk's order shall be final. (c)  The notice of appeal to the city council shall be in writing and accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The grounds for the appeal shall be limited to issues that were addressed in the hearing. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the city clerk shall submit the entire record of the case to the city council and may also submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the licensee. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten nor more than 30 days after receipt of the appeal, unless the appellant stipulates to another date. The appellant shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel. At the hearing, the city council will receive oral arguments on the written memoranda and the evidence in the record. The right to offer oral argument may be waived. No additional evidence or arguments shall be permitted at the council meeting, and the council shall base its decision on the memoranda, oral arguments (if any) and other evidence in the record. Following the appeal hearing, the council may sustain, overrule or modify the order of the city clerk. In lieu of suspension or revocation, the city council may impose a fine upon any licensee, not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation occurring on the licensed premises. The city council shall also have the option to refer the matter to the clerk for a de novo hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points, and in either of such cases, the city clerk shall proceed as provided in this chapter. If the city council does not refer the matter back to the clerk, the decision of the mayor and council shall be final, and the appellant shall have the right to seek a writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county within 30 days of the final action of the mayor and city council. The final action of the city council shall be reduced to a written order signed by the mayor. The original of the mayor's order shall be filed in the record of the case, and a copy of the order shall be included in the minutes of the city council meeting. It shall be the responsibility of the clerk to provide a copy of the order to the appellant. (Code 1989, § 3-30; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.024, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 373, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 679, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Secs. 4-30—4-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Sec. 4-47. - Locations where prohibited. (a)  No alcoholic beverages may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except in: (1)  Eating establishments regularly serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen consisting of a four-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the county health department and the city fire marshal, prepared to serve food every hour they are open; (2)  Supermarkets or wine bars, where these establishments are permitted to seat 45 or more persons pursuant to applicable building, fire and safety codes in effect for the city; (3)  Cigar shops; (4)  Art galleries or art studios; or (5)  Hotels, motels or high-rise office and apartment buildings. When located in hotels, motels and high-rise office and apartment buildings, every entrance to the establishment shall be from a public lobby, hallway, mall or other publicly-used interior portion of the primary use structure. Unless otherwise expressly exempted in this chapter from this requirement, establishments not located in hotels or motels shall derive a minimum of 50 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food (except that wine bars shall derive a minimum of 40 percent). Hotels or motels containing such establishments shall derive a minimum of 50 percent of their total annual gross income from the sales of prepared meals or food and from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "hotel" or the term "motel" means an establishment that contains not less than 35 separate rooms for overnight lodging. (b)  On or before the 20th day of each calendar month, each such establishment shall file a report of the previous calendar month's operation with the office of the director of finance verifying compliance with the above provisions. Such reports shall be filed on forms designated by the city. These forms are also used to report excise taxes on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, which are also due by the tenth day of each calendar month. Any licensed establishment that fails to meet the appropriate percentage requirements for two consecutive months shall be subject to immediate revocation. An audit may be required at any time to ensure compliance with these provisions. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit hotel room service of alcoholic beverages. (Code 1989, § 3-40; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.025, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 573, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 679, §§ 1, 9, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 740, § 2, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-48. - Hours of sale.     Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except: (1)  Monday through Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of the following day; and (2)  On Sunday from 11:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. on Monday in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, or which derives a minimum of 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging.     Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 4-401 and 4-452, permitting outside consumption of alcohol within the downtown district and certain mixed use developments, such sales and outside consumption are strictly prohibited on Sunday from 11:00 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. (Code 1989, § 3-41; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.026, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 740, § 3, 5-16-2017; Ord. No. 768, § 1, 8-20-2018) 
Sec. 4-49. - Consumption sales only. (a)  Except as may be otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, establishments holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not hold a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. (b)  The foregoing prohibition, however, shall not apply with respect to the following: (1)  Supermarkets and brew pubs, as defined in section 4-1; provided, however, no such license shall include or authorize the sale of distilled spirits by the package; and (2)  Eating establishments, as defined in section 4-1, may sell wine by the package for off-premises consumption, provided that no more than ten percent of the interior floor area of the establishment is devoted to the display of package wine and no more than ten percent of the establishment's revenues derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages is derived from package wine sales. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the sales of wine by the package for off-premises consumption shall not be used in calculating the total annual gross food and beverage sales for the establishment for the purpose of determining whether the establishment constitutes an eating establishment as set forth in section 4-1. (c)  For the purposes of this chapter, where a person holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package, including distilled spirits, at one establishment, and a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at a contiguous establishment, and the licensed premises of each establishment are physically separate from the other, with the only interconnectivity between the establishments (if any) being an inside connecting service door or passageway, such establishments shall be considered separate and distinct establishments, provided that: (1)  Each establishment operates under a trade name different from the other; (2)  All business transactions are kept separate; (3)  Each establishment must operate in compliance with all other provisions of this chapter and all other laws and regulations applicable to such business; (4)  Each establishment has a separate entrance for the public and the establishments share no common entrance; (5)  The inside connecting service door or passageway (if any) must be located behind the bar or service counter of each establishment or otherwise so situated or maintained as to be reasonably accessible only to the licensee or employees of the establishments, and only the licensee and employees of the establishments may use such door or passageway; and (6)  All other conditions required by state regulations applicable to such contiguous operations are met. (Code 1989, § 3-42; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.027, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 679, § 10, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 694, § 1, 9-15-2014; Ord. No. 701, § 1, 2-23-2015; Ord. No. 722, § 3, 3-21-2016; Ord. No. 740, § 4, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-50. - Regulations as to employees; permit.     The following regulations regarding employees shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: (1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general requirements for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. (2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license hereunder until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the department of public safety and a permit issued indicating that such person is eligible for this employment. The permit issued to a person under this section shall be either of the following: a.  Alcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued only to a person who must be 21 years of age or older, and who sells, serves or dispenses alcoholic beverages; b.  Non-alcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued to a person whose employment includes, but is not limited to, host, hostess, doorman and bouncer. (3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the director of public safety and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. Such application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. (4)  The director of public safety shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. In the event there is no record of a violation of this article, the director of public safety shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the director of public safety shall notify the employer that this person is not eligible for employment. (5)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the director of public safety the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers. (6)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the director of public safety or the city clerk. (7)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy, cook or dishwasher. (8)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. (9)  In the event that any permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the city department of public safety. (10)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the city department of public safety. (11)  Unless waived or modified by the director of public safety, the provisions of this section relative to employees shall also apply to any of the licensee's volunteers or contractors engaged in the service of alcohol. (Code 1989, § 3-43; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.028, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 622, § 1, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 679, § 1, 7-15-2013) State Law reference— Age of employees, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; persons under 18 years of age not allowed or required to serve, sell, or take orders for alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Sec. 4-51. - Open area, sidewalk, deck and patio sales.     The consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages may be allowed in open areas, sidewalks, decks, patios or similar unenclosed spaces on or about the premises of an establishment licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises if written application is made to and approved by the director of public safety, or his designee, under such conditions as the director may deem appropriate for the protection of public health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, maximum capacity, ingress and egress. (Code 1989, § 3-44; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.029, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 679, § 11, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 4-52. - Happy hour promotions prohibited. (a)  No licensee, or employee or agent of a licensee, shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: (1)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage; (2)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; (3)  Selling, offering to sell or delivering to any person any alcoholic beverage at a price less than one-half the price customarily charged for such alcoholic beverage, provided, nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit reducing the price of a drink by up to one-half the price customarily charged; (4)  Requiring or allowing the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed, by any one person; (5)  Increasing the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage. It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour." (b)  As used in this section, the phrase "customarily charged" means the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. (Code 1989, § 3-45; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.030, 9-22-1986) 
Sec. 4-53. - Brown-bagging or BYOB prohibited; exceptions. (a)  It is prohibited for any person to bring his own alcoholic beverage (brown-bagging) into any retail establishment, without regard to whether such establishment is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, for consumption on such premises. (b)  Exceptions. The foregoing prohibition in subsection (a) of this section is subject to the following specific exceptions: (1)  Furnishing of wine by a patron of a restaurant. Any restaurant which is licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to bring into the restaurant one unopened bottle of wine for consumption on the premises. In order for this provision to apply, the restaurant must establish a policy for permitting same and must charge a minimum corkage fee of $10.00 per bottle. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require a restaurant to establish such a policy. Any wine not consumed at a restaurant shall be disposed of at the premises and not carried out in an open container, unless the restaurant is able to reseal and repackage the opened bottle of wine in accordance with section 4-54. (2)  Patrons participating in cooking classes. This section shall not prohibit any person who is participating in a cooking class offered by a retail establishment from bringing one unopened bottle of wine into the retail establishment to consume with the meal prepared as part of such class, provided: a.  The retail establishment has a policy permitting a patron participating in a cooking class to bring an unopened bottle of wine into the retail establishment for consumption on the premises by the patron; b.  The retail establishment does not charge a corking or other fee for same; c.  The price of a cooking class offered by the retail establishment does not vary based on whether class participants will be permitted to bring wine into the retail establishment for consumption on the premises; d.  No employee of the retail establishment under the age of 18 years shall be working in the establishment during the times such classes are offered; and e.  The retail establishment has an established closing time of no later than 10:00 p.m. Any opened bottle of wine not consumed at the retail establishment during the cooking class shall be disposed of at the premises and not carried out in an open container. All other applicable state and city laws, regulations and ordinances which address the use and serving of alcoholic beverages shall apply to this subsection. (c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "retail establishment" shall not include a private hotel room or similar guest room or a private club. (Code 1989, § 3-46; Ord. No. 649, § 1, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 679, § 12, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 740, § 5, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-54. - Removal of wine from restaurant by patron.     Notwithstanding any other contrary provision of the ordinance from which this section derives, any restaurant which is licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off the premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with such meal on the restaurant's premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine or corkage fee and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. (Code 1989, § 3-47; Ord. No. 649, § 1, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 679, § 13, 7-15-2013) State Law reference— Removal of wine from restaurant by patron, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. 
Sec. 4-55. - Cigar shop exception.     A cigar shop may obtain a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, provided that it derives no more than ten percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purposes of this section only, annual gross revenues shall mean revenues from the sale of alcohol and the in-store sale of cigars. Such licensee shall meet the requirement of sections 4-47 through 4-50 except for providing a full-service kitchen and serving food. (Ord. No. 733, § 2, 2-6-2017) 
Secs. 4-56—4-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE CLUBS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Sale of distilled spirits by private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-82. - Exception for art galleries and art studios.     An art gallery or art studio may obtain a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises without meeting the requirement that the establishment provides a full-service kitchen serving prepared foods or derives a minimum of 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, provided that no more than ten percent of the establishment's total annual gross sales are derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. 740, § 6, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-83. - Conditions to selling. (a)  Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city governing the sale of such beverages (except as expressly exempted therein) and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. (b)  Community service organizations which are chartered by Congress as patriotic, mutual-help, or war-time veterans' organizations shall be specifically exempted from section 4-16. Compliance with all other regulations of this chapter is required for such organizations. (Code 1989, § 3-50; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.032, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 573, 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-84. - Private clubs exempt from percentage sales of food requirements.     Private clubs shall not be required to derive a certain percentage of annual gross receipts from the sale of prepared food. (Code 1989, § 3-51; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.033, 9-22-1986) 
Sec. 4-85. - Hours of sale.     Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. (Code 1989, § 3-52; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.034, 9-22-1986) 
Sec. 4-86. - Regulations as to employees.     The employee regulations set forth in section 4-50 pertaining to establishments holding a license for consumption on the premises shall also apply to private clubs licensed for consumption on the premises. (Code 1989, § 3-53; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.035, 9-22-1986) 
Secs. 4-87—4-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PACKAGE LIQUOR[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq. 
Sec. 4-116. - Types of establishments where retail sale permitted. (a)  No distilled spirits by the package shall be sold at retail except in: (1)  Retail establishments devoted exclusively to the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package; (2)  Retail establishments in which space has been set aside devoted exclusively to the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package, with ingress and egress provided directly to and only to the exterior of the building in which the facility is located and not to any other enclosed part of the building in which the facility is located, except as provided in subsection (a)(3) of this section; or (3)  In hotels, motels and high-rise office buildings where every public entrance to this use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary use structure. (b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the retail sale within these establishments of liquid commodities and mixes normally used in the preparation and serving of distilled spirits. (Code 1989, § 3-60; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.037, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 740, § 7, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-117. - Coin-operated or amusement machines prohibited; exception.     No retail dealer in liquors shall permit on such person's premises any slot machines of any kind or character or any coin-operated machines or any machine operated for amusement purposes. However, cigarette vending machines may be permitted. (Code 1989, § 3-61; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.038, 9-22-1986) 
Sec. 4-118. - Hours of sale.     Retail package licensees licensed to sell packaged distilled spirits may engage in the package sale of distilled spirits only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and only between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. These hours are to be determined by the standard of time in effect at the time of the sale. (Code 1989, § 3-62; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.039, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 650, § 1, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 4-119. - Regulations as to employees.     The following regulations as to employees shall apply to all establishments holding a license for package liquor: (1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general requirements for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. (2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license hereunder until this person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the department of public safety and has been issued a permit by the department of public safety indicating that the person is eligible for this employment. (3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the director of public safety, and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. Such application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. (4)  The director of public safety shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. In the event there is no record of a violation of this chapter or other applicable law, the director of public safety shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the director of public safety shall notify the employer that this person is not eligible for employment. (5)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the director of public safety the name of the establishment and the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers. (6)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the director of public safety or the city clerk. (7)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. (8)  In the event that any permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the director of public safety. (9)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the department of public safety. (Code 1989, § 3-63; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.040, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 679, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Secs. 4-120—4-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PACKAGE BEER, MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE 
Sec. 4-137. - Type of retail establishment.     No package beer, malt beverage or wine shall be sold at retail except in the following types of retail establishments, subject to such establishments holding a license to sell beer, malt beverages or wine (as applicable) by the package: (1)  Establishments which meet the same requirements applicable to establishments where distilled spirits may be sold (section 4-116); (2)  Establishments maintaining 80 percent of the floor space and storage area in a manner which is devoted principally to the retail sale of other products and located in zoning districts in which these establishments are permitted as a conforming use or in districts where existing establishments exist as a nonconforming use; (3)  Supermarkets, as defined in section 4-1; (4)  Establishments which are duly licensed by the city to operate as a brew pub; or (5)  Eating establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises which sell wine by the package in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 4-49(b); provided, however, package sales shall be limited to wine only. (Code 1989, § 3-70; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 722, § 4, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 4-138. - Hours of sale.     Retail package licensees licensed to sell packaged malt beverages, beer and wine may engage in the packaged sale of malt beverages, beer and wine only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and only between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. These hours are to be determined by the standard of time in effect at the time of the sale. (Code 1989, § 3-71; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 4-16-2012) 
Sec. 4-139. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices.     Retailers shall indicate plainly, by tags or labels on the bottle or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the prices of all beer, malt beverages and wine exposed or offered for sale. (Code 1989, § 3-72; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 4-16-2012) 
Sec. 4-140. - Regulations as to coin-operated or amusement machines, and regulations as to employees.     The provisions applicable to coin-operated or amusement machines applicable to retail establishments devoted to the retail sale of distilled spirits (section 4-117) and regulations as to employees applicable to retail package licenses licensed to sell packaged distilled spirits (section 4-119) are also applicable to retail establishments licensed to sell beer, malt beverages and wine. (Code 1989, § 3-73; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 4-16-2012) 
Sec. 4-141. - Growlers. (a)  The sale of growlers in compliance with this article is authorized for those certain types of establishments designated in section 4-137(1), (3) and (4), which are licensed to sell malt beverages, but not distilled spirits, by the package. The filling of growlers with malt beverage drawn from a tap on a barrel, cask, tank, or keg on the premises shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or other provisions of this chapter. The term "growler" means a container made of a material customary to the industry provided that the container is capable of being sealed with a tamper-proof cap, top or other seal for the purpose of complying with open container laws, and further provided that the container does not exceed 68 ounces and is filled by a licensee or employee of the licensed establishment with malt beverage drawn from a barrel, cask, tank, or keg. Growlers may only be filled from barrels, casks, tanks, or kegs procured by the licensee from a person who is licensed or authorized to do business as a wholesaler under this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, in the case of a brew pub holding a license to sell malt beverages by the package, growlers may be filled from barrels, casks, tanks, or kegs of malt beverages manufactured on the licensed premises, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in section 4-188. Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. Except as authorized in accordance with an ancillary tasting permit as hereinafter provided, consumption on the premises is strictly prohibited; however, this prohibition shall not apply with respect to sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises, provided that no filled growlers may be consumed on the premises. (b)  The holder of a package malt beverage license, with or without a package wine license, but in no event with a package distilled spirits license, shall be eligible for an ancillary growler malt beverage tasting license to provide samples of growler malt beverages offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. Growler malt beverage sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a growler malt beverage offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with growler malt beverage education classes and sampling designed to promote growler and malt beverage appreciation and education. Growler malt beverage tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. Growler malt beverage sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one time per day per customer for a period not to exceed two consecutive hours. Samples shall not exceed four ounces, and no customer shall consume more than 16 ounces in any two-hour period. Only the licensee or an employee shall open and handle unpackaged malt beverages, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. No open growler container shall be removed from the licensed premises. Not more than two times per week for a period not to exceed two consecutive hours, the holder of an ancillary growler malt beverage tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for class participants. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. Growler malt beverage sampling and tasting is only permitted within the designated interior portion of the premises. The annual fee for an annual growler malt beverage tasting license shall be $50.00, and may be revised, by resolution of the mayor and council, from time to time. (c)  The holder of a package malt beverage license, with or without a package wine license, but in no event with a package distilled spirit license, who is authorized to sell growlers and whose premises are located in the downtown district shall, in conjunction with city-sponsored special events within the downtown district, be authorized to sell malt beverages in 16-ounce plastic containers in the same manner as consumption on the premises licensees in the downtown district, except that such sales shall only take place outside the premises in a tent directly adjacent to the premises. The exact location and set-up of the tent shall be subject to the review of the director of public safety, or his designee, for public safety compliance. (Code 1989, § 3-74; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 679, § 14, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 722, § 5, 3-21-2016) 
Secs. 4-142—4-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WHOLESALER 
Sec. 4-166. - Special provisions applicable to wholesale license. (a)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale distilled spirit license. (b)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any distilled spirits to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. (c)  No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesaler distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. (Code 1989, § 3-80; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.044, 9-22-1986) 
Sec. 4-167. - Hours of sale.     Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday. (Code 1989, § 3-81; Ord. No. 218-A, § 1.045, 9-22-1986) 
Secs. 4-168—4-187. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BREW PUBS 
Sec. 4-188. - Exception for brew pubs.     A limited exception to the provisions of this chapter which implement and enforce the three-tier system for the manufacture, distribution and sale of malt beverages established under state law shall exist for owners and operators of brew pubs, subject to the following terms and conditions: (1)  No individual or person shall be permitted to own or operate a brew pub without first obtaining a proper brew pub license from the city council pursuant to the procedures set forth in article I of this chapter, and each brew pub licensee shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements; (2)  A brew pub license authorizes the holder of such license to: a.  Manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 10,000 barrels of malt beverage in a calendar year solely for retail sale; b.  Operate an eating establishment that shall be the sole retail outlet for such malt beverages; c.  Operate an eating establishment that may offer for sale for consumption on the premises any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are authorized for retail sale under this chapter, including wine, distilled spirits, and malt beverages, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler; and, provided further, that in addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brew pub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages from licensed wholesalers; and d.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, sell up to a maximum of 5,000 barrels annually of such malt beverage to licensed wholesale dealers. Under no circumstances shall such malt beverages be sold by a brew pub licensee to any person holding a retail consumption dealer's license or a retailer's license for the purpose of resale; (3)  Possession of a brew pub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package, excluding distilled spirits, for the same premises; (4)  A brew pub license does not authorize the holder of such license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package for consumption off the premises; and (5)  A brew pub licensee shall: a.  Pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals or persons licensed as manufacturers, retailers, and, where applicable, wholesalers under this title; and b.  Measure malt beverages manufactured on the premises and otherwise comply with applicable rules and regulations respecting excise and enforcement tax determination of such malt beverages as required by state and local law. (Code 1989, § 3-90; Ord. No. 373, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 722, § 6, 3-21-2016) 
Secs. 4-189—4-214. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIALTY GIFT SHOPS 
Sec. 4-215. - Exception for specialty gift shops. (a)  For all purposes of this section, the term "specialty gift shop" shall be defined as any retail gift shop that derives not more than 15 percent of its gross sales from the sale of packaged gift baskets or similar items containing unbroken containers of wine or beer. (b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, a limited exception to the provisions of sections 4-6 and 4-137 shall exist for the owners of specialty gift shops, provided that the owner shall first obtain a specialty gift shop alcohol permit as hereinafter provided, and the only sale of alcohol by the owner is through the sale of gift items as specified in subsection (a) of this section and not for consumption on the premises. (c)  All persons desiring to engage in activities permitted by this section shall make written application to the director of public safety for a specialty gift shop alcohol permit on forms prescribed by the director of public safety, and filed with the director of public safety. All applications shall be accompanied by a certified check for $150.00. If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded. The application shall include the name and address of the applicant, the address of the business location, and the name and address of the manager. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the director of public safety with the name and address of the new manager and the information as requested within ten days of such change. The applicant must meet the character requirements of this chapter. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. (d)  The director of public safety shall prepare and cause to be published a notice of each pending application, which notice shall include the date the application will be considered by the clerk, the location or street number of the premises where the applicant proposes to conduct activities permitted by this section and the name of the applicant. The applicant shall pay the publication costs. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and shall appear once a week for two weeks immediately preceding consideration of the application by the clerk. (e)  If the clerk grants the applicant a specialty gift shop alcohol permit, it shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. The director of public safety shall have authority to prescribe forms for new or renewal applications. All applicants shall furnish data, information or records as required by the director of public safety to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish such data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. (f)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an original or renewal application for a specialty gift shop alcohol permit shall be cause for the denial or revocation thereof. (g)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this section, the applicant may not re-apply for a new license for at least one year from any final date of such denial. (h)  Each applicant shall certify that the applicant has read this section, and if a specialty gift shop alcohol permit is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this section on the premises and shall require each of the licensee's employees to be familiar with this section. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, all of the applicant's employees must be at least 18 years of age to sell any gift item containing alcohol. (i)  Except as set forth in this section, a holder of a specialty gift shop alcohol permit must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter. (Code 1989, § 3-100; Ord. No. 373, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 679, § 15, 7-15-2013) 
Secs. 4-216—4-238. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - LICENSED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CATERERS[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Sales off premises for catered functions, O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-239. - Licensed alcoholic beverage caterers. (a)  License requirements; resident caterers. (1)  Any caterer who possesses a valid city license to sell or otherwise dispense malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises within the city may apply for an off-premises license that permits sales of the same off premises at authorized catered events or functions. (2)  Any caterer who possesses a valid city license to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the package for consumption off the premises within the city may apply for an off-premises license that permits sales of the same class of alcoholic beverages by the drink off premises at authorized catered events or functions. (3)  Each off-premises catering license authorized herein shall be valid through December 31 of the year for which it is issued. The fee for each license shall be set by resolution of the city council, and this fee shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution. (4)  In order to distribute or sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits at an authorized catered function, a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall file an application for an off-premises event permit with the director of public safety at no additional fee. The application shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address and time of the event, the caterer's license number and any other information the city deems necessary to review a request for such permit. (5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off premises and in connection with the catered event or function without first having obtained a license and event permit as provided herein. (b)  Permit requirements; nonresident caterers. (1)  A nonresident alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit to the director of public safety or his designee. The fee for each such permit shall be $50.00, as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3 (or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto). (2)  An application for an off-premises event permit shall include the name of the caterer, the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's state and local license number and expiration date, the date, address, time, and name of the event and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or function. (3)  The original off-premises permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function. (4)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages off premises except as authorized by the off-premises event permit. (c)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or otherwise dispense only that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell or otherwise dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. (d)  Sunday sales. An alcoholic beverage caterer wishing to cater an event or function on a Sunday must possess a valid Sunday sales license and comply with the requirements of state law with respect to the service of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. (e)  Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages by resident caterers as provided in this chapter. Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverages served by a nonresident caterer in the amount set forth in this chapter, and shall be paid within 30 days after the conclusion of the catered event or function. (Code 1989, § 3-110; Ord. No. 679, § 16, 7-15-2013) 
Secs. 4-240—4-256. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PUBLICLY-OWNED FACILITIES[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages at publically-owned facilities, O.C.G.A. § 3-8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-257. - Exception for publicly-owned facilities. (a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, a limited exception to sections 4-6 and 4-47, shall exist for that person or entity possessing a public facilities permit, as hereinafter defined. (b)  For all purposes of this section, the term "public facilities" means: (1)  An historic structure owned by the city and operated as a welcome center by a local historical society or similar nonprofit organization; or (2)  Property and/or facilities owned by the city and operated by the city as an equestrian center. (c)  Any person or entity desiring to engage in activities permitted by this section shall make written application to the director of public safety for the appropriate public facilities permit on forms prescribed by the director of public safety, and filed with the director of public safety. All applications shall be accompanied by a public facilities permit fee of $50.00. If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee, without interest, shall be refunded. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to: the name and address of the applicant, the date, address and times of the proposed event and the location of the public facility. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. (d)  If such public facilities permit is granted by the director of public safety, it shall be good only for the specified event at the specified address and times set forth in the application, not to exceed five days for an equestrian center and one day for a welcome center. (e)  A public facilities permit for an equestrian center shall only permit the permit holder to serve (not sell) alcoholic beverages in a hospitality tent or similar structure previously approved by the director of public safety, and the alcoholic beverages may only be consumed on the premises of such hospitality tent or similar structure. (f)  A public facilities permit for a welcome center shall only permit the holder to serve (not sell) alcoholic beverages within the premises of the welcome center, and the alcoholic beverages may only be consumed on the premises of the welcome center. (g)  A public facilities permit shall only be issued to a caterer licensed under the provisions of this chapter, or to an individual who meets the character requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that no more than two permits per calendar year shall be issued to an individual who is not a licensed caterer. (h)  The director of public safety shall have authority to prescribe forms for applications. Failure to furnish any requested data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. (i)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an original or renewal application for a public facilities permit shall be cause for the denial or revocation thereof. (j)  Except as set forth above in this section, a public facilities permit holder must comply with all of the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Code 1989, § 3-120; Ord. No. 373, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 679, § 17, 7-15-2013) 
Secs. 4-258—4-277. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ANNEXED AREAS 
Sec. 4-278. - Annexed areas.     Any person, establishment, partnership, corporation or other entity which holds a license from the county for the sale, manufacture, package or distribution of alcoholic beverages and which is located in an area annexed by the city, shall have 30 days from the effective date of the annexation to apply for the appropriate licenses and permits under this chapter. The applicant shall pay all applicable fees and costs for the equivalent license to the city. The applicant, however, shall be entitled to a credit for the amount of any license fee paid to the county in the year of annexation. (Code 1989, § 3-130; Ord. No. 373, 3-25-1996) 
Secs. 4-279—4-304. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SPECIAL EVENTS[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- State Law reference— Special events use permit, O.C.G.A. § 3-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-305. - Special temporary outside events. (a)  Establishments duly licensed by the city to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises must submit an application and site plan to the director of public safety or his designee to engage in outside special events. A special event temporary permit shall authorize the retail consumption licensee to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for a period not to exceed the hours otherwise specified in this chapter. The applicant must meet the following requirements: (1)  The licensed establishment must have an existing license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. The entrances and exits to the event must be through controlled entry points which allow for easy monitoring of patrons entering and leaving the event. (2)  A site plan must be submitted to and approved by the director of public safety as well as the city fire marshal for approval. If the site plan provides for an area to accommodate more than 25 persons, a crowd control and security plan must be submitted to the director of public safety for approval. The community development department and city fire marshal must approve any temporary structures. (3)  A signed and notarized letter from the property owner must be submitted to the director of public safety authorizing the use of the property for the event. (4)  The outside event shall not exceed two days. (5)  All outside events for an individual licensed establishment will be restricted to two events per year. (6)  A non-refundable fee of $150.00 per event must be paid at the time of filing of the application. (7)  The completed application must be submitted to the director of public safety no less than 20 days prior to the scheduled event. (b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to waive or appeal any other requirements ordained under this Code. (c)  The licensee or the licensee's employee shall supervise all aspects of the special event pertaining to the handling and storage of alcoholic beverages and the distribution of alcoholic beverages to consumers. The licensee shall be responsible for compliance with all aspects of this article and state law, and liable for infractions thereof. (Code 1989, § 3-140; Ord. No. 679, § 18, 7-15-2013) 
Secs. 4-306—4-328. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY 
Sec. 4-329. - Consumption on premises license for public entertainment facilities.     A license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may be issued to the owner and/or operator of a public entertainment facility with a seating capacity in excess of 5,000 persons, including stadiums, arenas, coliseums, amphitheaters and auditoriums ("public entertainment facility"). Except as provided in this section, all applicants and license holders for public entertainment facilities shall meet all licensing qualifications established pursuant to this article, and must comply with all state statutes governing the sale of alcoholic beverages and all sections of this article and other city ordinances governing sales. Public entertainment facilities shall be required to comply with the percentage sales requirements applicable to consumption on the premises licensees under this article, but in determining such compliance, the revenue from the sale of tickets shall be combined with the revenue derived from the sale of prepared meals or food. In addition, food must be served during any period of time that alcoholic beverages are served. Alcoholic beverages may be sold during the hours authorized for other consumption on the premises licensees holding licenses pursuant to this article, except that Sunday sales shall be limited to the hours of 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. (Code 1989, § 3-150; Ord. No. 575, § 1, 10-3-2005) 
Secs. 4-330—4-346. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ANCILLARY WINE TASTING LICENSE 
Sec. 4-347. - Conditions of license issuance.     The holder of a package wine license, with or without a package malt beverage license, but in no event with a package distilled spirits license, with licensed premises having a minimum of 200 square feet of floor space dedicated to the display of wine offered for sale, shall be eligible for an ancillary wine tasting license to sell or provide samples or tastings of wine offered for sale by the package to customers for consumption on the premises under the following conditions: (1)  The licensee shall maintain on the premises and offer for sale by the package at least 25 different brands of wine. (2)  Wine sampling and tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a wine counter area constituting no more than 20 percent of the entire floor area of the premises. (3)  Wine samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any calendar day. (4)  Wine bottles shall be opened only by the licensee or an employee, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. (5)  No open containers of wine shall be removed from the licensed premises. (6)  Wine sampling and tasting is only permitted within the enclosed portion of the premises. (7)  Wine sampling and tasting is only permitted during the hours the licensed premises are authorized to provide package sales of alcoholic beverages; provided, however, no wine sampling and tasting shall be permitted on Sunday. (8)  Wine sampling and tasting shall not be permitted prior to the city's approval of a package license holder's application for an ancillary wine tasting license and the package license holder's payment of the subject license fee. The annual fee for an ancillary wine tasting license shall be $250.00, which fee may be revised from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. (Code 1989, § 3-160; Ord. No. 598, § 1, 7-10-2006; Ord. No. 740, § 8, 5-16-2017) 
Secs. 4-348—4-367. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 
Sec. 4-368. - Alcohol consumption near package stores. (a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to consume all or any part of any type of alcoholic beverage within 100 feet of any retail store where alcoholic beverages are sold in package form or within the boundary lines of the property on which such retail store is located, whichever constitutes the greater distance. (b)  Enforcement. The police department shall be responsible for the enforcement of this section. (Code 1989, § 3-170; Ord. No. 622, § 2, 5-19-2008) 
Sec. 4-369. - Drinking in public places.     No person shall drink or consume all or any part of an alcoholic beverage in or on a street, sidewalk, alley, mall, parking lot or structure, motor vehicle, public grounds or other public place unless the place has been licensed or permitted for that purpose under this article. (Code 1989, § 3-171; Ord. No. 622, § 2, 5-19-2008) 
Secs. 4-370—4-396. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS WITHIN DOWNTOWN DISTRICT 
Sec. 4-397. - General.     The provisions of this article are intended to set forth certain exceptions and provisions applicable only to licensees whose establishments are located within the downtown district (as hereinafter defined) holding licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Except as specifically set forth in this article, all such licensees remain subject to all other provisions of the city's alcoholic beverage chapter. (Code 1989, § 3-180; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 8-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-398. - Minimum distance requirements within downtown district.     The minimum distance requirements for on-premises consumption establishments in the downtown district shall be 50 feet from all of the establishments and locations designated in section 4-17(a), and measured in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 4-17(b). For the purpose of distance requirements, the downtown district shall not be deemed to include establishments not physically located within the district. (Code 1989, § 3-180.1; Ord. No. 668, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 4-399. - Waiver procedure and standards.     An establishment that desires to locate within the downtown district and cannot meet the distance requirements specified above may file an application for a waiver or reduction of the minimum distance requirements with the city council. The city council, after notice and a public hearing, may grant a waiver or reduction to the minimum distance requirements if it determines that the proposed variance will not substantially diminish the property value, nor alter the essential character of the area surrounding the site, and will not substantially interfere with or injure the rights of others whose property would be affected by the variance. The city council may also impose any conditions which it finds to be necessary to protect the best interest of the surrounding property of the city. Conditions may include, but not be limited to, the hours of operation, parking and landscaping requirements and, with respect to residentially zoned areas, whether the establishment is physically separated or well buffered from adjacent residentially zoned areas. A location that has been granted a waiver or reduction of distance by the city council shall not be required to obtain a new waiver or reduction of distance as a result in change of tenancy, ownership or management, unless a change in use occurs for a time period of 12 months or more. (Code 1989, § 3-180.2; Ord. No. 668, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 4-400. - Definition of downtown district.     For the purpose of this article only, the downtown district is defined as follows: the area of the city bounded on the north by the northern right-of-way of Church Street, then traveling southward along the western right-of-way of Canton/Roswell Street to the intersection with Old Milton Parkway, then traveling along the northern right-of-way of Old Milton Parkway eastward to the intersection with State Route 9/Main Street, then traveling northward along the eastern boundary of State Route 9/Main Street to the southern right-of-way of Marietta Street, then by a line drawn to the east to the intersection of Haynes Bridge Road and Thompson Street, then northward along the western right-of-way of Haynes Bridge Road to the intersection of Academy Street, then proceeding westward along the southern right-of-way of Academy Street to the intersection of State Route 9/Main Street, there to travel northward along the western right-of-way of State Route 9/Main Street to the intersection with Church Street. For the purposes of this definition, any licensed establishment, the property of which abuts the described boundaries, shall be considered to be located within the district. (Code 1989, § 3-181; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 8-22-2011; Ord. No. 694, § 2, 9-15-2014) 
Sec. 4-401. - Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted. (a)  One drink on-street limit. Any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup, or other container other than a can, bottle, or glass, for removal from the premises; provided, however, that no establishment shall dispense to any person more than one such alcoholic beverage at a time for removal from the premises, and no person shall remove at one time more than one such alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises. (b)  Size limited to a maximum of 16 ounces. No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in possession on the streets and sidewalks, in parks and squares, or in other public places within the defined area any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. Nothing set forth in this subsection shall be construed to permit the possession of open alcoholic beverages in any public place within the downtown district except as otherwise expressly authorized under this section. (c)  Drinking from can, bottle, or glass prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, or glass, or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private. (d)  Purchase from licensed premises within downtown district. Alcoholic beverages consumed pursuant to this provision must be purchased from a licensed premises within the downtown district. (e)  Consumption limited to certain areas in downtown district. No alcoholic beverage purchased pursuant to this provision may be consumed outside of the downtown district, upon any sidewalk adjacent to a church, school or park (unless specifically authorized by the city in conjunction with a city event or other event authorized by the city) or upon any private property without the express written consent of the property owners. (f)  Consumption limited to lawful hours of operation. No alcoholic beverage purchased pursuant to this provision shall be consumed except within the authorized hours of sale of the establishment where purchased. (g)  Festivals; special events. Unless otherwise specified by this article or the terms of a special event permit issued by the city, the provisions of this article shall also apply to special events and festivals. (h)  Public parks and squares in the downtown district. Beer and wine, but not distilled spirits, may be consumed in public parks and squares located in the downtown district, including on the sidewalks adjacent thereto, but only when same is specifically authorized by the city in conjunction with a city event or under a special event permit issued by the city. Further, beer or wine consumed pursuant to the foregoing provision must be purchased from an alcoholic beverage licensee holding a permit to sell beer or wine at the subject city or special event. Except as otherwise expressly authorized pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this subsection, no person shall possess any open alcoholic beverage container in a public park or square located within the downtown district. (Code 1989, § 3-182; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 8-22-2011; Ord. No. 742, § 1, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 4-402. - Alcohol/food sales ratio.     A licensed establishment located within the downtown district shall derive a minimum of 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. (Code 1989, § 3-183; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 8-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-403. - No abrogation of other laws.     The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to abrogate or otherwise impact any state law or local ordinance pertaining to public drunkenness, disorderly conduct, driving with an open container or under the influence of alcohol, or similar laws. (Code 1989, § 3-184; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 8-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-404. - Licensed establishments with food trucks/mobile food vendors.     A licensed establishment within the downtown district may utilize one or more food trucks/mobile vendor trucks to satisfy the requirement of a full-service kitchen (article II, section 4-47) and alcohol/food sales ratio (article II, section 4-47 and article XVI, section 4-402) under the terms of this section. The food trucks/mobile food vendors must be: (1)  Licensed under chapter 10, article X; (2)  Located on the same private property premises as the licensed establishment; (3)  Generally incorporated into the operation of the licensed establishment; and (4)  Available, open and prepared to serve food every hour that alcoholic beverages are offered for sale from any portion of the premises. (Ord. No. 728, § 1, 9-19-2016) 
Secs. 4-405—4-421. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - BREWERIES[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- State Law reference— Dealing in malt beverages at wholesale and retail prohibited without a license from local governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40. 
Sec. 4-422. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Brewer means a manufacturer of malt beverages.     Brewery means a place where malt beverages are manufactured or brewed. (Code 1989, § 3-190; Ord. No. 673, § 1, 3-25-2013) State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1. 
Sec. 4-423. - Brewer license authorized.     Brewers' licenses are authorized in the city; provided, however, that no individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brewery without first obtaining a proper brewer's license from the city in the manner provided in this chapter, and each holder of a brewer's license shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable state statutes, including rules and regulations promulgated by the department of revenue. (Code 1989, § 3-191; Ord. No. 673, § 1, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 4-424. - License fee.     The license fee for a brewer shall be $500.00 annually. The license fee may be amended from time to time by resolution adopted by the mayor and city council. (Code 1989, § 3-192; Ord. No. 673, § 1, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 4-425. - Exceptions for breweries. (a)  As a limited exception to the provisions of this chapter which implement and enforce the three-tier system for the manufacture, distribution and sale of malt beverages established under state law, a brewer's license authorizes the holder of such license to sell directly to the public on its licensed premises up to 3,000 barrels of malt beverage manufactured on such licensed premises per year for: (1)  Consumption on the premises; and (2)  Consumption off the premises (sales by the package), provided that such sales by the package shall not exceed a maximum of 288 ounces per consumer, per day. (b)  Such retail sales are permitted on the days and at the times that the retail sale of malt beverages for consumption on the premises or by the package, as applicable, is authorized for other retailer licensees under this chapter. Under no circumstances shall such malt beverages be sold by a licensed brewer to a licensed retailer or retail consumption dealer for the purpose of resale. Any brewer engaging in the retail sales of malt beverages pursuant to this section shall remit all state and local excise taxes to the proper tax collecting authority. For the purposes of this article, the term "barrel" means 31 gallons of malt beverage. (Code 1989, § 3-193; Ord. No. 673, § 1, 3-25-2013; Ord. No. 740, § 9, 5-16-2017) Editor's note— The effective date of this provision is September 1, 2017. 
Secs. 4-426—4-448. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS WITHIN CERTAIN MIXED USE DEVELOPMENTS 
Sec. 4-449. - General.     The provisions of this article are intended to set forth certain exceptions and provisions applicable only to licensees whose establishments are located within certain large mixed use development districts, as hereinafter defined, holding licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Except as specifically set forth in this article, all such licensees remain subject to all other provisions of the city's alcoholic beverage chapter. (Code 1989, § 3-200; Ord. No. 679, § 19, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 4-450. - Definition of mixed use development district.     For the purposes of this article only, the term "mixed use development district" is defined as follows: (1)  The development contains a minimum of 50 acres. (2)  The development is zoned to include not less than 350,000 square feet of retail and restaurants, 500,000 square feet of office space, 200 rental or single-family homes, and 300 hotel rooms. (Code 1989, § 3-201; Ord. No. 679, § 19, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 4-451. - Minimum distance requirements within mixed use districts.     The minimum distance requirements for on-premises consumption establishments in a mixed use district are waived. (Code 1989, § 3-202; Ord. No. 679, § 19, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 4-452. - Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted. (a)  The provisions of section 4-401 regarding outside consumption of alcoholic beverages are authorized within mixed use development districts and the provisions of section 4-401 are incorporated herein by reference. (b)  In the event that a mixed use development is managed by an on-site management company, such management company may conduct outside special events within common/open areas of the development, provided that the company utilizes a licensed caterer for such events and meets the requirements of section 4-305, except for the limitation on the number of events. (Code 1989, § 3-203; Ord. No. 679, § 19, 7-15-2013) 
Chapter 5 - RESERVED 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Licensing and regulation of dogs; rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-1. - County regulations—Adopted.     The county regulations, as amended, pertaining to rabies and animal control are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, and the same shall be fully enforceable within the city. A copy of such rabies and animal control regulations is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1989, § 4-1; Res. of 8-10-1987) 
Sec. 6-2. - Same—Penalty.     The section of the county regulations pertaining to rabies and animal control relating to the penalty for violation of the control act is amended by striking same, and inserting in lieu thereof, the following: "(G) Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this rabies control ordinance shall be deemed to have violated a valid city ordinance and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code of Ordinances." (Code 1989, § 4-2) 
Chapter 7 - RESERVED 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); State minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i); enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 8-1. - Definitions     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Building official or building inspector means the qualified building official or qualified building inspector as designated by the city.     Code enforcement officer means the qualified code enforcement official as designated by the city. 
Sec. 8-2. - Building official.     The term "building official" as used in this chapter, the building code and other codes adopted herein, shall mean any officer of the city designated by the city council as having the duty to enforce the building regulations of the city. (Code 1989, § 5-1; Ord. No. 188-A, § 4, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 247, § A, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 8-3. - Enforcement officers.     The building official and fire marshal shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter. All fees provided herein shall be paid to the city clerk. Except as otherwise provided herein, all permits shall be issued by the building official. (Code 1989, § 5-2; Ord. No. 188-A, § 6, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 247, § A, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 8-4. - Interpretation of chapter.     Wherever in the building regulations it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or subject to the direction of the building official or any other officer of the city, this shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining whether the rules and standards established by ordinance have been complied with; and no such provision shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to what such regulations or standards shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by ordinance or to enforce ordinance provisions in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner. (Code 1989, § 5-3; Ord. No. 188-A, § 8, 2-28-1983) 
Sec. 8-5. - Conflict of regulations. (a)  If any of the publications listed in section 8-29 are adopted as a state minimum code pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the edition adopted by the state shall control. If any of the publications listed in section 14-1 are less stringent than the state minimum codes promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., the state minimum code shall control. (b)  A copy of each of the publications listed in section 8-29, as adopted by the state, is filed in the city clerk's office and available for review by the public. The same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which the ordinance from this section is derived shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. (Code 1989, § 5-5; Ord. No. 225, § A, 1-26-1987) 
Secs. 8-6—8-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODES ADOPTED 
Sec. 8-29. - Building codes adopted. (a)  Unless otherwise provided for by subsequent ordinance or another provision of this Code, the city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference, as if set out at length herein, the latest editions of the state minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B), as adopted and amended by the department of community affairs. (1)  International Building Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. (2)  International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia Amendments. (3)  International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. (4)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014 and 2015 Georgia Amendments. (5)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014 and 2015 Georgia Amendments. (6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014 and 2015 Georgia Amendments. (7)  National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition. (8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments 2011 and 2012. (9)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. (10)  Sprinkler: City Domestic Sprinkler Installation Code (Ordinance Number 220, latest revision). (11)  Accessibility (voluntary): Georgia Accessibility Code, Rules and Regulations of the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, Chapter 120-3-20, latest revision. (12)  Industrialized buildings: Industrialized Buildings Rules of Georgia Commissioner of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-2, latest revision. (13)  Manufactured housing: Rules and Regulations of the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, Chapter 120-3-7, latest revision. (14)  Site walls, walks, and drives: City Unified Development Code (UDC), section 4.4.5, or a site-specific drawing by a Georgia architect or professional engineer. (b)  If any of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section are adopted as a state minimum code pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the edition adopted by the state shall control. If any of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section are less stringent than the state minimum codes promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the state minimum code shall control. (c)  A copy of each of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section, as adopted by the state, is filed in the clerk's office and the building official's office and available for review by the public. The same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which the ordinance from which this section is derived shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city. 
Secs. 8-30—8-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
Sec. 8-47. - Adopted.     The city adopts, by reference, as if fully set forth herein, the latest edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, and as further amended by Ordinance Number 735. (Ord. No. 735, § 3, 3-20-2017) 
Secs. 8-48—8-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATING AND TRENCHING[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Blasting or excavating near underground gas pipes and utility facilities, O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-68. - Definitions.     The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Excavation means any manmade cavity or depression in the Earth's surface, including its sides, walls, or faces, formed by earth removal and producing unsupported earth conditions by reasons of the excavation. If installed forms or similar structures reduce the depth-to-width relationship, an excavation may become a trench.     OSHA means the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or its successor agency.     Supervisory personnel means any person who has the responsibility for layout, oversight, superintending, directing or controlling of an excavation or trenching site.     Trench means a narrow excavation made below the surface of the ground. In general, the depth is greater than the width, but the width of a trench is not greater than 15 feet. (Code 1989, § 5-141; Ord. No. 274, § 1, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 8-69. - Prohibition.     No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of any kind whatsoever shall engage in any excavation or trenching except in compliance with the provisions of this article, and in compliance with any applicable laws of the state or of the United States, or any rules and regulations of the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or any other state or federal governmental entity or department promulgating rules and regulations applicable to excavating and trenching. (Code 1989, § 5-142; Ord. No. 274, § 2, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 8-70. - Adoption of OSHA safety and health regulations.     All safety and health regulations adopted by OSHA with regard to excavating and trenching operations, particularly part 1926, subpart P - Excavations, Trenching, and Shoring, sections 1926.650, 1926.651, 1926.652, and 1926.653 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as the same now exist or may be hereafter amended, are adopted as a part of this article the same as if quoted verbatim herein. (Code 1989, § 5-143; Ord. No. 274, § 3, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 8-71. - Permit required.     No excavating or trenching shall be performed until a permit or authorization for same has been obtained from the city. Any applicant will be required to acknowledge receipt and understanding of safety requirements before any permit will be issued. All such permits shall be conspicuously posted upon the job site. (Code 1989, § 5-145; Ord. No. 274, § 5, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 8-72. - Inspection.     The city shall periodically inspect trench/excavation sites. Such inspectors shall, among other things, verify the presence of the required permit and verify compliance to OSHA safety standards hereinabove adopted. (Code 1989, § 5-146; Ord. No. 274, § 6, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 8-73. - Violations. (a)  Violations of this article may result in revocation or suspension of any permit issued hereunder as hereinabove set out. (b)  A notice of violation shall be issued for any deficiency. Upon receipt of such notice, the deficiency shall be corrected immediately. (c)  All excavation and trenching work upon any job site shall cease immediately when the deficiencies cannot be corrected immediately, and/or when there is a refusal or failure to correct immediately, and/or when such work is being done without a permit. (d)  If deficiencies identified in a notice of violation are not corrected, the building permit, land disturbance permit or any other permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked for due cause upon the conditions herein identified for revocation of permit. (e)  Flagrant and/or repeated violations shall be reported by the city to OSHA for action by that agency. (Code 1989, § 5-147; Ord. No. 274, § 7, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 8-74. - Appeals.     Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity whose permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal such suspension or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. Such appeal must be filed within ten days of the notice of suspension or revocation. The city council shall hear and determine the appeal, and the decision of the council shall be final. (Code 1989, § 5-148; Ord. No. 274, § 8, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 8-75. - Penalties.     Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity, or any employee of any such entity, who violates any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day any violation of any provision of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1989, § 5-149; Ord. No. 274, § 9, 4-9-1990) 
Secs. 8-76—8-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HIGH-EFFICIENCY PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; flow rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 
Sec. 8-96. - Purpose.     It is the purpose of this article to require the use of ultra-low-flow fixtures in all new construction, or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings, and to require the labeling of plumbing fixtures with information regarding flow rates for the purpose of conserving water, to maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies and to reduce wastewater flows. (Code 1989, § 5-181; Ord. No. 280, § 1, 1-28-1991) 
Sec. 8-97. - Definitions. (a)  The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context indicates a different meaning.     Commercial building means any type of building other than residential.     Plumbing fixture means a device that receives water, waste, or both, and discharges the water, waste, or both into a drainage system. The term "plumbing fixture" includes a kitchen sink, utility sink, lavatory, bidet, bathtub, shower, urinal, toilet, water closet, or drinking water fountain.     Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel.     Toilet means a water closet.     Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste.     Water closet means a fixture with a water-containing receptor that receives liquid and solid body waste, and on actuation, conveys the waste through an exposed integral trap into a drainage system. (b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3 (high-efficiency plumbing fixtures), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. (Code 1989, § 5-182; Ord. No. 280, § 2, 1-28-1991) 
Sec. 8-98. - Standards. (a)  No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state minimum plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovations of existing buildings, except as noted in section 8-99. (b)  The standards are as follows: (1)  A water closet or toilet that: a.  Is a dual flush water closet that meets the following standards: 1.  The average flush volume of two reduced flushes and one full flush may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 2.  The toilet meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the following standards, as applicable: (i)  American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2-2008; and (ii)  American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.14-2006, Six-Liter Water Closets Equipped with a Dual Flushing Device; and 3.  Is listed to the WaterSense TM Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; or b.  Is a single flush water closet, including gravity, pressure-assisted, and electro-hydraulic tank types, that meets the following standards: 1.  The average flush volume may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 2.  The toilet must meet the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.192/CSA B45.1 or A112.19.14; and 3.  The toilet must be listed to the WaterSense TM Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; (2)  A shower head that allows a flow of no more than an average of 2½ gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; (3)  A urinal and associated flush valve that: a.  Uses no more than one-half gallon of water per flush; b.  Meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2/CSA B45.1; c.  For flushing urinals, meets all WaterSense TM specifications for flushing urinals; and d.  Where non-water urinals are employed, complies with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.3/CSA B45.4 or American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.19/CSA B45.4. Non-water urinals shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions after installation. Where non-water urinals are installed, they shall have a water distribution line roughed-in to the urinal location at a minimum height of 56 inches (1,422 millimeters) to allow for the installation of an approved backflow prevention device in the event of a retrofit. Such water distribution lines shall be installed with shut-off valves located as close as possible to the distributing main to prevent the creation of dead ends. Where non-water urinals are installed, a minimum of one water-supplied fixture rated at a minimum of one water supply fixture unit shall be installed upstream on the same drain line to facilitate drain line flow and rinsing; (4)  A lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 1½ gallons of water per minute at a pressure of 60 pounds per square inch in accordance with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.18.1/CSA B.125.1 and listed to the WaterSense TM High-Efficiency Lavatory Faucet Specification; and (5)  A kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than two gallons of water per minute. (Code 1989, § 5-183; Ord. No. 280, § 3, 1-28-1991) 
Sec. 8-99. - Exceptions.     New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of this article when: (1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; (2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this part were installed; (3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or (4)  Units to be installed are: a.  Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities; b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
Sec. 8-100. - Penalties for violation. (a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (b)  Any building or plumbing contractor, or any builder, or any contractor, or any developer who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to suspension of his business license for a period not to exceed 90 days. (Code 1989, § 5-186; Ord. No. 280, § 6, 1-28-1991) 
Sec. 8-101. - Compliance and enforcement.     In addition to the penalty provided in section 8-100, the city may take other actions as described below to compel compliance, and may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with, or restrain any violation of, this article: (1)  Compliance with the requirements for installation and labeling at the time of installation in section 8-98 shall be determined by the chief building official, and compliance shall be a condition for receipt of any certificate of occupancy. (2)  The city (or the county in those areas where the county provides water service) may deny any service connections to an establishment which does not comply with the standards set forth in section 8-98. (3)  Compliance with the requirement in section 8-98, regarding the labeling of plumbing fixtures offered for retail sale, shall be determined by the chief building official. The city shall have access to all establishments which offer for retail sale or sell plumbing fixtures at retail for the purposes of determining compliance with section 8-98. (Code 1989, § 5-187; Ord. No. 280, § 7, 1-28-1991) 
Secs. 8-102—8-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 
Sec. 8-135. - Permit—Required; application; investigation. (a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved any building in, into, through, or from the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the building official. Such permit shall be known as a house moving permit. (b)  Application for permit. Any person desiring such a permit shall file with the building official an application therefor in writing on a form to be furnished by the city for that purpose. Such application shall specify the following: (1)  The character and size of the building to be moved; (2)  The reason for moving; (3)  The use, purpose and occupancy for which such building or structure is to be used; (4)  The location from which and to which such building is to be moved; (5)  A plot plan showing the proposed location of the building upon the property to which such building is to be moved, provided such location is in the city; (6)  The streets on, over or through which it is desired to move such building; (7)  Whether the building conforms to the zoning laws in the location to which it is to be moved in the city. (c)  Investigation. Upon the filing of the application, the building official shall investigate the building and determine action thereon. (Code 1989, § 5-38; Ord. No. 207-A, §§ 1—3, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-136. - Same—Terms and conditions.     When a house moving permit is granted, such terms and conditions as may be deemed reasonable and proper may be imposed, including, but not limited to, the public streets or other public property in the city on, over or through which the building or structure shall be moved, and the requirements of changes, alterations, additions or repairs to be made to or upon the building or structure, to the end that the relocation thereof will not be materially detrimental or injurious to public safety or to public welfare or to the property and improvements, or either, in the district to which it is to be moved. Such terms and conditions shall be written upon the permit or appended in writing thereto. (Code 1989, § 5-39; Ord. No. 207-A, § 5, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-137. - Same—Denial.     No permit shall be issued to move any building or structure which, in the opinion of the building official: (1)  Is so constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous; (2)  Is infested with pests or is unsanitary; (3)  If it is a dwelling or habitation, is unfit for human habitation; (4)  Is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or improvements in the district within a radius of 3,000 feet from the proposed site; (5)  Is prohibited by the zoning laws of the city; (6)  Is of a type prohibited at the proposed location by any ordinance of the city; (7)  Fails to meet the minimum standards of the city building construction code in force and effective at the time such application for permit is applied for; or (8)  The moving of the building or structure causes unreasonable damage to the trees, plants and shrubs on and along the public streets. Provided, however, that if the condition of the building or structure, in the judgment of the building official, admits of practicable and effective repair, the permit may be issued upon the terms and conditions as set forth herein. (Code 1989, § 5-40; Ord. No. 207-A, § 4, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-138. - Same—Issuance.     The building official shall approve the issuance of a house moving permit when all the necessary requirements and conditions of this article have been complied with. It then shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue the permit. (Code 1989, § 5-41; Ord. No. 207-A, § 12, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-139. - Same—Suspension or revocation.     The building official, at any time, for sufficient cause, may revoke or suspend any permit granted under this article. (Code 1989, § 5-42; Ord. No. 207-A, § 13, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-140. - Inspection fee and permit fee. (a)  An inspection fee in the sum of $100.00 shall be paid to the building official upon the filing of each application for a house moving permit. (b)  A permit fee in the sum of $25.00 shall be paid to the director of finance upon the issuance of each house moving permit. (Code 1989, § 5-43; Ord. No. 207-A, § 11, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-141. - Estimate of cost; deposit.     The applicant shall also deposit with the city clerk a cash deposit sufficient to cover the cost to the city, as estimated by the building official, of trimming, moving, removing or replanting of trees or shrubs, and of moving, removing, or displacing any pole or other structure supporting any wires, cables or other equipment belonging to the city or the cutting, displacing or changing the location of any wire, cable or other equipment upon such poles or structures belonging to the city. (Code 1989, § 5-44; Ord. No. 207-A, § 6, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-142. - Liability insurance. (a)  Every person moving a building in the city shall file with the city clerk a liability insurance policy issued by a solvent corporation holding a certificate of authority to do insurance business in the state, which policy shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this section. (b)  In lieu of filing the insurance policy herein referred to, a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance corporation may be filed. The certificate must show that a policy meeting the requirements of this section has been issued, and shall set forth the expiration date of such policy. (c)  The liability policy required under this section shall insure the person moving a building against loss from the liability imposed by law for injury to, or death of, any person, or damage to any property growing out of the moving of such building to the amount or limit of: (1)  $500,000.00, exclusive of interest and costs, on account of injury to, or death of, any one person; (2)  $1,000,000.00, exclusive of interest and costs, on account of moving any one building resulting in injury to or death of more than one person; and (3)  $250,000.00 for damage to property of others, resulting from moving any one building. (Code 1989, § 5-45; Ord. No. 207-A, § 7, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-143. - Owner's completion bond or cash deposit—General conditions. (a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or lessee of the property upon which the building is to be located shall file with the building official a corporate surety bond, conditioned as follows: that all of the work required to be done to complete the relocation, alteration and reconstruction of the building pursuant to the conditions of the permit shall be fully performed and completed within a reasonable time to be specified by the building official in the permit. Such bond shall be in a principal amount equal to the estimated cost of the work proposed to be done plus ten percent thereof, and shall name the city as obligee, and shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. (b)  In lieu of furnishing such a corporate surety bond, the owner or lessee may post a cash deposit in the amount of such bond. (c)  An extension of time for such completion may be granted in writing by the building official when, in the building official's discretion, circumstances shall so justify, but no such extension shall release any surety or other security. (Code 1989, § 5-46; Ord. No. 207-A, § 8, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-144. - Same—Specific conditions. (a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or lessee of the property from which the building is to be moved shall file with the building official a bond or other form of security in favor of the city conditioned as follows: (1)  Before any work is started on a building or structure, the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent shall notify the appropriate utilities in order that all gas, water, electric and oil pipelines that are to be disconnected from the building may be securely capped and sealed. (2)  Immediately after the moving of any building or structure, the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent shall securely barricade all basement excavations and other holes or openings. (3)  Within ten days after moving any building or structure, the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent shall complete the following work: a.  Securely close and seal any sanitary piping located on the property. b.  Fill with dirt or sand any septic tanks or cesspools located on the property. c.  Fill any openings, excavations or basements remaining on the land with dirt or sand to street level or the natural level of adjoining property, unless otherwise directed by the building official. d.  Remove any buried underground tanks formerly used for storage of flammable liquids. e.  Remove all refuse, debris and waste materials from the property. (b)  The bond required by this section shall be in an amount equal to the cost of the work proposed to be done, as estimated by the building official. (c)  The bond may be in the form of a corporate surety bond, cash deposit, savings and loan certificate, or an instrument of credit. (d)  An extension of time for completion of the work required by this section may be granted by the building official when, in such official's discretion, circumstances justify such an extension, but no such extension shall release any bond or other security furnished pursuant to this section. (Code 1989, § 5-47; Ord. No. 207-A, § 9, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-145. - Same—Site preparation. (a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or lessee of the property upon which the building is to be moved shall file with the building official such person's affidavit and a bond or other form of security in favor of the city, conditioned as follows: (1)  Before any work is started on a building or structure to actually move the same onto the site, that the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent has completed fully all required work of site preparation, including, but not limited to, clearing and grading of the land, foundation and supports for the structure and other related preparatory work in accordance with the standards set forth in the city building code as they apply to the type of structure permitted; that the appropriate utility companies have been notified in order that all gas, water, electric and oil pipelines that may be effected or damaged around the site will be disconnected, securely capped and sealed during the time required for the move. (2)  Immediately during site preparation and until the structure is permanently in place, the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent shall securely barricade all basement excavations and other holes or openings on the property. (3)  Within ten days after the moving of any building or structure onto the land, the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent shall complete the following work: a.  Finish all building foundation work according to approved plans and specifications. b.  Have all utilities necessary for the required changes, alterations, additions or repairs to be made turned on and readily available to the structure. c.  Remove all moving equipment, refuse, debris and waste materials used in the move to the property. (b)  The bond required by this section shall be in an amount equal to the cost of the work proposed to be done, as estimated by the building official. (c)  The bond may be in the form of a corporate surety bond, cash deposit, savings and loan certificate, or an instrument of credit. (d)  An extension of time for completion of the work required by this section may be granted by the building official when, in such official's discretion, circumstances justify such an extension; but no such extension shall release any bond or other security furnished pursuant to this section. (Code 1989, § 5-48; Ord. No. 207-A, § 10, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-146. - Control and supervision.     Every building which is moved on, over or through any public street, way or park in the city shall be under the control of the building official and every such building shall be moved in a careful manner and the work shall be prosecuted with diligence and to the satisfaction and approval of the building official. This section in no way relieves the person having charge of the moving of any building of such person's obligation to furnish proper supervision. (Code 1989, § 5-49; Ord. No. 207-A, § 14, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-147. - Notice to city departments.     Notice must be given by the person to whom the permit is issued, or such person's representative, to both the department of public works and the police department of the city not less than 36 hours, nor more than 48 hours, before the actual work of moving a building or structure is to commence. (Code 1989, § 5-50; Ord. No. 207-A, § 15, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-148. - Default in performance of conditions. (a)  Whenever a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee by the building official, such notice to state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed to be reasonably necessary to complete such work. After receipt of such notice, the permittee must, within the time therein specified, either cause the work to be done or pay over to the city clerk the estimated cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice, plus ten percent of such estimated cost. Upon receipt of notice from the city clerk that the permittee has deposited such money, the building official shall cause the required work to be performed and completed. (b)  If the permittee defaults, the city shall have the option, in lieu of completing the work required, to demolish the building or structure or to clear, clean and restore the site. (Code 1989, § 5-51; Ord. No. 207-A, § 16, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-149. - Approval of route.     The streets over which any building or structure is to be moved must be approved by the building official and the chief of police. (Code 1989, § 5-52; Ord. No. 207-A, § 17, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-150. - Obstructing streets.     No person owning or having charge of the moving of any building into, on, over, through, or from any public street, way or park in the city, shall permit such building to remain in any one location on any such street, way or park for a period longer than 24 hours, except by written permission obtained from the chief of police, or to obstruct traffic on any state or federal roadway. (Code 1989, § 5-53; Ord. No. 207-A, § 18, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-151. - Lights and barricades.     The person having charge of the moving of any structure shall maintain proper lights and barricades whenever such structure is on any public street, way or park during the hours of darkness; but such structure shall not be allowed to remain on any state or federal roadway within the corporate limits of the city after dark. (Code 1989, § 5-54; Ord. No. 207-A, § 19, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-152. - Wires and structural supports. (a)  In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been granted hereunder makes it necessary to move, remove or displace any pole or other structure supporting the wires, cables or other equipment of any public utility, cable television company or of the city or to cut, displace or change the location of any wire, cable or other equipment upon such pole or structure, the person to whom such permit has been granted, or such person's authorized representative, shall obtain permission in writing from the owner of such pole or structure or the wires, cables or other equipment thereon, and shall notify such owner at least 48 hours prior to the time that the moving of such building will necessitate the removal of such obstructions. (b)  The person to whom the permit is granted shall not, at the expiration of such time of notice or at any time, cut, move or in any way disturb such public utility, cable television company or city property; and such work shall be done only by the authorized workers of the utility, cable television company or the city, whichever is the owner. (c)  The person to whom such permit is granted shall pay to such public utility, cable television company, or to the city, as the case may be, any and all costs or expense for the removal, rearrangement or replacement of any pole or structural support of wires, cables or equipment thereon or of any damage to such property. (Code 1989, § 5-55; Ord. No. 207-A, § 20, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-153. - Trees, plants and shrubs. (a)  In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been granted hereunder makes it necessary to trim, move, remove or replant any tree, plant or shrub belonging to or under the control of the city, the person to whom such permit has been granted, or the person's authorized representative, shall notify the building official at least 48 hours prior to the time that the moving of such building will necessitate the removal of such obstructions. (b)  The person to whom such permit is granted shall not, at the expiration of such time of notice or at any time, trim, mow, remove, replant or otherwise disturb said trees, plants or shrubs; and such work shall be done only by the authorized workers of the city, unless otherwise approved and so ordered by the building official. (c)  The person to whom such permit is granted shall pay to the city any and all costs or expense for the trimming, moving, removing or replanting of any trees, plants or shrubs or of any damage thereto. (Code 1989, § 5-56; Ord. No. 207-A, § 21, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-154. - Repairs to public property.     In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been granted hereunder causes damage to the public streets or other public property, in addition to any other remedies the city may have, the building official may cause such damage to be repaired and the cost thereof shall be deducted from the deposit required herein, or the building official may require the person to whom such a permit has been granted, or such person's authorized representative, upon written notification from the building official, to make all necessary repairs to such streets or property; provided, however, that should such person to whom the permit has been granted, and to whom such notice has been given, or such person's authorized representative, fail to make such necessary repairs within the period of time designated in such written notice, the said building official may cause such necessary repairs to be made and the cost thereof deducted from the deposit required herein. (Code 1989, § 5-57; Ord. No. 207-A, § 22, 3-25-1985) 
Sec. 8-155. - Refunding of deposits.     When the moving of any building for which a permit has been granted is completed, and all damage to public streets or other public property has been repaired to the satisfaction of the building official, and all costs of repairing damage or performing other work as provided herein have been paid, the deposit as required by section 8-143, or such portion thereof then remaining unused under the provisions of this article, shall be refunded upon surrender of the deposit receipt representing such money so deposited. Should the cost, however, of repairing damages and/or performing other work as in this article provided, exceed the total amount of money deposited, the person to whom such permit was granted shall be held liable for the amount of damage and/or other cost which is in excess of the amount deposited, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk, upon receipt of the request from the director of public works, to collect such part of the claim which is in excess of the deposit from the person to whom the permit was granted; and no occupancy permit for the structure or property shall issue until such delinquency excess is paid in full. (Code 1989, § 5-58; Ord. No. 207-A, § 23, 3-25-1985) 
Secs. 8-156—8-178. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PERMITS 
Sec. 8-179. - Building permit—Required.     It shall be unlawful to construct any building or structure, other than a fence, in the city where the cost of such construction exceeds $100.00 or to alter or remodel any building or structure so as to change the bearing walls, beams, supports or the roof thereof, without having first secured a permit therefor, or in violation of the terms of such permit, or in violation of the terms of this chapter. (Code 1989, § 5-6; Ord. No. 188-A, § 1, 2-28-1983) 
Sec. 8-180. - Same—Plans.     No permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure or for remodeling or repairing affecting bearing walls, roofs other than resurfacing, or chimneys, or for moving a building onto premises in the city, unless the application is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the proposed location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and specifications showing the work to be done. Such plans shall bear the seal or signature of a licensed architect or the person preparing the same. (Code 1989, § 5-7; Ord. No. 188-A, § 2, 2-28-1983) 
Sec. 8-181. - Compliance with other regulations.     All work done under any permit issued shall be in full compliance with the zoning ordinance, the water ordinance, ordinances pertaining to street excavations and all other ordinances pertaining thereto. (Code 1989, § 5-8; Ord. No. 188-A, § 3, 2-28-1983) 
Sec. 8-182. - Stop order. (a)  Whenever any work is being done in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in variance with the terms of any permit issued for such work, the building official may order all work on the job stopped until such violation or variance is eliminated and any work or installation made in violation of this chapter corrected. Such stop order, if oral, shall be followed by a written stop order within 24 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays). (b)  It shall be unlawful to do or perform any work in violation of such stop order, except as may be necessary to prevent injury to persons or damage to property. (c)  Such stop order may be revoked by the building official, the mayor, or the council. (Code 1989, § 5-9; Ord. No. 188-A, § 7, 2-28-1983) 
Sec. 8-183. - Certificate of occupancy.     No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected, altered or repaired shall hereafter be issued unless such building or structure was erected, altered or repaired in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Code 1989, § 5-10; Ord. No. 188-A, § 9, 2-28-1983) 
Sec. 8-184. - Responsibility for compliance with city ordinance, building and construction codes, construction standards, etc. (a)  Party responsible for compliance. The responsibility for compliance with all ordinances, building and construction codes, construction standards, and other authorities shall rest with the owner, developer, contractor or other party engaging in construction or land disturbance activity. (b)  City inspections and considerations for permits not exhaustive. City inspections provide the city with a preliminary review of construction and land disturbance activity within the city. These inspections, however, are not exhaustive and the city does not make exhaustive or continuous on-site inspections of buildings, construction and land disturbance activity. (c)  City not responsible for construction means and methods. The city does not have control over and shall not be responsible for any construction and land disturbance means, methods, techniques, sequences, procedures or safety precautions. Moreover, the city shall not be responsible for any contractor's failure to carry out any work in accordance with city ordinances, applicable building and construction codes, construction standards, plat approval or other applicable authorities. (d)  Issuance of permit or certificate of occupancy. The city's issuance of a building, land disturbance or other permit or certificate of occupancy or other grant or approval shall in no way be a warrant by the city that it has made an exhaustive or continuous on-site inspection of the premises or that it has reviewed the construction means, methods, techniques, sequences, procedures or safety precautions of the construction. In addition, the issuance of a building permit shall not relieve any person from responsibility for complying with the city's ordinances, applicable building and construction codes, construction standards or other applicable authorities. (Code 1989, § 5-11; Ord. No. 270, §§ 1—4, 2-12-1990) 
Chapter 9 - RESERVED 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT BOOKSTORES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Governing authority has power to enact legislation to restrict operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 
Sec. 10-19. - Findings. (a)  The mayor and council find, based upon an October, 1980, study by the Minnesota Crime Prevention Center, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, entitled "An Analysis of the Relationship Between Adult Entertainment Establishments, Crime and Housing Values," that adult bookstores are significantly related to diminishing market values of neighboring residential areas, that adult bookstores should not be located in residential areas, and that adult bookstores should be permitted only in locations that are at least one-tenth-mile, or approximately 500 feet, from residential areas. (b)  The mayor and council further find, based upon a June, 1978, study by the division of planning of the St. Paul, Minnesota Department of Planning and Economic Development and the community crime prevention project of the Minnesota Crime Control Planning Board entitled "Effects on Surrounding Area of Adult Entertainment Businesses in Saint Paul," that the presence of adult bookstores correlates with a decreasing market value of neighboring residential areas. The mayor and council also find that adult bookstores tend to locate in areas of poorer residential condition, and that more than two adult entertainment businesses in an immediate area is associated with a statistically significant decrease in residential property market value, and that such a concentration of adult entertainment businesses in a given area should be discouraged. The mayor and council also find that such worsening of residential conditions will adversely affect uses found in residential areas or in the proximity of residential areas, such as public recreational facilities, public or private institutional uses, churches, schools, universities, colleges, trade schools, libraries, and day care centers. (c)  The mayor and council further find, based upon a May 19, 1986, land use study conducted in Austin, Texas, that an adult bookstore within one block of a residential area decreases the market value of homes, that adult bookstores are considered a sign of decline by lenders, making underwriters hesitant to approve the 90 to 95 percent financing many home buyers require, and that patrons of adult bookstores tend to be from outside the immediate neighborhood in which the adult bookstore is located. (d)  The mayor and council further find, based upon a March 3, 1986, study conducted by the Oklahoma City, Oklahoma Community Development Department entitled "Adult Entertainment Businesses in Oklahoma City—A Survey of Real Estate Appraisers," that an adult bookstore will have a negative effect on residential property market values if it is located closer than one block to residential uses. (e)  The mayor and council further find, based upon a 1983 study conducted in Indianapolis, Indiana, that real estate appraisers there overwhelmingly (80 percent) felt that an adult bookstore located in a neighborhood would have a negative impact on residential property values within one block of the site. Furthermore, a 1984 study entitled "Adult Entertainment Businesses in Indianapolis" found that areas with sexually-oriented businesses had higher crime rates than similar areas with no sexually-oriented businesses. (Code 1989, § 12-185; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 10-20. - Intent. (a)  It is the intent of this article to regulate the place of operation of adult bookstores as defined herein. This article is intended to be a carefully tailored regulation to minimize the adverse land use impacts caused by the undesirable secondary effects of adult bookstores. The mayor and council find that restricting adult bookstores to industrially zoned areas and imposing development standards can legitimately regulate adult bookstores by establishing zones where adult bookstores are most compatible with other uses or the surrounding neighborhood, and by requiring minimum distances to be maintained between adult bookstore uses and other uses, so as to afford the most protection to residential uses. (b)  It is not the intent of the mayor and council, in enacting this article, to deny to any person rights to speech protected by the state constitution or the United States Constitution, nor is it the intent to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented films, videotapes, books, or other materials. Further, the mayor and council do not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain or view any sexually-oriented materials protected by the United States Constitution or the state constitution, nor do they intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually-oriented materials may have to sell, distribute, or exhibit such constitutionally protected materials. Finally, in the enactment of this article, the mayor and council intend to adopt a content neutral measure to address the secondary effects of adult bookstores. (Code 1989, § 12-186; Ord. No. 387, § 2, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 10-21. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which is offered for sale any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct.     Church means a building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.     Licensed day care center means a facility licensed by the state that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than 12 children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers.     Residential, pertaining to the use of land, means premises such as homes, townhomes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums and apartment complexes which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein.     School means a building where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education together with the playgrounds, stadia and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term "school" is limited to: (1)  Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education, in which any regular kindergarten or grades one through 12 classes are taught; and (2)  Special educational facilities in which students who have physical or learning disabilities receive specialized education in lieu of attending regular classes in kindergarten or any of grades one through 12.     Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: (1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic regions; buttocks; or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.     Specified sexual activities means: (1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; (2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; (3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; (4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts; (5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; (6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or (7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. (Code 1989, § 12-187; Ord. No. 387, § 3, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 10-22. - Location; development standards. (a)  The measurement of distances, for purposes of this section, shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible straight line distance, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e., "as the crow flies." The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used, or to be used, as a unit. No adult bookstore shall be located: (1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for residential uses or purposes or used residentially; (2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, licensed day care center, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; (3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult bookstore is located; (4)  Within any zoning category other than industrial (L-I) as defined in article VI of the zoning ordinance. (b)  The minimum lot area for an adult bookstore shall be one acre. (c)  Adult bookstores shall be required to be on lots that have a minimum of 150 feet of road frontage on a public road, street or highway. Such establishments shall have a minimum of two driveways, which shall provide access to a public road, street or highway. (d)  In addition to development standards governing the L-I zoning district, buildings and structures established in connection with an adult bookstore shall be set back at least 40 feet from any other business establishment, and the minimum rear yard shall be 75 feet. (e)  Adult bookstores shall be required to provide one automobile parking space for each 25 square feet of gross building area or for every three customer seats, whichever results in the greater number of parking spaces. (f)  Adult bookstores shall not allow the depictions of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities to be visible from any point outside the structure. (Code 1989, § 12-188; Ord. No. 387, § 4, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 10-23. - Violation; penalties.     Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount according to the penalties described in section 1-8; and each violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such; and each day that a violation continues shall be punishable as a separate offense. (Code 1989, § 12-189; Ord. No. 387, § 5, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 10-24. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance.     Any adult bookstore operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove the adult bookstore and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining the adult bookstore contrary to the provisions of this article. (Code 1989, § 12-190; Ord. No. 387, § 6, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 10-25. - Miscellaneous.     Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise declared to be obscene or illegal by this Code or the statutes of the state, or in violation of any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity as provided for in such city Code or statutes of the state; and further, the location of the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. This section shall supersede and limit all other provisions of this article. (Code 1989, § 12-191; Ord. No. 387, § 7, 4-7-1997) 
Secs. 10-26—10-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Establishment, maintenance, or use of building, structure, or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1; prohibited conduct, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41; governing authority has power to enact legislation to restrict operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 10-54. - Findings; public purpose.     The mayor and city council find that public nudity (either partial or total) in so-called nude bars or establishments offering so-called nude entertainment or adult entertainment, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. This finding is based upon the experiences of other communities and municipalities, and upon the evidence and testimony of citizens and experts who have appeared before the mayor and council. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with such establishments are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with such establishments are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditures for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Accordingly, it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to enact regulations to reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. However, the mayor and council also find that the outright prohibition of such establishments could improperly infringe upon protected forms of expression. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to reasonably regulate adult entertainment establishments in a manner that serves the legitimate governmental interest of reducing criminal activity and protecting property values without unreasonably infringing upon the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and their patrons. (Code 1989, § 12-101; Ord. No. 289, § 1, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-55. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of specified anatomical areas. Adult entertainment includes performances by persons that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities as defined herein, and/or performances that feature, depict, display, or emphasize their genitals, pubic regions, anuses, or female breasts, even if their specified anatomical areas are opaquely covered as provided herein.     Adult entertainment establishment or establishment . The term "adult entertainment establishment" or "establishment" means: (1)  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity, in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas, as defined herein; (2)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume, or clothing as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas as defined herein, or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities as defined herein; (3)  Any commercial establishment in which persons perform live in a manner so as to feature, depict, display, or emphasize their genitals, pubic regions, anuses, or female breasts, even if their specified anatomical areas are opaquely covered as provided herein; (4)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors, or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1), (2), and/or (3) of this definition; (5)  Any commercial establishment having a substantial portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities as defined herein or specified anatomical areas as defined herein, or having a segment or section comprising more than 50 square feet of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material, or which utilizes 25 percent or more of its display area for the display or offer for sale or rental such media or materials, or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; (6)  The definition of the term "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or mainstream theater, which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution, or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. For purposes of this subsection, such performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise at least 80 percent of all annual performances or showings.     Church means a building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.     Good moral character. A person is of good moral character, according to this article, if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five years.     Licensed day care center means a facility licensed by the state that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than 12 children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers.     Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years.     Operator means the manager or other natural person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment.     Owner or owners means the proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all partners (general and limited) if a partnership, or all officers, directors and persons holding ten percent or more of the outstanding shares, if a corporation.     Residential , pertaining to the use of land, means premises such as homes, townhomes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums and apartment complexes which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein.     School means a building where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education together with the playgrounds, stadia and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term "school" is limited to: (1)  Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education, in which any regular kindergarten or grades one through 12 classes are taught; and (2)  Special educational facilities in which students who have physical or learning disabilities receive specialized education in lieu of attending regular classes in kindergarten or any of grades one through 12.     Specified anatomical areas . The term "specified anatomical areas" includes any of the following: (1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic regions; buttocks; or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.     Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: (1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or (2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; (3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; (4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts; (5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; (6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or (7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. (Code 1989, § 12-102; Ord. No. 289, § 2, 9-9-1991; Ord. No. 321, §§ 1, 2, 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 10-56. - Regulations. (a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment license issued pursuant to this article. (b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the city clerk certifying the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. (c)  No adult entertainment establishment shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not permitted pursuant to this article. (d)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. (e)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be closed between 12:00 midnight and 9:00 a.m. (f)  No patron, dancer or other employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. For the purposes of this section, the term "employee" includes an independent contractor. (g)  If any portion or subsection of this section of this article, or its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (h)  No adult entertainment establishment shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance on the premises of the adult entertainment establishment. (i)  All dance performances shall be confined to a clearly defined stage or platform area that is elevated at least two feet above the normal floor level of the establishment. (j)  There shall be a clearly defined and delineated ten-foot buffer area or space between the stage or platform and any area of the establishment in which patrons are customarily seated in or served. (k)  No patron or dancer shall encroach upon the buffer area during a performance. (l)  Dancers and patrons are prohibited from commingling with or touching one another while the dancers are in a state of nudity. (m)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer, and no dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. (n)  All areas of an adult entertainment establishment shall be fully lighted at all times when patrons are present. The term "fully lighted" shall mean illumination equal to not less than 3½ footcandles per square foot. (Code 1989, § 12-103; Ord. No. 289, § 3, 9-9-1991; Ord. No. 321, § 3, 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 10-57. - On-premises operator required.     An adult entertainment establishment shall designate a natural person to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises on a regular basis. (Code 1989, § 12-104; Ord. No. 289, § 5, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-58. - Employee permit required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed by an adult entertainment establishment without a permit issued under the terms of this article. For the purposes of this section, the term "employee" includes an independent contractor. (Code 1989, § 12-105; Ord. No. 289, § 6, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-59. - Admission of minors unlawful. (a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of age to enter or be on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment at any time that the establishment is open for business. (b)  It shall be the duty of the operator of each adult entertainment establishment to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the establishment at all times during such establishment's regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendants to not allow any person under the age of 18 years to enter the establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 years unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: (1)  A valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's driver's license; or (2)  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state department of public safety reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older. (Code 1989, § 12-106; Ord. No. 289, § 7, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-60. - Location; development standards. (a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: (1)  Within 750 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for residential uses or purposes; (2)  Within 750 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, licensed day care center, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; (3)  Within 750 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment is located; (4)  Within any zoning category other than industrial (L-I). The measurement of distances for purposes of this section shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible straight line distance, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e., "as the crow flies." The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. (b)  The minimum lot area for an adult entertainment establishment shall be one acre. (c)  Adult entertainment establishments shall be required to be on lots that have a minimum of 150 feet of road frontage on a public road, street or highway. Such establishments shall have a minimum of two driveways, which shall provide access to a public road, street or highway. (d)  In addition to development standards governing the L-I and C-2 zoning districts, buildings and structures established in connection with an adult entertainment establishment shall be set back at least 40 feet from any other business establishment, and the minimum rear yard shall be 75 feet. (e)  Adult entertainment establishments shall be required to provide one automobile parking space for each 25 square feet of gross building area or for every three customer seats, whichever results in the greater number of parking spaces. (f)  Adult entertainment establishments shall not allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from any point outside such establishment. (Code 1989, § 12-107; Ord. No. 289, § 8, 9-9-1991; Ord. No. 321, § 3, 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 10-61. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. (a)  Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter be employed by any adult entertainment establishment licensed under this article for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty. The term "employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. (b)  Before any person may be employed in an adult entertainment establishment, he shall file an application for an adult entertainment establishment employee permit with the city clerk on forms that require the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section. Each such person shall also provide a signed and notarized consent on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center authorizing the release of such person's criminal records to the police department. The city shall have 15 days to investigate the information contained in the application. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the city clerk shall grant the permit. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the city clerk for a hearing. The decision of the licensing officer after hearing may be appealed to city council. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the application. (c)  The license of any employee who violates the provisions of this article, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall be subject to suspension or revocation. (d)  For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. (Code 1989, § 12-108; Ord. No. 289, § 9, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-62. - Criminal penalties. (a)  Any person, firm or corporation operating an adult entertainment establishment within the city without having obtained a license as provided in this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount according to penalties described in section 1-8; and each day the adult entertainment establishment is operated without a license shall be a separate offense. (b)  Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount according to penalties described in section 1-8; and each violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (Code 1989, § 12-109; Ord. No. 289, § 18, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-63. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance.     Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. (Code 1989, § 12-110; Ord. No. 289, § 19, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-64. - Notices; registered agent; jurisdiction. (a)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the licensee may be served. This person shall act as a registered agent for the operator and each owner. This person must be a natural person who is a resident of the county. The operator shall be appointed registered agent if he is a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city clerk in such form as the clerk may prescribe. By appointing such registered agent, and as a condition of the issuance of a license pursuant to the terms of this article, the licensee agrees that any legal action brought by the city against the adult entertainment establishment or the licensee (which includes the operator or any owner) to enforce the provisions of this article may be filed in any court of competent jurisdiction in the county. (b)  Any notice required or permitted to be given by the city clerk or any other city office, division, department or other agency under this article to any licensee, operator or owner of an adult entertainment establishment may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee's registered agent at the most recent address specified in the agent's written consent form received by the city clerk, or any notice of address change which has been received by the city clerk. If personally delivered, the effective date of the notice shall be the date of delivery. If mailed, the effective date of the notice shall be two days after the notice is placed in the mail. (Code 1989, § 12-111; Ord. No. 289, § 20, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-65. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment. (a)  All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all ordinances and regulations of the city, county and state. (b)  The county health department shall have the authority to inspect regularly adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all city, county and state health rules and regulations and report any violation to the city clerk. (c)  The city fire department shall have the authority to inspect regularly adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all city, county and state fire regulations and report any violations to the city clerk. (d)  The building inspector or his designee shall have the authority to inspect regularly adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all technical codes of the city. (e)  The city police department shall have the authority to inspect periodically adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all provisions of this article or other applicable laws and report any violations to the city clerk. (Code 1989, § 12-112; Ord. No. 289, § 20, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-66. - Limitations on provisions.     Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise declared to be obscene or illegal by the official Code of the city or the statutes of the state, or in violation of any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity as provided for in such city Code or statutes of the state; and further, the location of the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. This section shall supersede and limit all other provisions of this article. (Code 1989, § 12-113; Ord. No. 289, § 22, 9-9-1991) 
Secs. 10-67—10-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
Sec. 10-91. - Required.     It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, an adult entertainment establishment without a license to so do. The issuance of such a license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity or conduct that is illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. The annual license fee for an adult entertainment establishment shall be established, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. (Code 1989, § 12-121; Ord. No. 289, § 4, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-92. - Application—Generally. (a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk, or his designated representative. The application must be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment, the operator and each owner, as defined in this article, of the adult entertainment establishment. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee, established from time to time by resolution of the city council, to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. (b)  The license application does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. (Code 1989, § 12-122; Ord. No. 289, § 10, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-93. - Same—Contents. (a)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information and documentation: (1)  The name, street address (and mailing address, if different) and state driver's license number of the intended operator. (2)  The name and street address (and mailing address, if different) of the owner. (3)  The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided. (4)  The telephone number of the establishment. (5)  The address and legal description of the parcel of land on which the establishment is to be located. (6)  The business, occupation or employment history of each owner and operator for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. (7)  If any owner or operator has had an adult entertainment establishment license or similar type of license denied, revoked or suspended, and if so, the violation that led to the denial, suspension or revocation, the date of the denial, suspension or violation, the disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed, and whether or not the terms of the disposition have been completed. (8)  If any owner or operator has been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past five years, and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed, and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. (9)  If the establishment is or proposes to do business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. (10)  If the establishment is a Georgia corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto; and the most recent annual report. (11)  If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all amendments thereto, and the most recent annual report. (12)  If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of Georgia, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the county clerk. (13)  If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto. (14)  Three character references for each owner and operator from individuals who are not related by blood or marriage to any owner or operator, who will not directly or indirectly benefit financially if the license is granted, and who have not been convicted of any crime involving good moral character. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicants, who shall submit all character references on such forms. (15)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, certifying the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 10-60 respecting location and development standards. (16)  The application shall contain a statement under oath that: a.  The person signing the application has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; and b.  The person signing the application has read the provisions of this article. (17)  The application shall be signed by each owner and the operator. (18)  Each owner and operator shall provide a signed and notarized consent on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center authorizing the release of each such person's criminal records to the police department. (19)  The written consent of a county resident certifying that such resident shall serve as registered agent for each owner and operator, as required by section 10-64(a). (b)  Any of subsections (a)(9) through (13) of this section shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished the city clerk with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current. (Code 1989, § 12-123; Ord. No. 289, § 11, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-94. - Owner and operator to appear.     At least one owner, as defined in this article, and the operator shall personally appear at the public hearing scheduled pursuant to section 10-95 for consideration of the application. (Code 1989, § 12-124; Ord. No. 289, § 12, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-95. - Investigation. (a)  Within 15 days of receipt of the application, the city clerk or designee shall review the application and shall send a copy to all affected departments of city government to determine compliance with city regulations and laws and to the police department to investigate the character and reputation of each owner and operator. Each department notified shall submit a report within 15 days to the city clerk. If no report is received, it shall be concluded that there is no objection. (b)  The city clerk shall prepare and cause to be published a notice of each pending application, which notice shall include the date the application will be considered by the council, the location or street number of the premises where the applicant proposes to conduct activities permitted by this article, and the name of each owner and operator. The applicant shall pay the publication costs. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and shall appear once a week for two weeks immediately preceding consideration of the application by the council. Each applicant for a license for an adult entertainment establishment shall, at such applicant's expense, post on the premises where the activities permitted by such license are to be conducted, continuously for a period of not less than ten days prior to consideration of the application by the council, a notice of the pending application, meeting the following minimum specifications: this notice shall be painted or printed in black letters three inches or more in height, against a white background, on a wooden or metal sign and having a surface of not less than 12 square feet, and shall be placed with the base of the sign not more than three feet from the ground on the most conspicuous part of the premises, facing the most frequently traveled road, street or highway abutting same, and not more than ten feet therefrom. The sign shall state clearly the nature and purpose of the application, the date and hour and place of the council hearing, and the name of each owner and operator making the application. (c)  The mayor and council may grant the license following the public hearing if they find: (1)  The required fee has been paid. (2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. (3)  No owner or operator knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. (4)  Each owner and operator has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. (5)  Each owner and operator is of good moral character as defined in this article. (6)  No owner or operator has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked for cause involving moral character by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. (7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of the adult entertainment establishment, as proposed by the applicant, will comply with all applicable city zoning and development standards. (8)  Each owner who is a natural person and the operator is at least 21 years of age. (9)  No owner or operator is a city employee or an elected or appointed city official, or a spouse of an elected or appointed city official. (10)  No owner or operator has, within five years of the date of application, committed or knowingly allowed another to commit the crime of public indecency, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-6, upon the premises of an adult entertainment establishment or similar business. (11)  The location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment is not inconsistent with the provisions of section 10-60 respecting location and development standards. (12)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state, or the United States. (13)  The registered agent's written consent has been provided. (d)  If the license is approved it shall be issued jointly in the name of the establishment and each owner and operator. (e)  The issuance of an adult entertainment establishment license shall not authorize any other conduct or activity regulated by other city ordinances, including, but not limited to, the alcoholic beverage provisions in chapter 4. Applicants desiring to obtain an alcoholic beverage license or other such license shall submit a separate application for each such license, and must independently satisfy all conditions of each applicable ordinance. (f)  As a condition to the issuance of a license, the establishment shall post with the city clerk a $10,000.00 cash bond or surety bond payable to the city and conditioned upon the licensee's faithful performance of the provisions of this article. All surety bonds shall be issued by a surety licensed to do business in the state and listed on the U.S. Treasury list as an approved surety. (Code 1989, § 12-125; Ord. No. 289, § 13, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-96. - Renewal.     Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a calendar year basis, provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be established, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to January 1 of the year for which such permit is requested. The form for renewal applications shall be designated by the city clerk. (Code 1989, § 12-126; Ord. No. 289, § 14, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-97. - Non-transferable.     No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued. (Code 1989, § 12-127; Ord. No. 289, § 15, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-98. - Change of location or name of establishment. (a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city, and approval has been obtained from the mayor and council. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in this Code, have been met. (b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the license. (c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. (Code 1989, § 12-128; Ord. No. 289, § 16, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-99. - Revocation and appeal. (a)  The director of public safety shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license under the conditions set forth in this section. In the event the city clerk seeks to suspend or to revoke a license, the city clerk shall give written notification to the licensee of such action, and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations. (b)  The city clerk shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license in the event of any one or more of the following: (1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application or renewal process; (2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises, or the licensee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent any such occurrence; (3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed a violation of this article, any other ordinance of the city, or any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises, or the licensee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent any such violation; (4)  A licensee has violated any provision of this article; (5)  A licensee has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the state or the city regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; and (6)  A licensee fails to pay any fee, license fee, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other licensing ordinance of the city. (c)  In the event that the city clerk determines that a license violation has occurred, such license shall be suspended for ten days for the first violation. For a second violation occurring within any consecutive 12-month period, the license shall be suspended for 30 days. For a third violation occurring within any consecutive 12-month period, the license shall be suspended for 90 days. Any license that has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period shall be revoked. In addition, any licensee found to be in violation of section 10-56(d) and (f) shall be subject to immediate license revocation; provided, however, that the licensee shall be authorized to continue its business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (e) hereafter. No licensee or any other applicant may apply for a license for the same premises during any period of suspension or revocation. (d)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the city clerk, the licensee may appeal the decision of the city clerk to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days from the date of the effective date of the written notice received by the licensee in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The city clerk may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the licensee on appeal to the city council. The city clerk's decision shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall stay the city clerk's decision until the appeal is heard or withdrawn. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the appeal. (e)  When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: (1)  Set a hearing date before the city council and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; or (2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. In either event, the hearing shall be held within 30 days of the council's action, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the licensee and the city clerk. (f)  At any hearing, the hearing officer or the city council (if it elects not to appoint a hearing officer) shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the appeal. Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the hearing officer or city council, which shall be consistent with rules applied in administrative proceedings, and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. (g)  If the hearing is held before the city council, the city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action of the city clerk. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. Appeals from the decision of the mayor and city council shall be to the county superior court filed within 30 days of the final action of the mayor and city council. (h)  If the hearing is held before the hearing officer, the hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 15 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and a recommendation. The report may recommend that the council sustain, overrule or modify the action of the city clerk. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city administrator and chief of police. The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting, unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. (i)  The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. The council shall base its determination on the hearing officer's report and other evidence in the record. No additional evidence or arguments shall be permitted at the council meeting. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: (1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a de novo hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points, and in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. (2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. (Code 1989, § 12-129; Ord. No. 289, § 17, 9-9-1991) 
Secs. 10-100—10-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ASTROLOGERS 
Sec. 10-127. - Astrologers, etc. (a)  Definition. The term "astrologer" shall include the terms "clairvoyant," "mesmerist," "card reader," "fortuneteller," "mind reader," "planet reader," "palmist," "seer," "trance medium," "test medium," "business medium," "phrenologist," "hypnotic healer," and "electric magnetic healer." (b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to practice in the city the calling or profession of astrologer. (c)  Advertising. It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise by sign, circular, handbill, newspaper or other publication in the city the practice of astrology. (d)  Exception. The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply to any religious or spiritual functions of a bona fide church or religion, unless it is an alleged church or religion organized primarily to confer a certificate or commission upon a person for a price. (Code 1989, § 12-20; Ord. No. 205, §§ 1—4, 2-11-1985) State Law reference— Fortunetelling, phrenology, astrology, clairvoyance, etc., regulated, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-15. 
Secs. 10-128—10-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70 et seq. 
Sec. 10-153. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine means every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket, or similar object and the result of whose operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b) through (g), and which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law.     Business location means any structure, vehicle or establishment where a business is conducted.     Class B machine means a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine that allows a successful player to accrue points won on one play to a subsequent play or plays, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(2).     Location owner or location operator means an owner or operator of a business where one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public. (Code 1989, § 12-207; Ord. No. 647, § 1, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 10-154. - Authorization.     A business owner or business operator whose business location is located within the city limits of the city may have available for use the number of Class B bona fide coin-operated amusement machines in one business location that he deems advisable (which may be in excess of nine); provided, however, each Class B bona fide coin-operated amusement machine shall meet the following criteria: (1)  It rewards the player or players with tickets, tokens, or other non-cash representations of value redeemable for merchandise prizes; (2)  The outcome of the game involves some skill in its operation; (3)  The award of tickets, tokens or other non-cash representations of value is based solely on the player achieving the object of the game or the player's score; (4)  Only merchandise prizes and novelty candy may be redeemed; (5)  The average wholesale value of the prizes awarded in lieu of tickets or tokens for a single play of the machine does not exceed $5.00; and (6)  The redemption value of each ticket, token or other non-cash representation of value that may be accumulated by a player or players to redeem prizes of greater value does not exceed the cost of a single play of the machine. (Code 1989, § 12-208; Ord. No. 647, § 1, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 10-155—10-176. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SALES 
Sec. 10-177. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Licensed solicitor means any person who has obtained a valid permit as hereinafter provided, which permit is in the possession of the solicitor on his person while engaged in soliciting.     Residence means every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons contained within any type of building or structure.     Soliciting means any one or more of the following activities: (1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, or services of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; (2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or publication; or (3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. (Code 1989, § 12-51; Ord. No. 683, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 10-178. - Penalties.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished according to the penalties described in section 1-8. Each day any violation of any provision of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1989, § 12-52; Ord. No. 683, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 10-179. - Permit required. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of soliciting or calling on residences door-to-door without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the provisions contained in this article. (b)  The requirement of subsection (a) of this section is meant to apply to door-to-door solicitations for commercial transactions for profit only. The requirement: (1)  Is not meant to regulate solicitation for charitable, political or other nonprofit purposes, provided that all sales proceeds are the property of and used by the nonprofit organization. (2)  Does not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. (c)  Each person shall, at all times while soliciting in the city, carry upon his person the permit so issued and the same shall be exhibited by such solicitor whenever he is requested to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited. (d)  Each permit issued shall contain the name of the solicitor, the name and address of the person or association by whom the solicitor is employed or represents, and a photograph of the solicitor. Solicitors shall make themselves available for photographing and such other investigation as may be required by the city. Each permit shall be worn by the solicitor during all solicitation activities. The permit shall be pinned or otherwise conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the shirt, blouse or other garment worn by the solicitor so that the permit is easily seen by the public. (e)  The permit shall state the expiration date thereof. In no event shall a permit be valid for more than 30 days. (Code 1989, § 12-53; Ord. No. 683, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 10-180. - Permit applications. (a)  Application for a permit shall be made to the director of public safety upon a form provided by the city. The director of public safety, or his designee, shall have applications available on request. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application as follows: (1)  Name and address of the present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address, if other than the present address; (2)  Addresses of places of residence during the past three years, if other than present address; (3)  Age of the applicant; (4)  Physical description of the applicant; (5)  Name and address of the person or association by whom the applicant is employed or represents and the length of time of such employment or representation; (6)  Names and addresses of employers during the past three years, if other than the present employer; (7)  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage; (8)  Period of time for which the certificate is applied; (9)  Proposed routes, including streets to be included on each day, which the applicant intends to follow; (10)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for permit under this article, if any; (11)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, a crime of moral turpitude or any other violation of any state or federal law; (12)  Names of magazines, books or journals to be sold; (13)  Names of the three most recent communities where the applicant has solicited house-to-house; (14)  Proposed method of operation; (15)  Description and license plate number of vehicles intended to be operated by the applicant; (16)  Signature of applicant; and (17)  Social security number of the applicant. (b)  All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. (c)  The applicant shall submit to finger printing and a background investigation by the director of public safety or his designee. (d)  The director of public safety or his designee shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all permits issued under the provisions of this article, and of the denial of applications. Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every permit issued shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. (e)  No permit shall be issued to any person: (1)  Who has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within five years of the date of the application; (2)  Who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article; or (3)  Whose permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided. (f)  The non-refundable fee for a permit for a 30-day period for each solicitor shall be as established by resolution. (Code 1989, § 12-54; Ord. No. 683, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 10-181. - Permit denial, suspension or revocation; hearings. (a)  Any permit issued hereunder shall be suspended or revoked by the director of public safety or his designee if the applicant or holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms of this article. Should the director of public safety, or his designee, deny an application under this article, written notice of the denial shall be provided to the applicant by the director of public safety, or his designee, setting forth the reason for the denial, and advise the applicant of the right to appeal said decision to the city administrator within ten days of the director of public safety's denial. (b)  Whenever the director of public safety or his designee determines there is cause to suspend or revoke a permit issued hereunder, the director of public safety, or his designee, shall give the permit holder written notice at least 15 days prior to an administrative hearing of the time, place, purpose of the hearing, and a statement of the grounds for suspension or revocation. The applicant or permit holder shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard and present evidence at the hearing. (c)  The director of public safety, or his designee, shall reach a decision on the matter before him within ten days following the close of the hearing and give written notice of said decision. The decision of the director of public safety or his designee shall be final unless the permit holder files a written notice of appeal to the city administrator within three days of receiving notice of said decision. (d)  The city administrator or designated hearing officer shall hear appeals to decisions by the director of public safety, or his designee, to deny applications for permits, as well as appeals to decisions by the director of public safety, or his designee, to suspend or revoke permits. (e)  Applicants or permit holders shall be given ten days prior written notice of the date, time, and place when the appeal will be heard by the city administrator or designated hearing officer. The applicant or permit holder shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard and present evidence at the hearing. (f)  Upon the close of the hearing, the city administrator or hearing officer shall reach a decision on the matter before him, and the decision of the city administrator or hearing officer shall be final. The applicant or permit holder may appeal to the county superior court by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city administrator or hearing officer. (Code 1989, § 12-55; Ord. No. 683, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 10-182. - Routes.     To the extent practical, each solicitor shall identify the streets and routes which he will follow on each day he is engaged in the business of soliciting. If changes in routes are made, then such changes must be immediately reported to the director of public safety's office. (Code 1989, § 12-56; Ord. No. 683, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 10-183. - Prohibitions. (a)  Any licensed solicitor who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or misrepresentation, whether by himself or through an employee, while acting as a solicitor in the city, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article. (b)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting, as herein defined, if the occupant of said residence has made it clear, by written sign or by filing a written "no solicitation" notice with the department of public safety, that solicitors are not invited. The written sign may be posted on the premises and/or at the main entrances to the subdivision or neighborhood. The department of public safety shall maintain a list of addresses of residents having filed a "no solicitation" notice with the department. The department shall provide a copy of such list to each solicitor. (c)  Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. (d)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether licensed under this article or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting, as herein defined, prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. (Code 1989, § 12-57; Ord. No. 683, 10-7-2013) 
Secs. 10-184—10-206. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HOUSE MOVERS 
Sec. 10-207. - House movers. (a)  License required. It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of house moving, or raising or shoring structures without first having secured a license therefor. Application for such license shall be made in writing to the city clerk. (b)  Fee. The fees for such licenses shall be $5.00 for a daily license; or in accordance with the existing established license fees and taxes set forth under "Class II Services" by employee, whichever amount is larger. (c)  Regulations. Persons licensed under this section must comply with all the ordinance provisions relating to the work being done, and must pay the permit fee required for moving buildings, and must keep lights and warnings maintained as is required by ordinance. (d)  Inspections. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this section. (e)  Bond. Every person licensed under the provisions of this section shall file with the clerk a bond in the sum of $5,000.00 with sureties to be approved by the city council, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss, damage or expense occasioned by such person, by any act or failure to act of the licensee, or by any failure of the licensee to comply with the ordinances of the city relating to the business of house moving, or raising or shoring structures. (f)  Planking street. The pavement of any street, alley or sidewalk on or along which any house is moved shall be protected by two-inch planks along the route; provided, however, that where the structure moved is conveyed on a trailer or truck equipped with pneumatic tires, in compliance with the state traffic law, such planking shall be unnecessary. (Code 1989, § 12-19; Ord. No. 173, § 15, 1-22-1980; Ord. No. 207, 3-25-1985) 
Secs. 10-208—10-237. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - INDOOR SHOOTING RANGES[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; discharge of firearm on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105; Georgia Firearms and Weapons Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq.; sport shooting ranges not deemed nuisances as result of changed circumstances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-9. 
Sec. 10-238. - Indoor shooting ranges permitted.     Indoor shooting ranges (hereinafter referred to as "ranges") are hereby allowed in the city, subject to the terms, conditions and regulations set out and specified in this section. The term "range" is defined as a room, place or enclosure wherein the firing of firearms is permitted to practice marksmanship. (Code 1989, § 12-141; Ord. No. 290, § 1, 11-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-239. - License required.     It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to operate a range within the city without a license to do so. The annual license fee for the operation of a range shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The initial annual license fee shall be $100.00. The annual license fee shall be due and payable on or before the first business day of January of each year. (Code 1989, § 12-142; Ord. No. 290, § 2, 11-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-240. - Licensee qualifications. (a)  No license to operate a range shall be granted to any person who, within five years prior to the filing of the application for such license, has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any offense involving the possession or use of firearms, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or of any felony. For the purposes of this section, a plea of nolo contendere shall constitute a conviction. (b)  No license for operation of a range shall be granted to any person who has had any city license revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. (Code 1989, § 12-143; Ord. No. 290, § 3, 11-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-241. - License application. (a)  Every applicant for a license shall make written application to the city clerk on forms prescribed by the city clerk. All applications shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of $100.00, to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded, but the $100.00 investigative fee shall be retained. (b)  Every application for a license shall be accompanied by one or more fully completed background questionnaires on forms prescribed by the city clerk. The background questionnaire shall be completed by the owner and primary operator of the range. If the owner is a corporation or partnership, each officer and director of the corporation and each general partner of the partnership shall provide a background questionnaire. (c)  The city clerk, or his designee, shall review the application and shall send a copy to all affected departments of city government to determine compliance with city regulations and laws, and to the police department to investigate the character and reputation of the applicant and other parties required to submit background questionnaires. (Code 1989, § 12-144; Ord. No. 290, § 4, 11-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-242. - General regulations for ranges. (a)  Buildings containing ranges shall have walls, ceilings and floors that are either impenetrable to the bullets of the firearms being used within it, or have internal baffling built so that the bullets cannot hit the walls or ceilings. Provisions shall also be made to stop glancing bullets or particles of bullets at the sides of the target area. (b)  A system of ventilation shall be installed within the range in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (c)  The range shall be so constructed and insulated that the discharge of firearms within it shall not disturb persons outside the premises. The discharge of firearms shall be deemed to constitute a disturbance if the noise level exceeds 55 decibels at a distance of 50 feet or more from the building containing the range. Sound measurements shall be made with a sound level meter. (d)  Hearing protectors which fully cover the shooters' ears will be provided by the range and made available for all shooters or other persons in the firing area. (e)  There shall be one instructor for each five firing points in use. All instructors will be required to be certified by the National Rifle Association or similar organization satisfactory to the city. The owner of the range shall require personnel, instructors and attendants to be at least 18 years of age. (f)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to enter a range unless accompanied by an adult. (g)  No weapons, other than handguns or rim fire rifles with a .22 caliber or less, shall be allowed on the premises. All weapons brought into the range shall be in a case designed for the weapons so that no parts of the weapons will be visible. Certified law enforcement officers are exempt from the provisions of this article. (h)  Loaded weapons shall only be allowed in the firing area of the range and shall not be permitted in any other place inside the building or premises or within the property boundaries outside the building. (i)  Not more than one person shall shoot from a firing point at one time. All of the persons except instructors must stand behind the firing point. No person shall be allowed in front of a firing point at any time during operating hours except instructors and/or employees and law enforcement officers. (j)  An emergency system shall be installed within each range, capable of alerting the people on the range to stop firing immediately. (k)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a range to permit any person to bring any alcoholic beverages on the premises of any range, or to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises or to permit alcoholic beverages to be left at any place on the premises. It shall also be unlawful for any person operating a range to permit any intoxicated person to be or remain in the premises of a range. (l)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a range to permit any form of gambling or wagering. (m)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee or instructor to brief patrons concerning the rules and regulations in the range before they are permitted to use the firing range. The licensee shall keep posted in a conspicuous place inside the building and outside the building a sign stating the rules and regulations of the range. (n)  All ranges shall be subject to all requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. (Code 1989, § 12-145; Ord. No. 290, § 5, 11-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-243. - Location; hours of operation. (a)  No range shall be located within 500 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for residential uses or purposes. No range shall be located within any zoning category other than industrial (L-I) as defined in article VI of the city zoning ordinance. In addition, the operation of a range within the L-I zoning district shall require a conditional use permit. The measurement of distances, for the purposes of this section, shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible straight line distance, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e., "as the crow flies." (b)  No range shall be open for business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. (Code 1989, § 12-146; Ord. No. 290, § 6, 11-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-244. - Suspension or revocation of license.     The city clerk may suspend or revoke the license of any licensee found to have violated any provision of this article. However, no license shall be suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing before the city council. Any licensee desiring a hearing shall, within 15 days of being notified of an ordinance violation, file a written petition for a hearing in the office of the city clerk. A hearing shall be conducted by the city council within 30 days of the filing of the petition, unless a continuation of such date is agreed to by the licensee and the city clerk. The licensee shall have the right to be represented by an attorney at the hearing, at the expense of the licensee. The findings of the city council shall be forwarded to the city clerk after the conclusion of the hearing and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify the licensee of the action of the city council. The findings of the city council shall be final. The findings of the city council may be appealed to the superior court of the county within 30 days of the date of the findings; provided, however, that the findings shall not be set aside unless found to be contrary to law or ordinance, or unsupported by any evidence on the record as a whole. For the purposes of this section, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. (Code 1989, § 12-147; Ord. No. 290, § 7, 11-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-245. - Criminal penalties. (a)  Any person, firm or corporation operating a range within the municipality without having obtained a license as provided for in this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount according to the penalties described in section 1-8; and each day the range is operated without a license shall be a separate offense. (b)  Any licensee who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount according to the penalties described in section 1-8; and each violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (Code 1989, § 12-148; Ord. No. 290, § 8, 11-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-246. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance.     Any range operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. (Code 1989, § 12-149; Ord. No. 290, § 9, 11-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-247. - Liability insurance; bond. (a)  The owner of the range, whether an individual, or corporate or other business entity, shall carry liability insurance protecting the general public and users of the range against any injury resulted from the discharge of firearms in the range in the amount of not less than $500,000.00 for bodily injury and $100,000.00 for property damage. (b)  As a condition to the issuance of a license, each licensee shall post with the city clerk a $500.00 cash or surety bond payable to the city and conditioned upon the licensee's faithful performance of all provisions of this article. All surety bonds shall be issued by a surety licensed to do business in the state and listed on the U.S. Treasury list as an approved surety. (Code 1989, § 12-150; Ord. No. 290, § 10, 11-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-248. - Miscellaneous.     The provisions of this article regulating the operation of ranges are declared to be the minimum standards for the operation of a range. The operator of a range shall also be required to comply with any applicable county, state or federal regulations. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity which is otherwise declared to be unlawful by any applicable county, state or federal regulation. (Code 1989, § 12-151) 
Secs. 10-249—10-274. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MASSAGE AND SPA ESTABLISHMENTS[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- State Law reference— Massage therapy practice, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22 et seq. 
Sec. 10-275. - Purpose and legislative findings.     The Georgia General Assembly has declared that the practice of massage therapy is an activity affecting the public interest and involving the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and that the practice of massage therapy by a person who is not licensed under the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.) is a public nuisance, and harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The city council agrees with those findings. Furthermore, the city council finds that, for many massage establishments, the business in fact is sexual conduct or the intimation of sexual conduct, rather than lawful massage therapy. Such establishments offer massage services as a subterfuge for prostitution, masturbation for hire, and other paid sexual contact, which are harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. There is difficulty and expense in conclusively distinguishing between such establishments and legitimate massage establishments, but one rational distinction is whether the establishment has a relationship with a corporate or franchising hierarchy, which would tend to safeguard against unlawful sexual activities on the massage establishment premises. It is a purpose of this article to impose licensing requirements to help prevent illegal massage, prostitution, and related sex crimes, yet without hindering legitimate massage establishments operating under a business structure with external oversight that serves that purpose. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22 (allowing local regulation of massage businesses and of persons not licensed by the state), it is the purpose of this article to regulate the operation of massage establishments and spa establishments, and to regulate employees of such establishments who are not licensed as massage therapists by the state, as an exercise of the city's police power in order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-161, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-276. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Applicant means any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity applying for a license to operate a massage establishment or spa establishment, as defined herein, or a person applying for a work permit, as provided for herein.     Employee means any person who performs any service on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment, on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, apprentice, trainee, or otherwise. The term "employee" does not include a person who is licensed or provisionally permitted pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.), or a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.     Hearing officer means the city administrator, or his designee, appointed to conduct hearings under this article.     Massage or massage therapy means the manipulation and/or treatment of soft tissues of the body, including, but not limited to, the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range of motion stretches, a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body, and any other soft tissue manipulation whether manual or by use of massage apparatus, and may include the use of water, oils, lotions, creams, lubricants, salt glows or scrubs, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, hot packs, cold packs or other topical preparations. The term "massage" or "massage therapy" shall not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any service or procedure when performed by a person who is licensed by the state to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry or medicine. Further, the term "massage" or "massage therapy" shall not include the following when lawfully performed by a natural person licensed or certified by the state board of cosmetology while engaged in the practice authorized by such state license (or certificate of registration) in accordance with, and as further regulated by, the state licensing laws set forth in O.C.G.A. § 43-10-1 et seq.: (1)  Touching of the scalp or face by a state-licensed barber or cosmetologist; (2)  Touching of the hands or feet by a state-licensed nail technician or cosmetologist; and (3)  Touching of the face, neck, décolletage, or arms by a state-licensed esthetician or cosmetologist.     Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power for the purpose of administering a massage.     Massage establishment means a commercial establishment where any person offers or engages in massage or massage therapy. The term "massage establishment" shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state.     Premises means the real property, or portion thereof, upon which the massage establishment or spa establishment is located, including, but not limited to, the establishment and the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages under the ownership or control of the establishment.     Spa establishment means a commercial establishment that offers or engages in personal services that call for the patron to disrobe, such as body wraps, hydro mineral wraps, body polishes, body washes, baths and hydro-tub soaks. The term "spa establishment" shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state.     Specified criminal activity means any of the following specified crimes: (1)  Illegal gambling; (2)  Prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, sodomy, aggravated sodomy, rape, child molestation, sexual assault, sexual battery, aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual battery, or public indecency; (3)  Obscenity, disseminating or displaying matter harmful to a minor, or use of a child in a sexual performance; (4)  Any offense related to any massage establishment or spa establishment or which is related to the regulatory purposes of this article, including controlled substance offenses, tax violations, racketeering, crimes involving sex, crimes involving prostitution, or crimes involving obscenity; (5)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; or (6)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act been committed in Georgia, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-162, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-277. - Penalties.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder shall be held to exclude such other civil, criminal, or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this Code or any of the laws in force in the city, or to exempt anyone violating this Code or any part of said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-163, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-278. - Scope of regulations. (a)  All licenses and work permits issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to operate or work at the establishment specified in the license or work permit during the term of the license or work permit only, and shall be subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city, the county and the state. (b)  This article shall not be enforced against: (1)  Any natural person who is a physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of the profession for which the person is licensed by the state; (2)  Any hospital or other professional health care establishment, including a physician's, physical therapist's, or chiropractor's office, separately licensed as such by the state; (3)  Any natural person who is a massage therapist licensed by the state under the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.) while engaged in the practice of massage therapy as authorized and regulated under said Act; notwithstanding the foregoing exception, the provisions of this article regulating massage establishments and spa establishments and the operation of such establishments shall be enforced against any such person to the extent such person owns, operates or manages a massage establishment or spa establishment or supervises the employees thereof, unless otherwise expressly excepted herein; or (4)  Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of the state. (c)  Licenses and work permits issued before the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall continue in effect for their original terms, subject to the regulations provided herein, including the revocation provisions in section 10-284, as amended. (d)  All massage establishments, spa establishments, and their employees shall comply with this article upon its adoption, including those that hold a license or a work permit issued before the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. (e)  The director of public safety may exempt a massage establishment or a spa establishment and its employees from the licensing requirements of sections 10-279 through 10-281 for a specified calendar year. An exemption under this subsection expires on December 31 of the year for which it was granted. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the establishment and its employees are subject to all requirements of sections 10-279 through 10-281. Any request for an exemption shall be submitted in writing to the director of public safety and is automatically rejected unless the director of public safety grants the exemption. An exemption, if granted by the director of public safety, shall be in writing and shall be based upon evaluation of the request according to the following standards: (1)  Whether the establishment is part of a chain that operates in multiple locations under common ownership, franchise agreements, or a similar arrangement that involves centralized control or corporate supervision; (2)  Whether persons who provide services to customers at the establishment hold state licenses; (3)  The establishment's, its owners', and its managers' histories relative to compliance with massage establishment or spa establishment licensing requirements; (4)  Whether the location used by the establishment has been free from association with unlawful activity for the last 12 months; and (5)  Whether the establishment is managed and operated by a person who has been continually licensed pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act for at least seven years. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-164, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-279. - Massage/spa establishment license required; application. (a)  Massage/spa establishment license required. It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city without a valid massage/spa establishment license. This license requirement is in addition to obtaining an occupation tax certificate pursuant to article III of chapter 42 pertaining to taxation. No more than 20 massage/spa establishment licenses may be in effect at a time. The city shall not issue a massage/spa establishment license that would result in more than 20 such establishments being licensed to operate simultaneously. (b)  Application. An applicant for a massage/spa establishment license shall file in person at the city department of public safety records division a completed application made on a form provided by the city. The application must be executed by the person primarily responsible for the operation of the establishment. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, the application must also be executed by an officer, member, partner or shareholder, as applicable. Signatures on the application shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains the information and/or items required in this subsection, accompanied by the annual regulatory fee: (1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. (2)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, a signed and sworn affidavit verifying the lawful presence of each person who executes the application on behalf of the applicant. (3)  A signed and sworn affidavit attesting that the applicant either uses the federal work authorization program in accordance with federal regulations or that the applicant employs fewer than 11 people or otherwise does not fall within the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. (4)  Current business address and residential mailing address for the applicant. (5)  The business name, location, legal description, mailing address and telephone number of the establishment. (6)  If the applicant is a sole proprietor, written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by an agency of a state or of the federal government. (7)  If the applicant is not a sole proprietor, then the partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity shall submit a complete list of the legal entity's: a.  Officers; b.  Directors; c.  Partners, members, or shareholders (natural persons) holding a ten percent or greater ownership interest in such legal entity, or if there is no shareholder (natural person) with at least a ten percent interest, the ten shareholders with the greatest ownership interest; d.  Employee or agent primarily responsible for operation of the massage or spa establishment; and e.  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by an agency of a state or of the federal government for each person listed in subsections (b)(7)a through d of this section. (8)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) of this section has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. (9)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) of this section has within the previous five years been arrested for, convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each such arrest and/or conviction. (10)  A statement of whether the applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) of this section has in the previous 12 months resided with someone who has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. (11)  If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity required to be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state, such corporation must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state and must submit copies of the certificate of organization or incorporation, as applicable, and articles of organization or incorporation, as applicable. (12)  A sworn and notarized statement of a registered agent who is a resident of the county and who is at least 18 years of age, required to be designated by a licensee to receive any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the applicant. (13)  A statement as to whether the applicant is the owner of the premises wherein the establishment will be operated or the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the license. If the applicant is a lease holder, the following shall be submitted with the license application: a.  A copy of the lease; and b.  The written consent of the owner of the real property upon which the premises are located which demonstrates knowledge and acceptance of the applicant's proposed operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment on the subject property, grants permission to the applicant to submit the subject application, and acknowledges and represents that such real property owner has read and fully understands the requirements of this article, including, but not limited to, the provisions set forth in section 10-288. (14)  A copy of a $25,000.00 surety bond, issued by a company approved to issue surety bonds by the state insurance commissioner, payable to the city upon the entry of an injunction by the county superior court against operation of the applicant's massage establishment or spa establishment due to unlawful operation of same while the applicant held a massage/spa establishment license under this article. (15)  For every person on the premises who offers, or will offer, services for which a license under O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. is required, a copy of the state license for each such person as well as a color photograph, no smaller than two inches by two inches, showing the face, neck, and shoulders of each such person; or, if there are none, a statement certifying that the application is for the operation of a spa establishment only and that neither the establishment nor any person on the premises offers, or will offer, massage. The information provided pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city department of public safety records division within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. (c)  Confidentiality. The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the city department of public safety records division on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed to the public only as required under governing law. Any information protected by the right to privacy as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to any required disclosure under the Georgia Open Records Act or other applicable law. (d)  Issuance of license. Upon the filing of a completed massage/spa establishment license application, the city shall cause to be conducted a criminal background investigation of the applicant and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the director of public safety or his designee. Within 60 days of the filing of the application, the director of public safety, or his designee, shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny the license to the applicant. The director of public safety, or his designee, shall issue the license unless: (1)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) of this section is less than 21 years of age. (2)  The applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. (3)  The applicant is neither the owner of the premises wherein the establishment will be operated, nor the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the license. (4)  The annual regulatory fee required by this article has not been paid. (5)  The establishment is not in compliance with the location requirements of this article or of any part of the Code. This provision shall not be grounds to deny a license to a massage establishment or spa establishment that was, in all respects, lawfully operating at the premises prior to the adoption of the location requirements of the ordinance from which this article is derived and that has continued to lawfully operate at the premises. (6)  The city has revoked a massage/spa establishment license at the premises within the previous 12 months. (7)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) of this section has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. (8)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) of this section has within the previous five years been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. (9)  The establishment does not comply with all applicable building, health, and life safety codes, or the building to be occupied does not have a valid, current certificate of occupancy. (10)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) of this section has in the previous 12 months resided with someone who has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. (11)  The license, if issued, would result in more than 20 massage/spa establishment licenses being in effect at the time. (12)  The applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity that is required to be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state, but is not so chartered or authorized. (e)  License display. A license, if issued, shall be issued in the name of the applicant. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the establishment so that it may be read at any time that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. (f)  Employee permit display. Massage establishments and spa establishments shall post each employee's work permit issued by the city in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the establishment so that it may be read at any time that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-165, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-280. - Regulatory fee; expiration. (a)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee, consisting of a non-refundable investigative fee and a license fee, for each massage and spa establishment licensed within the city. The investigative and license fees shall be set by the director of public safety. The full regulatory fee shall be paid with the license application and shall not be prorated under any circumstances. If the applicant withdraws the application or the license is denied, the applicant shall be refunded the full license fee paid. No refund shall be allowed once the license has been issued. (b)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and expire on December 31 of each year. Each subsequent application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. Existing licensees shall file applications by November 1 of each year for the following license year. Applications received after November 1 shall be subject to a ten percent late fee. (c)  No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable. Upon change of ownership, even if only in part, a new application will be completed and submitted along with all necessary fees. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-166, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-281. - Employee work permits required. (a)  Massage/spa establishment work permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an employee, as defined in this article, of a massage establishment or spa establishment in the city without a valid massage/spa establishment work permit issued under the terms of this article, except that a person who holds a valid massage/spa establishment license or who is listed in response to section 10-279(b)(7)a through c in relation to a valid massage/spa establishment license shall not be required to also obtain a massage/spa establishment work permit to be an employee at that particular licensed establishment. A person who works at more than one establishment shall obtain a separate work permit for each establishment. No applicant for a massage/spa establishment work permit shall work at a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city until the applicant receives, and the establishment posts, the employee's work permit as required by this article. A receipt issued by the city is not a valid massage/spa establishment work permit and does not authorize the person to work in a massage establishment or spa establishment. (b)  Application. An applicant for a massage/spa establishment work permit shall file in person at the city department of public safety, records division, a completed application made on a form provided by the city. The application must be signed and notarized. Applicants shall make themselves available for photographing. An application shall be considered complete when it contains the information and/or items required in this subsection (b), accompanied by the work permit fee: (1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. (2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. (3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by an agency of a state or of the federal government. (4)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. (5)  The name and address of the massage establishment or spa establishment for which the applicant seeks to obtain the work permit. (6)  A statement of whether the applicant has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. (7)  A statement of whether the applicant has within the previous five years been arrested for, convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each such arrest and/or conviction. (8)  A copy of the applicant's state massage therapy license and proof of continuing education credit. The information provided pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city department of public safety, records division, within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. (c)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a work permit under this article shall be maintained by the city department of public safety, records division, on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed to the public only as required under governing law. Any information protected by the right to privacy as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to any required disclosure under the Georgia Open Records Act or other applicable law. (d)  Issuance of work permit. Upon the filing of a completed massage/spa establishment work permit application, the city shall cause to be conducted a criminal background investigation of the applicant and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the director of public safety or his designee. Within 30 days of the filing of a completed massage/spa establishment work permit application, the director of public safety or his designee shall either issue a work permit to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny the work permit to the applicant. The director of public safety, or his designee, shall issue the work permit unless: (1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. (2)  The applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a work permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. (3)  The work permit fee required by this article has not been paid. (4)  The establishment for which the applicant seeks a work permit does not have a valid massage/spa establishment license from the city. (5)  The applicant has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. (6)  The applicant has within the previous five years been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. (e)  The work permit, if issued, will be valid for a period of one year from the date it is issued. The replacement and additional work permit shall be issued upon payment of one-half of the fee charged for a work permit and will expire the same date as the then-current work permit. A massage establishment or spa establishment employee shall provide the employee's work permit to the establishment for which it was issued to be posted on the premises pursuant to this article. (f)  The director of public safety or his designee shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke an employee's work permit, following notice and hearing pursuant to this article, and demand its return if the employee has violated the provisions of this article, any state law or applicable local ordinance. (g)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose work permit has been revoked to refuse to return the work permit to the city department of public safety, records division, or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the work permit. (h)  The permit fee for a massage/spa establishment work permit shall be established by the director of public safety. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-167, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-282. - General operating provisions. (a)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall keep on file, on the premises of the establishment, a list of all persons who perform any service on the premises of the establishment, their home addresses and home or mobile telephone numbers, their duties and services performed for the massage or spa establishment, whether such persons have massage/spa establishment work permits issued by the city, and whether such persons have licenses or provisional permits issued by the state pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act. The holder of a massage/spa establishment license must also keep on file, on the premises of the establishment, a copy of the establishment's two most recent license applications. A list of all employees, and most recent copies of their state licenses (if so licensed) and certifications shall be provided to the city department of public safety, records division, no later than January 15 of each year. (b)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall maintain correct and accurate records of each instance that a service is provided, the type of service provided, and the name of the person at the establishment who provided the service. The records shall be subject to inspection by the city manager, the chief of police, and their designees during those times when the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. (c)  No massage establishment or spa establishment shall allow any person required to have any state-mandated licenses, or a massage/spa establishment work permit pursuant to this article, to perform any service on the premises until such person has procured such license or work permit. Licensees and all managers and/or supervisors of any massage or spa establishment are required by this article to inspect and verify that each person who performs services on the premises who is required to have a valid state license or city work permit, has the required license or work permit on the establishment premises at all times, and failure to do so shall be a violation of this article. (d)  Each massage establishment and spa establishment shall have an owner, manager or supervisor on the premises at all hours that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. Further, each massage establishment shall have a state-licensed massage therapist on the premises at all hours that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. No massage establishment shall hold itself out as being open for business at any time when there is no state-licensed massage therapist on the premises. In addition to the other penalties and remedies provided herein, if during an inspection there is no owner, manager, or supervisor, or, if applicable, state-licensed massage therapist on the premises, the establishment must cease operations and close until an owner, manager or supervisor or state-licensed massage therapist, as applicable, is on the premises. (e)  Records required to be maintained under this article shall be kept for a minimum of two years. Records shall be made available to the director of public safety or his designee, during business hours, at the establishment's business location in the city. (f)  All employees and other persons on the premises, with the exception of customers receiving a massage from a state-licensed massage therapist, shall be completely clothed. For the purposes of this article, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either a blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body, save the arms and neck, and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or a skirt, and said pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this article shall be entirely non-transparent. (g)  No customer receiving a massage from a state-licensed massage therapist shall expose his genitals, pubic area, anus, buttocks, or the female breast to another person on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment. This prohibition does not apply to the showing of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. (h)  No massage establishment or spa establishment shall be or remain open for business between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. No person shall be or remain inside a massage establishment or spa establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. No massage establishment or spa establishment shall hold itself out as open at a time that the establishment is prohibited, under this subsection, from being open for business. (i)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment. Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this Code. (j)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the building code, as adopted by the city council, and at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts (or equivalent illumination) shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth. (k)  Ordinary beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any massage establishment or spa establishment. (l)  No massage establishment or spa establishment shall knowingly or recklessly allow any minor (i.e., a person under the age of 18 years) to be or remain inside the massage establishment or spa establishment unless the minor is accompanied by his parent, legal guardian, or a person who is at least 21 years of age and has been entrusted with the minor by the minor's parent or legal guardian. (m)  No person shall knowingly or recklessly touch, manipulate, fondle, or handle in any manner the sexual organs, genital area, or anus of any other person on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment. (n)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall post and maintain a copy of the human trafficking notice available on the Georgia Bureau of Investigation internet website (as per O.C.G.A. § 16-5-47) in each public restroom for the establishment and in another conspicuous location in clear view of the public and employees where similar notices are customarily posted. (o)  It shall be unlawful to operate a massage establishment or spa establishment with storefront windows that have material and glazing applied or affixed that reduce light transmission through the windows to less than 32 percent, plus or minus three percent, or increase light reflectance to more than 20 percent. (p)  Massage establishments, spa establishments, and their employees shall ensure that storefront windows are not blocked by curtains, blinds, posters, advertisements, or any other screening material. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-168, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-283. - Inspection.     Massage establishments, spa establishments, and their employees shall permit the city manager, director of public safety, and/or their designees or agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, any portion of the establishment premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the regulations of this article, during those times when the establishment is occupied by any patron or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-169, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-284. - Revocation of license or work permit. (a)  Revocation for specific violations. The director of public safety or his designee shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a massage/spa establishment license or a massage/spa establishment work permit, as applicable, if: (1)  The licensee or work permit holder has failed to maintain the qualifications for holding a license or work permit; (2)  The licensee or work permit holder has recklessly given false information in the application for the license or the employee work permit or has failed to supplement the application information as required by section 10-279(b) or 10-281(b) after a change of circumstances that rendered the information originally submitted false or incomplete; (3)  The licensee or work permit holder has failed to maintain correct and accurate records as required by this article; (4)  The licensee or work permit holder has engaged in or recklessly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the establishment; (5)  The licensee or work permit holder has engaged in or recklessly allowed prostitution on the premises of the establishment; (6)  The licensee or work permit holder has engaged in or recklessly allowed sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct to occur in or on the premises of the establishment; (7)  The licensee or work permit holder has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the premises of the establishment; (8)  The licensee or work permit holder has violated section 10-282(c); (9)  The licensee or work permit holder has knowingly or recklessly allowed any minor (i.e., a person under the age of 18 years) to be or remain inside the massage establishment or spa establishment unless the minor is accompanied by his parent, legal guardian, or a person who is at least 21 years of age and has been entrusted with the minor by the minor's parent or legal guardian; or (10)  The licensee or work permit holder has recklessly allowed three or more violations of this article within a 12-month period. (b)  When a notice of intent to revoke a license or employee work permit has been issued, the licensee, any person listed on the licensee's application, or the work permit holder, as the case may be, shall not apply for or be issued any new license or permit under chapter 4, chapter 28, or chapter 42, until such notice has been withdrawn or, if revocation has become effective, until two years after the effective date of revocation. (c)  When any person listed on a massage/spa establishment license application, any employee of the establishment, or any person who performs massage at the establishment, is arrested for unlawful sexual conduct of any kind alleged to have occurred at the massage establishment or spa establishment, no person listed on the establishment's license application and no employee of the establishment may apply for or be issued any new license or permit for that location under chapter 4, chapter 28, or chapter 42, until the arrestee is cleared or until 90 days following the arrest have passed, whichever occurs sooner. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-170, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-285. - Hearing; license denial, revocation; appeal. (a)  When the director of public safety, or his designee, issues a written notice of intent to deny or revoke a license or employee work permit, the director of public safety or his designee shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or licensee/work permit holder (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the city department of public safety, records division, for the respondent. The notice shall also set forth the following: the respondent shall have ten days after the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office of the director of public safety or his designee, a written request for a hearing. If the respondent does not request a hearing within said ten days, the city manager's written notice shall become a final denial or revocation, as the case may be, on the 30th day after it is issued. (b)  If the respondent does make a written request for a hearing within said ten days, then the director of public safety or his designee shall, within ten days after the submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after the date that the hearing notice is issued. (c)  The city administrator or his designee shall serve as the hearing officer for any such appeal. (d)  At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all relevant arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his behalf, and cross-examine any of the city's witnesses. The respondent shall bear the burden of proving entitlement to the license. The hearing shall take no longer than one day, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a final written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. (e)  If the decision is to deny or revoke the license, the decision shall advise the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction, and the decision shall not become effective until the 30th day after it is rendered. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial or revocation of the license, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the director of public safety to immediately withdraw the intent to deny or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the director of public safety shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license or work permit to the applicant. (f)  If any court action challenging a licensing or work permitting decision is initiated, the city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-171, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-286. - Location and distance requirements. (a)  It shall be unlawful to establish a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city, unless said establishment is located: (1)  At least 300 feet from State Route 9; (2)  At least 300 feet from State Route 120; and (3)  At least 300 feet from any parcel occupied by a house of worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, state-licensed day care facility, or any residence. (b)  The foregoing minimum distance requirements shall not apply to any massage establishment or spa establishment located within a mixed use development in the MU district. For the purpose of this subsection, measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest point on a boundary line of the massage establishment or spa establishment parcel to the closest point on the State Route 9 or State Route 120 right-of-way, or to the closest point on a boundary line of any parcel containing a house of worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, or residence. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-172, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-287. - Remedies. (a)  Any premises, building, dwelling, or other structure in which a massage establishment or spa establishment is operated or maintained in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, and harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The city's legal counsel may bring an action in the county superior court to restrain, prohibit, and/or enjoin the use of such premises as a massage establishment or spa establishment in the county superior court. (b)  The operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment by a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, and harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The city's legal counsel may bring an action in the county superior court to restrain, prohibit, and/or enjoin such operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment. (c)  The operation of a massage establishment by a person in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, and harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The city's legal counsel may bring an action in the county superior court to restrain, prohibit, and/or enjoin such operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment. (d)  It shall not be necessary, in order to obtain an injunction under this section, to allege or prove that there is no adequate remedy at law or to allege or prove any special injury. (e)  If the court declares a massage establishment or spa establishment to be a nuisance, or if the court issues an injunction against a massage establishment or spa establishment pursuant to this article, the city shall be entitled, on motion, to recover its reasonable attorney's fees and costs incurred in bringing the action. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-173, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 10-288. - Real property used for illegal sexual activity; property owner responsibility. (a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 41-3-13, the municipal court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the question of the existence of the nuisance provided for in O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1 and as further defined herein, and, if found to exist, to order its abatement. (b)  As used in this subsection, the term: (1)  "Sex crime-related arrest" means an arrest for unlawful sexual conduct of any kind alleged to have occurred at the massage establishment or spa establishment, including, but not limited to, and citation, summons, accusation or indictment for violations of state laws concerning lewdness, prostitution, sodomy, the solicitation of sodomy, or masturbation for hire; provided, however, that any such arrests which result directly from cooperation between the real property owner and a law enforcement agency shall not be considered a sex crime-related arrest for purposes of this section. (2)  "Substantial illegal sexual activity" means activity comprised of three or more separate incidents resulting in sex crime-related arrests within a 24-month period on the same parcel of real property. (c)  Any owner of real property, regardless of whether such owner is the occupant of the subject premises, who has knowledge that substantial illegal sexual activity is being conducted on such property, shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance, and such real property shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated as provided by law. (d)  The owner of real property shall be deemed to have knowledge of illegal sexual activity occurring on a parcel of real property if the city notifies the owner in writing of two or more separate incidents occurring on the same premises within a 24-month period that result in sex crime-related arrests and, after the receipt of such notice and within 24 months of the first of the incidents resulting in a sex crime-related arrest, one or more separate incidents occur which result in a sex crime-related arrest. (e)  The provisions of this section are cumulative of any other remedies and shall not be construed to repeal any other existing remedies for related nuisances. Nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder shall be held to exclude such other civil, criminal, or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this Code or any of the laws in force in the city, or to exempt anyone violating this Code or any part of said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. (Ord. No. 723, § 12-174, 4-4-2016) 
Secs. 10-289—10-309. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 
Sec. 10-310. - Purpose. (a)  The general purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by requiring that new and existing mobile food vendors provide residents and customers with a level of cleanliness, quality and safety. (b)  It is also the intent of this article to establish reasonable guidelines and restrictions for mobile food vendors in relationship to established restaurant businesses, and ensure the safe and convenient use of the public rights-of-way. (Code 1989, § 12-209; Ord. No. 674, § 1, 4-8-2013; Ord. No. 697, § 1, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-311. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commissary means an approved catering establishment, restaurant, or other approved place in which food, containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored.     Ice cream truck means a motor vehicle in which pre-packaged ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or other frozen desserts of any kind are carried for the purpose of retail sale on the streets of the city. For the purpose of this article, the term "ice cream truck" shall not include vendors who prepare ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or other frozen desserts of any kind.     Mobile food vendor means a retail food establishment that reports to and operates from a commissary and is readily moveable, is a motorized wheeled vehicle, or a towed wheeled vehicle designed and equipped to prepare and serve food.     Pushcart means a non-self-propelled vehicle limited to serving commissary prepared or prepackaged food and non-potentially-hazardous food, unless the equipment is commercially designed and approved to handle food preparation and service. Pushcarts shall not be required to comply with mobile vehicular safety requirements.     Restaurant means an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building.     Temporary food establishment means a retail food establishment, other than a licensed mobile food vendor or pushcart, that is not intended to be permanent and that operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. (Code 1989, § 12-210; Ord. No. 674, § 1, 4-8-2013; Ord. No. 697, § 1, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-312. - License required. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, food of any type from a commissary, mobile retail food establishment vendor, ice cream truck, pushcart or temporary food establishment without a license first having been granted under this section, except as part of a city-sponsored or sanctioned special event. (b)  An application for a license or a permit hereunder shall be submitted to the community development director or his designee setting forth all information required hereunder and in compliance with this article. The community development director or his designee shall develop a form of application for the purpose of compliance with this article. (c)  The following information shall be provided with each application for a mobile food vendor, or push cart permit: (1)  Name of the mobile food vendor; (2)  Make, model, and license plate number of the vending unit; (3)  Owner's contact information; (4)  Operator's contact information; (5)  Type of vendor (street vending unit or sidewalk vending unit); (6)  Copy of the approved permit from the county health department; (7)  List of operating locations and times; (8)  Signatures from property owners indicating consent for the use of their property; (9)  Signature of the applicant indicating agreement to the listed requirements. (d)  The following information shall be provided with each application for an ice cream truck permit: (1)  Name of the mobile food vendor; (2)  Owner's contact information; (3)  Operator's contact information; (4)  Type of vendor (street vending unit or sidewalk vending unit); (5)  Copy of the approved permit from the state department of agriculture; (6)  Signatures from property owners indicating consent for the use of their property, if applicable; (7)  Signature of the applicant indicating agreement to the listed requirements. (Code 1989, § 12-211; Ord. No. 674, § 1, 4-8-2013; Ord. No. 697, § 1, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-313. - Prohibited conduct and requirements. (a)  Except for ice cream trucks, no mobile food vendor shall conduct business or operate in the public right-of-way except as part of a city-sponsored or sanctioned special event. (b)  Operation from private property. (1)  A mobile food vendor shall not operate on any private property without the prior written consent of the owner. (2)  Except as may be allowed as part of a city-issued special event permit or pursuant to section 4-404 (Licensed Establishments with Food Trucks/Mobile Food Vendors), mobile food vendors are permitted on a given property no more than eight days in any calendar month. A minimum of two calendar days must transpire between operating periods on any given property. (3)  Except as may be allowed as part of a city-issued special event permit, no more than two mobile food vendors may operate on any single property at any one time. (4)  Except as may be allowed as part of a city-issued special event permit or pursuant to section 4-404 (Licensed Establishments with Food Trucks/Mobile Food Vendors), mobile food vendors may occupy no more than ten percent of the designated parking spaces on a given property, and at no time shall the operation of a mobile food vendor reduce the number of parking spaces on a property below the minimum required by city Code or ordinance. (5)  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. (c)  A mobile food vendor who prepares food shall maintain a $1,000,000.00 liability insurance policy. Proof of current liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, protecting the mobile food vendor and the public from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. Such insurance shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without 30 days' advanced written notice to the city. (d)  Except for ice cream trucks, a mobile food vendor shall not make sounds or announcements to call attention to the mobile food vehicle either while traveling on the public rights-of-way or when stationary. At all times said mobile food vendor, ice cream truck, or push cart shall be in compliance with the city noise ordinance. (e)  The license under which a mobile food vendor, ice cream truck, or push cart is operating must be firmly attached and visible on the mobile food vendor or pushcart at all times. (f)  Any driver of a mobile food vendor or ice cream truck motorized vehicle must possess a valid state driver's license. (g)  Except for ice cream trucks, mobile food vendors are allowed only in commercial zoning districts, except as part of a special event sponsored by a homeowners' association or similar official neighborhood organization. (h)  Mobile food vendors shall not be located within 15 feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk or ten feet of any driveway except as part of a city-sponsored or sanctioned special event. (i)  Mobile food vendors shall not be located within 200 feet of any existing food service establishment except as part of a city-sponsored or sanctioned special event or pursuant to section 4-404 (Licensed Establishments with Food Trucks/Mobile Food Vendors). (j)  Mobile food vendors shall not be located within 200 feet of any city-sponsored or sanctioned special event except pursuant to section 4-404 (Licensed Establishments with Food Trucks/Mobile Food Vendors). (k)  Except as may be allowed as part of a city-issued special event permit or pursuant to section 4-404 (Licensed Establishments with Food Trucks/Mobile Food Vendors), a mobile food vendor may operate from any given property or within any given city block only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and/or 10:30 a.m. until 2:30 p.m. (l)  No sale or offer for sale of ice cream, frozen milk, frozen dairy or ice confection products shall be made from a mobile food vendor unless each side of the vehicle is marked, in letters and numbers at least three inches in height, with the name and address of the mobile food vendor licensee. (m)  The mobile food vendor shall comply with all state, federal and local health and safety regulations and requirements and shall obtain and maintain any and all licenses required by any other health organization or governmental organization having jurisdiction over this subject matter. (n)  Except as otherwise allowed and described within this section, a mobile food vendor must operate from a motorized, wheeled vehicle that may lawfully be driven upon streets and roadways within the state. (1)  The owner of a licensed restaurant located within the city may, with a valid city mobile food vendor permit, engage in mobile food vending from a wheeled mobile trailer, pushcart, or motorized vehicle as an ancillary location of said restaurant, provided that all other provisions of this article are met and adhered to. (2)  As allowed by a city-issued special event permit, a mobile food vendor that holds a valid city mobile food vendor permit may operate from a wheeled mobile trailer, pushcart, or motorized vehicle. (o)  The following safety regulations shall apply to any and all vehicles operating under this article or used for mobile retail food establishments: (1)  Every self-propelled vehicle shall be equipped with a reverse gear signal alarm with a sound distinguishable from the surrounding noise level. (2)  Every self-propelled vehicle shall be equipped with two rear-vision mirrors, one at each side, firmly attached to the outside of the motor vehicle, and so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway to the rear, along both sides of the vehicle. (p)  The mobile food vendor may sell food and non-alcoholic beverage items only. (Code 1989, § 12-212; Ord. No. 674, § 1, 4-8-2013; Ord. No. 697, § 1, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 729, 9-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-314. - Indemnity.     As part of the permitting process set forth herein, any person or entity receiving a permit set forth herein shall execute an indemnity agreement indemnifying and releasing the city, its agents, employees and elected officials from any and all liability against any and all claims, actions and suits of any type whatsoever. (Code 1989, § 12-213; Ord. No. 674, § 1, 4-8-2013; Ord. No. 697, § 1, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-315. - Revocation and suspension. (a)  The director of community development shall have the right to suspend or revoke a mobile food vendor license under the conditions set forth in this section. In the event the director of community development seeks to suspend or to revoke a license, the director of community development shall give written notification to the licensee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations for which cause the action is being taken. (b)  The director of community development shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license in the event of any one or more of the following: (1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application or renewal process; (2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed a violation of this mobile food vendor article to occur or did not make a reasonable effort to prevent any such occurrence; (3)  A licensee failed to pay any fee, license fee, or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other licensing ordinance of the city. (c)  In the event that the director of community development determines that a license violation has occurred, such license shall be suspended for 30 days for the first violation. For a second violation occurring within any consecutive 12-month period, the license shall be suspended for 90 days. Any license that has been suspended two times within any consecutive 12-month period that is determined to have committed a subsequent license violation within 24 months of the second suspension shall be revoked. Provided, however, that the licensee shall be authorized to continue its business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. Should a license be revoked, the owner and/or operator shall not be eligible to apply for a mobile food vendor license for a period of three years from the date of revocation. (d)  In the event of a revocation by the director of community development, the licensee may appeal the decision of the director of community development to the city administrator by filing a written notice of appeal with the director of community development within ten business days from the date of the effective date of the written notice received by the licensee in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The director of community development may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the licensee on appeal to the city administrator. The director of community development's decision shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall stay the director of community development's decision until the appeal is heard or withdrawn. (e)  When an appeal is received, the city administrator shall, within ten business days from the date on which the notice of appeal is received by the director of community development, take either of the following actions: (1)  Set a hearing date before the city administrator and instruct the director of community development to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; or (2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place of hearing. The director of community development shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice as may be required by law. In either event, the hearing shall be held within 30 calendar days of the director of community development's action, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the licensee and the director of community development. (f)  The city administrator or assigned hearing officer may sustain, overrule, or modify the action of the director of community development. The decision of the city administrator or hearing officer shall be final. (Code 1989, § 12-214; Ord. No. 674, § 1, 4-8-2013; Ord. No. 697, § 1, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-316. - Fees.     The fee for every application for license under this section shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1989, § 12-215; Ord. No. 674, § 1, 4-8-2013; Ord. No. 697, § 1, 10-6-2014) 
Secs. 10-317—10-335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PAWNSHOPS[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 
Sec. 10-336. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Employee means any person working for an owner, or pawnbroker, or any owner or, who, in the performance of his duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into substantial contact with members of the public, or is employed on a part-time or full-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop.     Pawn or pledge means a pledge of personal property as security for any debt or loan, redeemable upon certain terms and with the express or implied power of sale on default.     Pawnbroker means any person, whether an owner or not, who works in a pawnshop on a regular basis and in a managerial capacity whereby he has charge of the business or operations of the pawnshop. The term "pawnbroker" also means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this definition.     Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise or any kind of personal property, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. (Code 1989, § 12-71; Ord. No. 273, § 1, 3-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-337. - Licensing requirements. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a pawnbroker business or pawnshop without first obtaining a city license. The fee for such license shall be $150.00 annually. Licenses are not transferable. (b)  No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude as defined by the laws of the state unless a full and complete pardon has been granted. (c)  No license shall be issued to any person under the terms of this chapter if any false information is furnished upon the application by the applicant to the appropriate authorities of the city. (d)  No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of usury under the laws of this state or of any other state. (e)  No license shall be issued until the applicant has been investigated by the city police department, and a favorable report is received from the police department as to his general reputation in the business community. (f)  No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident of this county, or who does not maintain a registered agent in the county. (g)  No license shall be issued to any person who does not maintain a blanket bond in an amount not less than $10,000.00. Such bond must be made payable to the city. (h)  No license shall be issued unless the names and addresses of all persons holding any interest in the business are listed and those persons have signed the application. (i)  No license shall be issued to any person who is engaged in any finance or lending business. (Code 1989, § 12-72; Ord. No. 273, § 2, 3-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-338. - Entry and examination by police. (a)  Upon making application for and receiving a license from the city to operate as a pawnbroker, the holder of the license expressly authorizes the city police department to enter upon his premises and to inspect and examine any articles in the business for the purpose of determining whether or not they have been stolen or otherwise illegally obtained by the applicant or the pawnor, and the applicant expressly agrees that no search warrant shall be necessary, but consents to such examination and inspection at any time upon request by any police officer. (b)  Prior to any police officer removing an article which is suspected to be stolen or lost, the officer will provide the pawnbroker with: (1)  The name of the jurisdiction taking custody of the item; and (2)  The case number associated with the item. (c)  Any item removed shall be tagged with: (1)  The case number; and (2)  The name of the pawnbroker from which the item was taken. (Code 1989, § 12-73; Ord. No. 273, § 3, 3-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-339. - Records. (a)  Each pawnbroker licensed hereunder shall furnish to the director of public safety each week a list of every item sold to or not previously pledged to such pawnbroker. Such list may be a copy of the information required to be kept by O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132, or any other list maintained containing the same information as follows: (1)  The date of the transaction; (2)  The name of the person conducting the transaction; (3)  The name, age and address of the customer; a description of the general appearance of the customer; and the distinctive number from the customer's driver's license with a picture of the license holder; (4)  An identification and description of the pledged or purchased goods, including, if reasonably available, the serial, model, or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon; (5)  The number of the receipt or pawn ticket; (6)  The price paid or the amount loaned; (7)  If payment is made by check, the number of the check issued for the purchase price or loan; (8)  The maturity date of the transaction; and (9)  The signature of the customer. (b)  Entries shall appear in chronological order, in ink. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. (Code 1989, § 12-74; Ord. No. 273, § 4, 3-26-1990) State Law reference— Permanent records required; content, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132; manner of recording entry corrections; inspections, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-133. 
Sec. 10-340. - Thumbprints of pledger or seller.     Any pawnbroker who shall receive as a pledge or purchase any item, goods or wares valued in excess of $10.00 or any revolver, pistol, shotgun, rifle or any other firearm, shall be required to take a thumbprint of such person pledging or selling any of the above items. Such thumbprints must be kept by the pawnbroker as part of the records required by the state, and for the period of time required therein. (Code 1989, § 12-75; Ord. No. 273, § 5, 3-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-341. - Dealing with minors.     No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist such pawnbroker in the business. Nothing shall prevent the employment of minors who are otherwise qualified for employment, provided such minors shall not be allowed to take items in pawn or loan money on pledged items. (Code 1989, § 12-76; Ord. No. 273, § 6, 3-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-342. - Stolen goods. (a)  It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with such pawnbroker or which is sought to be pledged with such pawnbroker, if such pawnbroker shall have reason to believe the article was stolen, or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it, in the case of a lost article. No pawnbroker shall accept any item, goods or wares upon which a manufacturer's identity or serial number has been intentionally removed, obliterated, or in any way caused to become unreadable. (b)  No pawnbroker shall accept any handgun upon which the manufacturer's identity or serial number has been removed, obliterated or in any way become unreadable. (Code 1989, § 12-77; Ord. No. 273, § 7, 3-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-343. - Certain purchased articles to be held 30 days.     Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who purchases goods, other than those purchased through wholesalers or on order in the normal course of business, taking full title thereto (the term "goods" being used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property) shall hold such goods purchased for at least 30 days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. (Code 1989, § 12-78; Ord. No. 273, § 8, 3-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-344. - Suspension or revocation of license. (a)  Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: (1)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for a license; (2)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting business; (3)  Failure to adhere to the recordkeeping or reporting requirements of sections 10-339 and 10-342; (4)  Violation of any provision of this article; (5)  Violation of any provision of O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-130 through 44-12-137 pertaining to the regulation of pawnbrokers. (b)  Upon suspension or revocation, the city shall deliver written notice to the license holder stating the action taken and the reason supporting such action. The written notice shall be delivered to the address set forth in the license holder's application. (c)  The holder of a pawnbroker license shall be responsible for any and all acts of his employees, and for any violation by them of the provisions of this article. (Code 1989, § 12-79; Ord. No. 273, § 9, 3-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-345. - Appeals.     Pawnbrokers who are denied licenses or whose licenses have been suspended or revoked may appeal such denial, suspension or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. The appeal must be filed within ten days of the date of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation. The city council shall hear and determine the appeal and the decision of the council shall be final. (Code 1989, § 12-80; Ord. No. 273, § 10, 3-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-346. - Penalties.     In addition to the suspension and revocation penalties provided in section 10-344, any pawnbroker or employee who violates any provision of this article shall be punished according to the penalties described in section 1-8. Each day any violation of any provision of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1989, § 12-81; Ord. No. 273, § 11, 3-26-1990) 
Secs. 10-347—10-365. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - PROFESSIONAL BONDS PERSONS[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- State Law reference— Professional bonds persons generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50 et seq. 
Sec. 10-366. - Definition of professional bonds person. (a)  Bondsmen or persons who hold themselves out as signers or sureties of bonds for compensation are declared to be professional bonds persons. (b)  A professional bondsperson is one who holds himself out as a signer or surety of bonds for compensation who must meet the following qualifications: (1)  Is 18 years of age or over; (2)  Is a resident of the state for at least one year before making application to write bonds; (3)  Is a person of good moral character and has not been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude; and (4)  Is approved by the sheriff and remains in good standing with respect to all applicable federal, state, and local laws and all rules and regulations established by the sheriff in the county where the bonding business is conducted. (c)  The sheriff of the county in which the bonding business is conducting business or is seeking approval to conduct business shall initiate a criminal background investigation to ensure that a professional bonds person has not been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude in this state or any other jurisdiction. The sheriff shall require the professional bonds person to furnish two full sets of fingerprints which the sheriff shall submit to the Georgia Crime Information Center. The center shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a national criminal history record check. (d)  It shall be the duty of each professional bonds person approved by the sheriff in accordance with this section to provide the clerk of each court before which one or more of such professional bonds person's principals are required to appear with the business name, complete address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the chief operating officer or his designee of such professional bonds person for the purpose of receiving any notices that may be sent pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 17-6-71. Each professional bonds person shall have the duty to keep such information current and accurate. It shall be the duty of each clerk of court to keep, maintain, and update such information as provided by a professional bonds person. (Code 1989, § 12-30; Ord. No. 139, § 2, 10-28-1974) 
Sec. 10-367. - Permit—Required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to be engaged in the business of professional bonds person until authorized so to do by a permit granted by the city council upon recommendation of the police chief and/or police committee. No business license shall be issued to a professional bonds person until such permit has been granted. (Code 1989, § 12-31; Ord. No. 139, § 1, 10-28-1974) 
Sec. 10-368. - Same—Suspension or revocation authorized.     The chief of police and/or police committee shall have the right at any time to suspend the permit of any person, or agent thereof, engaged in the business of acting as a professional bonds person for noncompliance with this article. The police committee and/or chief of police shall have the right to suspend, for a definite period of time, or to permanently revoke, any such permit. (Code 1989, § 12-32; Ord. No. 139, § 6, 10-28-1974) 
Sec. 10-369. - Same—Hearing on suspension.     The person, or agent thereof, whose permit is suspended shall be notified by the chief of police and/or police committee of the reason for such suspension and shall be given the right, within 30 days from the effective date of such suspension, to appear before the police committee and to show cause why the suspension should not be made permanent. Failure to appear within the specified time or any extension thereof shall, of course, automatically forfeit the permit. (Code 1989, § 12-33; Ord. No. 139, § 7, 10-28-1974) 
Sec. 10-370. - Exemptions.     Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as affecting the right of a citizen to sign a bond not for compensation, or the right of surety companies who have complied with the laws of the state regulating such companies to carry on their regular business. (Code 1989, § 12-34; Ord. No. 139, § 3, 10-28-1974) 
Sec. 10-371. - Contents of bond. (a)  Each bond signed by any professional bonds person shall, on a separate affidavit, contain: (1)  A description of all real property in the county owned in fee simple by such person, and the clear market value of each item of real property so scheduled shall be set forth; (2)  A description of each mortgage, lien or other encumbrance affecting such real property, showing the maturity date and amount thereof; (3)  A statement of the total amount of all bonds upon which the petitioner may, at that time, appear as surety; and (4)  A sub-schedule of all bonds upon which the petitioner may, at that time, appear as surety which have been forfeited and not paid. (b)  All schedules and sub-schedules required by this article shall be made under oath by the petitioner, provided that, if the petitioner is a firm, each member of the firm shall sign the same, and if a corporation, two principal officers thereof authorized by the corporation's bylaws shall sign the same, and the corporate seal shall be affixed. (Code 1989, § 12-35; Ord. No. 139, § 4, 10-28-1974) 
Sec. 10-372. - Submitting schedules.     The chief of police and/or police committee shall have the right and authority at all times to require professional bonds persons to submit schedules of property and of bonds upon which they appear as surety. In the event such schedules disclose the insolvency or inability of a bonds person to sign bonds because of an excess of liability over assets, then the committee shall have the power to bar such bonds person from signing further bonds in the municipal court for so long as such insolvency or inability exists. Any professional bonds person who shall fail to furnish such schedules on demand, or who shall furnish a false schedule, shall thereafter be barred from signing bonds in connection with cases in the municipal court. (Code 1989, § 12-36; Ord. No. 139, § 5, 10-28-1974) 
Sec. 10-373. - Violations.     Any professional bonds person violating this article shall, on conviction in the municipal court, be punished as provided by law. In addition thereto, any bonds person convicted of any violation of this article shall automatically be barred from signing bonds in the city. (Code 1989, § 12-37; Ord. No. 139, § 8, 10-28-1974) 
Secs. 10-374—10-404. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - TICKET BROKERS[8] Footnotes: --- (8) --- State Law reference— Ticket brokers, O.C.G.A. § 43-4B-25 et seq. 
Sec. 10-405. - Adoption of state law by reference. (a)  The provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 43-4B-25 through 43-4B-30 regarding ticket brokers are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the city's ticket broker regulations with like effect, as if fully recited herein. (b)  Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine according to the penalties described in section 1-8 and in the discretion of the municipal judge. (Code 1989, § 12-206; Ord. No. 623, § 1, 5-19-2008) 
Secs. 10-406—10-423. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - VIDEO STORES 
Sec. 10-424. - Findings. (a)  Based on the experience of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to Houston, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; Chattanooga, Tennessee; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Dayton, Ohio; Fulton County, Georgia and Gwinnett County, Georgia, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the city, and based on documentary evidence and a transcript of oral testimony presented by law enforcement personnel during the Gwinnett County board of commissioners' public hearing and regular meeting on August 7, 2001, and based upon oral evidence presented to the mayor and council at their August 20, 2001 public hearing, the mayor and council take note of the opportunity for unlawful sexual activities, including, but not limited to, masturbation and oral and anal sex, to occur at video stores which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films or videos depicting nudity, and for sexually transmitted diseases to spread as a result of the unhealthy conditions and unlawful activities associated with such booths, and the mayor and council further note that persons frequent such video viewing booths for the purpose of engaging in sexual activities within such video viewing booths, and bodily fluids, including semen, urine and feces are found in such video viewing booths. (b)  The mayor and council find that removal of doors on such video viewing booths and prohibiting holes between such booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in such booths. The mayor and council therefore find that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the community to require that doors or other partitions on video viewing booths in video stores be removed and that no holes be allowed to exist between adjoining booths. The mayor and council find that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing unlawful sexual activities and unhealthy conditions in video viewing booths found in video stores. The mayor and council further find that these regulations will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, this article is hereby adopted. (Code 1989, § 12-192; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 8-27-2001) 
Sec. 10-425. - Regulations.     Any video store having available for customers, patrons or members, any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any video or motion picture must comply with the following requirements: (1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the video store, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. (2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following requirements: a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any non-public areas by a wall. b.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall have at least one side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the video store is located. c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light-colored, non-absorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. d.  The floor must be light-colored, non-absorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use, shall be a minimum of ten footcandles at all times, as measured from the floor. (3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. (4)  Definition of video store. The term "video store" means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade which includes videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent or more of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos. The term "video store" shall also include adult bookstores as defined in section 10-21 and adult entertainment establishments as defined in section 10-55. (5)  Enforcement. The provisions of this article may, in addition to any criminal remedy available, be enforced through an action for abatement of a nuisance in the manner provided by law. The city may apply to a court with jurisdiction to grant equitable relief to abate or remove private video viewing booths and to restrain or enjoin any person from operating or engaging in conduct contrary to the provisions of this article. (Code 1989, § 12-193; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 8-27-2001) 
Chapter 11 - RESERVED 
Chapter 12 - CEMETERIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; city as trustee of cemetery funds, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4 et seq. 
Sec. 12-1. - Cemetery authority—Created.     There is created a cemetery authority to be known as the Alpharetta Cemetery Authority. (Code 1989, § 6-1; Ord. No. 142, § 1, 8-25-1975) 
Sec. 12-2. - Same—Composition; accounting for and auditing account.     The cemetery authority shall consist of the building and grounds committee. All funds coming under the purview of the authority shall be held in trust by the city, and shall be accounted for and audited the same as any other fiduciary account held by the city. (Code 1989, § 6-2; Ord. No. 226, § 1, 5-27-1987) 
Sec. 12-3. - Same—Property; finances.     The cemetery authority is authorized to hold cemetery property in trust for the city and is authorized to receive gifts, trusts, income from trusts, real estate and donations of every kind, and to hold the same as trustee for the city; to convey real estate so received to any person, church or corporation as trustees for the city; to invest in bank certificates or government bonds; to accept deeds to secure debt from any source; and to expend any and all moneys received for the upkeep and maintenance of the city cemeteries. Any gifts and trusts of real estate shall be received by the cemetery authority as trustees for the city. The authority shall have the right to convey lots or other real property connected with the city cemeteries as trustee for the city. (Code 1989, § 6-3; Ord. No. 142, § 1, 8-25-1975) 
Sec. 12-4. - Rest Haven Cemetery; assumption of ownership.     The city does assume full ownership and possession of Rest Haven Cemetery and claims all of the land located therein, with the exception of all lots privately owned. (Code 1989, § 6-4; Ord. No. 142, § 1, 8-25-1975) 
Chapter 13 - RESERVED 
Chapter 14 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-1. - Emergency management defined.     As used in this article, the term "emergency management" means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin, caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. (Code 1989, § 7-1; Ord. No. 81, § 1, 11-20-1961) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 14-2. - Council of emergency management—Created; composition.     The city council of emergency management is hereby created and shall include the following: (1)  Mayor. (2)  Director of emergency management (as appointed) (shall be executive vice-chairperson). (3)  Police chief. (4)  Fire chief. (5)  Director of public works. (6)  American Red Cross representative. (7)  Others, including representatives of business, labor and patriotic organizations, as appointed by the city council. (Code 1989, § 7-2; Ord. No. 81, § 8, 11-20-1961) 
Sec. 14-3. - Same—Powers and duties.     It shall be the duty of the council of emergency management, and it is hereby empowered: (1)  To develop a city emergency management plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the city, both private and public. (2)  To prepare and recommend for consideration by the city council, ordinances necessary to implement the emergency management plan. (3)  To consider and recommend to the city council for approval mutual aid plans and agreements. (4)  Others (as determined locally). (Code 1989, § 7-3; Ord. No. 81, § 8, 11-20-1961) 
Sec. 14-4. - Director of emergency management.     There is hereby created the office of the city emergency management director. Such officer shall be nominated by the mayor, and appointed by the governor, as provided by law. The director is hereby charged: (1)  To represent the mayor on all matters pertaining to emergency management. (2)  To develop a city emergency management plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the city, both private and public. (3)  To obtain and utilize cooperation of city officials in the preparation and implementation of emergency management plans. (4)  During periods of emergency, to direct the services of all city emergency management forces. (5)  During periods of emergency, to obtain vital supplies and equipment lacking, needed for the protection of life and property of people, and bind the city for the value thereof, and, if required immediately, requisition same. (Code 1989, § 7-4; Ord. No. 81, § 2, 11-20-1961) 
Sec. 14-5. - Emergency management organization—Composition.     Officers and employees of the city with volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency and all groups, organizations and persons who make the agreements on operation of law charged with duties necessary for the protection of the life and property in the city during such an emergency shall constitute the emergency management organization. (Code 1989, § 7-5; Ord. No. 81, § 3, 11-20-1961) State Law reference— Authority to form, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 14-6. - Same—Divisions.     The functions and duties of the emergency management organization shall be distributed among the divisions as listed below. Each division shall be under the direction of a service chief appointed by the director. The service chiefs will be selected from among the best qualified in the city and may include, but not be restricted to, chiefs of existing community services. Arranged within each division are the various emergency management services, each service under the direction of a chief designated to head this service due to intimate knowledge of the particular service and qualities as a leader. The divisions are as follows: Operations Intelligence Logistics Administration Communications Police Fire Rescue Transportation Health Engineering Welfare Warden Attack warning Radiological Defense Industry and institutions Emergency public   information Manpower Shelter Planning Supply  (1) Resources  (2) Procurement  (3) Controls Administrative and fiscal   section (including matching funds) Training and education  (Code 1989, § 7-6; Ord. No. 81, § 4, 11-20-1961) 
Sec. 14-7. - Volunteers.     All persons other than officers and employees of the city volunteering in service pursuant to emergency management under this chapter shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such service, they shall have the same immunities as employees of the city performing similar duties. (Code 1989, § 7-7; Ord. No. 81, § 5, 11-20-1961) 
Sec. 14-8. - Unlawful acts.     It shall be a misdemeanor during an emergency: (1)  To willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organizations, or any enforcement of a lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon such person by the virtue of this chapter. (2)  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such nature as to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil or delay emergency management thereof. (3)  To wear or carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the council of emergency management. (Code 1989, § 7-8; Ord. No. 81, § 6, 11-20-1961) 
Sec. 14-9. - Plan.     A complete and adequate emergency management plan will be formulated and maintained at once by the council of emergency management. This plan will be based upon plans formulated by the state, mutual aid agreements, and chiefs of divisions. (Code 1989, § 7-9; Ord. No. 81, § 7, 11-20-1961) 
Sec. 14-10. - Emergency powers of mayor.     In addition to all powers enumerated in this Code, the mayor, as the chief executive of the city, shall have further emergency powers as follows: (1)  The mayor shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when, in such official's opinion, one or more of the following conditions exists: a.  That there is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions. b.  Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of city streets or areas difficult or impossible. c.  Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists. d.  There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. (2)  After declaration of such emergency, the mayor, as chief executive, shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: a.  The power to use employees of the city to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city. b.  The power to close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists. c.  The power to impose emergency curfew regulations. d.  The power to close business establishments within the affected area. e.  The power to close any municipally-owned building and other facilities to the use of the general public. f.  The power to do all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city. g.  No emergency power as set forth herein may be effective for more than 72 hours after the declaration of an emergency by the mayor. However, upon declaration of a second or further emergencies to exist, the emergency powers as set forth herein may be exercised during such further emergency period or periods, but never for more than 72 hours in one declared emergency period. h.  No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular, special or called meeting of the city council. (3)  The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. (Code 1989, § 7-10; Ord. No. 106, 10-9-1967) 
Sec. 14-11. - Conflict of interest.     Where provisions of this chapter are in conflict with provisions of existing ordinances, the provisions of this chapter, in an emergency, will govern. (Code 1989, § 7-11; Ord. No. 81, § 8, 11-20-1961) 
Sec. 14-12. - Office of emergency management. (a)  The director of the city office of emergency management shall be authorized to exercise overall direction and coordination of emergency and disaster planning and operations, as stated in section 14-4. (b)  The director of the city office of emergency management shall be authorized to activate and deactivate the city emergency operations center, any secondary emergency operations center that may be opened, and/or support of all city departments in an emergency or disaster. (c)  The city administrator, or his designee, shall serve as the director of the city office of emergency management. (d)  The city emergency operations plan shall be binding on all city departments providing emergency support functions, and shall serve as the basis to assist the city in time of emergency or disaster. (e)  The director of the city office of emergency management shall provide direction and coordination of all activities and functions provided by state agencies and organizations, and shall perform other duties prescribed herein. (f)  The primary and support function responsibilities for emergency management services and resources shall be as follows: Emergency Support Function Agency/Organization 1. Transportation Primary:Department of recreation and parks Support: Department of public works 2. Communications Primary:Department of public safety Support: Department of technical services     Division of fire and emergency services     Office of homeland security and emergency management 3. Public works Primary:Department of public works Support: Department of recreation and parks 4. Firefighting Primary:Department of fire and emergency services Support: Division of police services 5. Emergency management Primary:City administrator's office Support: Department of public safety     Department of police services     Department of fire and emergency services     Department of public works     Department of recreation and parks     Department of community development     Department of financial services     Department of human resources 6. Mass care Primary:Department of recreation and parks Support: Department of community development 7. Resource support Primary:Department of financial services Support: Department of human resources 8. Health and medical Primary:Department of fire and emergency services Support: Department of police services     Department of human resources 9. Search and rescue Primary:Department of fire and emergency services Support: Department of public works     Department of police services     Department of recreation and parks 10. Hazardous materials Primary:Department of fire and emergency services Support: Department of police services     Department of public works 11. Food and water Primary:Department of human resources Support: Department of community development     Department of recreation and parks 12. Energy Primary:Department of public works Support: Department of fire and emergency services 13. Public safety and security Primary:Department of public safety Support: Department of police services     Department of fire and emergency services 14. Long term recovery and   mitigation Primary:Department of community development Support: Department of public works 15. External affairs Primary:City administrator's office Support: Department of public safety  (g)  Each city department shall appoint an emergency coordinator and two alternates to serve in time of an emergency or disaster. (h)  Each city department assigned primary emergency support function responsibilities shall provide assistance in preparation and revision of such functions, collaborate with support agencies and maintain accompanying standard operating plans. (i)  Each city department with primary and/or support responsibilities shall assign personnel to serve in the emergency operations center (EOC), maintain a 24-hour response capability, conduct and participate in training and exercises, prepare updates to the city emergency operations plan, as necessary, and maintain reporting systems as required by state and federal laws and regulations. (j)  All other departments not assigned a primary or support role in emergency management shall implement duties or services that may be required during an emergency or disaster as requested by the mayor. (Code 1989, § 7-12; Res. No. 991, 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 605, 5-21-2007; Res. No. 1626, 8-6-2012) 
Chapter 15 - RESERVED 
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
Sec. 16-19. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to regulate the responsibilities of those persons who purchase, rent or use alarm systems, devices or services. This article is also intended to encourage the improvement in reliability of these systems, devices and services and to ensure that police and fire department personnel will not be unduly diverted from responding to actual criminal activity as a result of responding to false alarms. This article specifically encompasses "fire alarms," "burglar alarms," "robbery alarms," "holdup alarms," "medical alarms" and "panic alarms," both audible and inaudible (silent). The provisions of this article shall not apply to alarm systems which are owned or maintained by the city and installed on premises in which the city has a property interest. (Code 1989, § 13-41; Ord. No. 374, § 1, 4-1-1996; Ord. No. 567, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 16-20. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alarm means and includes any fire, robbery, burglary, holdup, medical or panic alarm that transmits any signal (audible, visual or silent) to the city, indicating a predetermined emergency condition exists, whether the alarm is received either: (1)  By telephone line to a designated position on an alarm panel; (2)  By a private alarm service company relayed to the city communications center telephone; (3)  By an automated telephone alarm system, playing a recorded message when received on the city communications center telephone; or (4)  By a signal relayed to the city communications center by a third party.     False alarm means any activation of an alarm system where none of the emergencies for which the alarm system has been installed have in fact occurred.     Response means the dispatch of any police or fire unit to the premises where an alarm has been activated or the arrival of an officer to the location by any means of notification.     Telephone alarm system means any alarm system which automatically transmits by telephone line a recorded electronic or mechanical signal to a telephone instrument at the city communications center. (Code 1989, § 13-42; Ord. No. 374, § 2, 4-1-1996; Ord. No. 567, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 16-21. - Registration required after false alarm.     Each person who receives a warning notice for a false alarm as provided in section 16-23(2) shall, within 30 days of the notice, apply for and obtain a registration certificate in accordance with the provisions of this article. When registration is required under this section, the application fee shall be $50.00. Any other person may, but is not required to voluntarily register, and there shall be no application fee for voluntary registration. (Code 1989, § 13-43; Ord. No. 374, § 3, 4-1-1996; Ord. No. 567, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 16-22. - Contents of application; permit fee. (a)  Each applicant for a registration certificate shall complete a registration form prescribed by the city containing the following information: (1)  The name and telephone number of the applicant, and the address of the premises where the alarm system is installed; (2)  The person or business entity maintaining, monitoring or servicing the alarm system, along with a telephone number of the alarm dispatch center; and (3)  Names and telephone numbers of all persons who have access to the premises and have knowledge of the operation of the alarm, and who shall be responsible for resetting, disconnecting or disarming the alarm. (b)  Registration applications, together with a fee of $50.00, shall be filed with the finance department, which will disseminate registration application information to the inspections, fire, and police departments. (c)  Persons owning or using alarm systems shall provide response to the alarm location, when requested, in order to reset, disconnect or disable the alarm system within 90 minutes of such request. Failure to provide such response shall result in a service fee of not less than $25.00 for each such occurrence. The imposition of this service fee may be appealed to the city administrator by sending a letter of appeal to the city administrator within ten days after the fee is imposed. The city administrator may waive the fee if the appellant establishes to the satisfaction of the city administrator that the failure to respond was due to circumstances not within the reasonable control of the appellant. (d)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city in connection with the regulation of alarm systems, or otherwise constitute a waiver of sovereign immunity. (e)  All alarm systems installed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived having an audible or visual signal at the premises shall be equipped so as to automatically shut off the audible signal after no longer than ten minutes for residential installations and 15 minutes for nonresidential installations, except those systems required by law to have a longer operation period, in which case, such system shall be equipped so as to automatically shut off the audible signal at the conclusion of the longer operating time. (f)  Telephone alarm devices shall be construed or installed so as not to seize or otherwise hold or preempt the telephone lines of the city communications center. Beginning 12 months after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, no person shall use or cause to be used any telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects or dials a published emergency telephone number or any city telephone number and then reproduces any prerecorded message or signal, provided that this section shall not apply to a life safety alert system utilizing residential transmitting equipment designated for direct telephone access to dedicated control receiving equipment located in the city's public safety communications center. (g)  If, after a registration certificate is issued, any of the information contained within the application for which the registration certificate was issued changes, the certificate holder shall notify the inspections department in writing of each such change not later than 30 days after the change. (Code 1989, § 13-44; Ord. No. 374, § 4, 4-1-1996; Ord. No. 567, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 16-23. - Service fee for false alarms.     For each police or fire response to a false alarm, the responding officer shall leave a false alarm notification slip at the premises. Service fees for police or fire response to false alarms shall be imposed as follows: (1)  False alarms occurring during the first 120 days of operation of a newly installed or reinstalled alarm system shall not be counted as "false alarms" for the purposes of subsections (2) through (4) of this section. (2)  For the first false alarm within a calendar year, no service shall be charged, but a warning notice shall be issued and a registration certificate shall be obtained within 30 days of the notice. (3)  For the second, third and fourth false alarm within a calendar year, the property owner or lessee shall be charged a service fee of $50.00 per false alarm. (4)  For the fifth and each additional false alarm within a calendar year, the property owner or lessee shall be charged a service fee of $125.00 per false alarm. (5)  Service fees shall be billed by the city finance department directly to the occupant where the false alarm occurred. In the event the occupant fails to pay the service fees billed under this article, the city shall bill the owner of the property, if different than the occupant. The owner and the occupant shall be jointly responsible for the service fees billed under this article. (6)  Should the service fees go unpaid, the city shall withhold the issuance of a business license or occupational tax certificate or apply funds paid for other charges and services to service fees billed under this article. (7)  In the event fees go unpaid after the due date, a one-time ten percent penalty will be charged based upon the amount due, and interest at the rate of one percent per month shall accrue until the fees are paid in full. (Code 1989, § 13-45; Ord. No. 374, § 5, 4-1-1996; Ord. No. 567, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 16-24. - Duties of alarm system company or business.     Each alarm system company or business selling, leasing and/or monitoring an alarm system installed within the city limits shall provide the user with a copy of this article and an application for a registration certificate, and shall instruct the user in the proper operation of the system. Each business entity monitoring or servicing an alarm system installed within the city limits shall file an annual registration with the city identifying the name, address and telephone number of the entity, the name of a contact person, and the location of each system in the city that is monitored or serviced by the entity. The registration is due no later than January 15 of each year. (Code 1989, § 13-46; Ord. No. 374, § 6, 4-1-1996; Ord. No. 567, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 16-25. - Penalties.     Any person who violates any provision of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable according to the penalties described in section 1-8. Each day that a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. The punishment or conviction of any person under this section shall not relieve the person from paying any unpaid permit or service fee; nor shall payment of any unpaid permit or service fee bar criminal prosecution for any violation of this article. (Code 1989, § 13-47; Ord. No. 374, § 7, 4-1-1996; Ord. No. 567, 5-23-2005) 
Secs. 16-26—16-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY 911 SYSTEM 
Sec. 16-54. - Monthly wireless enhanced 911 charges. (a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 46-5-133 and 46-5-134(2), there is hereby imposed upon each subscriber of a wireless telecommunications connection whose billing address is within the jurisdiction of the city a monthly wireless enhanced 911 charge of $1.50 per month, per wireless telecommunications connection provided to the telephone subscriber, to be used to support the maintenance and operation of the emergency 911 system, which is capable of providing automatic number identification of a wireless telecommunications connection and the location of the base station or cell site which receives a 911 call from a wireless telecommunications connection. (b)  The monthly 911 charge heretofore imposed upon subscribers of exchange access facilities shall remain in full force and effect, and shall not be affected by this section. (c)  The mayor and city council do hereby reaffirm the necessity for the monthly 911 charges of $1.50 per telephone line, $1.50 per wireless subscriber, $1.50 per voice-over-internet protocol subscriber, and $0.75 per retail transaction of prepaid wireless telecommunications services within the city for fiscal year 2017, and hereby authorize the imposition of such fees to continue to fund and maintain the emergency 911 fund. (Code 1989, § 13-76; Ord. No. 739, 9-28-1998; Ord. No. 570, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 594, 6-19-2006; Res. No. 1299, 6-4-2007; Res. No. 1358, 6-2-2008; Res. No. 1422, 6-15-2009; Res. No. 1493, 6-7-2010; Res. No. 1557, 6-13-2011; Res. No. 1617, 6-4-2012; Res. No. 1667, 6-3-2013; Res. No. 1723, 6-2-2014; Res. No. 1785, 6-1-2015; Res. No. 1847, 6-6-2016) 
Chapter 17 - RESERVED 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHATTAHOOCHEE RIVER PROTECTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. 
Sec. 18-19. - Definitions.     The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Area , also referred to as the protection area, means the stream channel and the land area extending outward 35 horizontal feet from the banks on either side of all flowing streams in the drainage basins of all tributaries of the Chattahoochee River which enter the Chattahoochee River downstream from Buford Dam and upstream from Peachtree Creek, except for such land within the Chattahoochee Corridor, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-441.     Flowing stream means any stream which is designated and shown as a permanent stream on the 7 5/10-minute quadrangle maps of the U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey, plus any stream which the city council may determine to be, and designate as, a flowing stream.     Land disturbing activity means scraping, plowing, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, or filling of land or placement of any structure or impervious surface, dam, obstruction, or deposit.     Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown correctly as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records.     Watershed means the land area which drains into a particular stream. (Code 1989, § 5-118; Ord. No. 204-B, § 4, 1-28-1985) 
Sec. 18-20. - Statutory authorization.     This article is adopted pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-453. (Code 1989, § 5-119; Ord. No. 204-B, § 2.0, 1-28-1985) 
Sec. 18-21. - Finding.     The city council finds that: (1)  The Chattahoochee River provides multiple public benefits, which include use of the river as the primary water supply for metropolitan Atlanta. (2)  The water quality of the Chattahoochee River depends upon the water quality of the flowing streams tributary to the river. (3)  Sediment and other polluting materials and conditions, including, but not limited to, pesticides, nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorous, toxic materials, and elevations in water temperature are harmful to the water quality of the river and its tributaries. (4)  The riparian vegetation along these watercourses helps preserve water quality. Dense tree growth helps to prevent stream bank erosion, and streamside vegetation reduces the amount of sediment and other polluting materials that would otherwise wash into streams. Riparian trees, by shading, help maintain cooler water temperatures and thus enhance water quality. (Code 1989, § 5-120; Ord. No. 204-B, § 3.1, 1-28-1985) 
Sec. 18-22. - Purpose.     It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation, and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality in specific areas by provisions designed to: (1)  Create vegetative buffer areas adjacent to tributary streams in the drainage area of the Chattahoochee Corridor. (2)  Minimize land disturbing activities within such buffer areas by requiring issuance of a permit for such activities. (Code 1989, § 5-121; Ord. No. 204-B, § 3.2, 1-28-1985) 
Sec. 18-23. - Establishment of tributary protection area.     The Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Area within the city, hereinafter referred to as the protection area, is hereby established. The designated protection area shall be shown on the official map of the city. (Code 1989, § 5-122; Ord. No. 204-B, § 5.0, 1-28-1985) 
Sec. 18-24. - Permit—Required; exceptions. (a)  Required. No person shall engage in any land disturbing activity in a protection area without first having obtained a written permit from the director of public works. (b)  Exceptions. The permit provisions of this article shall not apply to: (1)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. When emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report the pertinent facts relating to the work to the director of public works on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the director of public works to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability, or water quality of the protection area. (2)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land which was zoned and approved for such use on or before January 1, 1984, whichever is earlier. (Code 1989, § 5-123; Ord. No. 204-B, §§ 6.0, 6.1, 1-28-1985; Ord. No. 276, § 1, 6-11-1990) 
Sec. 18-25. - Same—Application.     A separate application for a permit shall be made to the director of public works, on a form approved by the director of public works, for each land disturbing activity, except that only one application need be made for two or more such acts which are to be done on the same parcel. The application shall include a map of the site and such information concerning the proposed action as the director of public works deems necessary to describe the nature and extent of the proposed action and to determine the effect of the proposed action on the protection area. (Code 1989, § 5-124; Ord. No. 204-B, § 6.2, 1-28-1985; Ord. No. 276, § 1, 6-11-1990) 
Sec. 18-26. - Same—Issuance; conditions; term; extension; renewal. (a)  Issuance. No application for a permit shall be approved and no permit shall be issued for any land disturbing activity within the protection area unless: (1)  The land disturbing activity is for the purpose of constructing one of the following: a stream crossing by a driveway, a dam and/or impoundment; a detention, retention, or sediment control pond or facility; a transportation route or public utility line when, due to natural conditions in an area, such construction would be less harmful to the environment than if it were located outside the protection area; (2)  The land disturbing activity is within a right-of-way of any public agency pursuant to a permit issued by such public agency; or (3)  The director of public works finds and determines that a minimum amount of land disturbance necessary for the beneficial use of the parcel has been proposed. (b)  Conditions. In each permit issued under the provisions of this article, the director of public works shall include conditions designed to: (1)  Limit erosion, sedimentation, and water pollution within the protection zone to amounts and rates not greater than those occurring before the land disturbing activity; and (2)  Preserve, protect, or replace the maximum feasible amount of natural vegetation. (c)  Term; extension; renewal. The permittee shall complete the work authorized by the permit within the time limits specified in the permit, which in no event shall extend more than 12 months from the date of issuance. Should the work not be commenced and completed within the time limits, then the permit shall become void; provided, however, that if prior to the date established for commencement of work, the permittee makes a written request to the director of public works for an extension of time to commence the work, setting forth the reasons for the required extension, the director of public works may grant such extension. A permit which has become void may be renewed at the discretion of the director of public works. (Code 1989, § 5-125; Ord. No. 204-B, §§ 6.3, 6.7, 1-28-1985; Ord. No. 276, § 1, 6-11-1990) 
Sec. 18-27. - Same—Suspension; revocation; modification.     The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the director of public works upon finding that the holder is in violation of the terms of the permit or any portion of this article. (Code 1989, § 5-126; Ord. No. 204-B, § 7.4, 1-28-1985; Ord. No. 276, § 1, 6-11-1990) 
Sec. 18-28. - Variance.     The city council shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for a variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by majority vote of the full membership of the city council. The city council shall give public notice of each such public hearing at least two weeks prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. (Code 1989, § 5-127; Ord. No. 204-B, § 6.5, 1-28-1985) 
Sec. 18-29. - Responsibility.     Neither the issuance of a permit, nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. A permit issued pursuant to this article does not relieve the permittee of the responsibility of securing and complying with any other permit which may be required by any other county or city ordinance or state law. (Code 1989, § 5-128; Ord. No. 204-B, § 6.6, 1-28-1985) 
Sec. 18-30. - Inspection. (a)  The director of public works may cause inspections of the work to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the director of public works in making such inspections. The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and, for this purpose, to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land disturbing activities within a protection area. (b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. (Code 1989, § 5-129; Ord. No. 204-B, § 6.8, 1-28-1985; Ord. No. 276, § 1, 6-11-1990) 
Sec. 18-31. - Performance bond.     Prior to the issuance of any permit for land disturbing activities within the protection area, the applicant shall submit a performance and maintenance bond which shall ensure that all terms and conditions of the permit are complied with. The bond shall pertain to and recite therein an exact description of the property in question. The length of time for which the bond shall be valid shall be determined by the director of public works, and shall be specified on the face of the bond. The bond shall be in an amount equal to twice the estimated cost for carrying out the land disturbing activity in compliance with all terms and conditions of the permit. The sum of the bond shall be made payable to the city. The bond shall be provided by a bonding company licensed and registered in the state. (Code 1989, § 5-130; Ord. No. 204-B, § 6.9, 1-28-1985; Ord. No. 276, § 1, 6-11-1990) 
Sec. 18-32. - Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity.     If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining such permit, that person shall be subject to revocation of such person's business license, work permit, building permit, or other authorization for the conduct of business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. (Code 1989, § 5-131; Ord. No. 204-B, § 7.1, 1-28-1985) 
Sec. 18-33. - Stop-work orders.     Upon notice from the director of public works, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's authorized agent or the person in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed or the site restored to its original condition, or its equivalent. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. (Code 1989, § 5-132; Ord. No. 204-B, § 7.2, 1-28-1985; Ord. No. 276, § 1, 6-11-1990) 
Sec. 18-34. - Performance bond forfeiture.     If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the permit and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, such person shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, the performance bond shall be subject to forfeiture. (Code 1989, § 5-133; Ord. No. 204-B, § 7.3, 1-28-1985) 
Sec. 18-35. - Civil penalties.     Any person violating any provision of this article, or permitting conditions for a stop-work order, and the owner of the land on which the violation occurs shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $100.00 per day or not to exceed $500.00 per day. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1989, § 5-134; Ord. No. 204-B, § 7.5, 1-28-1985) 
Sec. 18-36. - Administrative appeal.     Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the director of public works shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council within 15 days after receipt by the director of public works of written notice of appeal. (Code 1989, § 5-135; Ord. No. 204-B, § 8.1, 1-28-1985; Ord. No. 276, § 1, 6-11-1990) 
Sec. 18-37. - Judicial review.     Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the director of public works, after exhausting such person's administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court. (Code 1989, § 5-136; Ord. No. 204-B, § 8.2, 1-28-1985; Ord. No. 276, § 1, 6-11-1990) 
Chapter 19 - RESERVED 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; statewide application of International Fire Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 20-1. - Fire prevention code—Adoption.     As to fire prevention code, adopted by reference, see section 8-29(a)(3). (Code 1989, § 9-1) 
Sec. 20-2. - Same—Modifications.     The chief of the fire department shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or the duly authorized agent of either, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the intent of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed, and the decision of the chief thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. (Code 1989, § 9-3; Ord. No. 165, § 11, 5-14-1979) 
Sec. 20-3. - Same—New materials, processes or occupancies which require permits.     The mayor and city council, or their designee, and the chief of the fire department shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code. The chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in such chief's office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (Code 1989, § 9-4; Ord. No. 165, § 13, 5-14-1979) 
Sec. 20-4. - Same—Appeals.     Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant is permitted to appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. (Code 1989, § 9-5; Ord. No. 165, § 12, 5-14-1979) 
Sec. 20-5. - Limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited.     The limits referred to in chapter 56 of the fire prevention code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are all areas within the incorporated limits of the city, except those areas zoned "I," light industrial district. (Code 1989, § 9-6; Ord. No. 165, § 4, 5-14-1979) 
Sec. 20-6. - Limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted.     The limits referred to in chapter 61 of the fire prevention code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are all areas within incorporated limits of the city, except those areas zoned "I," light industrial district. 
Sec. 20-7. - Domestic sprinkler installation code.     The domestic sprinkler installation code attached as Exhibit A to the ordinance from which this section is derived shall govern the installation of domestic sprinklers in the city. Such code is hereby incorporated herein by reference as fully as if set out at length herein. (Code 1989, § 9-12; Ord. No. 220, § 1, 11-25-1986) 
Sec. 20-8. - Outdoor burning prohibited. (a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, or as otherwise set forth in this Code, no persons shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse, rubbish, brush, wood, trash, leaves, tree limbs or other combustible materials anywhere in the city. (b)  The following are exceptions to the prohibition on outside burning: (1)  Outdoor burning in connection with the preparation of food for immediate human consumption; (2)  Camp fires and fires used solely for recreational or ceremonial occasions, provided that the burning is approved in advance by the fire department and conducted pursuant to such conditions as the fire department may require; (3)  Burning for the purpose of training private firefighting personnel when conducted in accordance with the guidelines set forth by the department of natural resources, subject to approval of the fire chief; (4)  Burning associated with the operation of devices that require open flames, such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame-making equipment, provided that the use of such equipment does not violate other local or state laws; and (5)  Burning associated with the disposal of packaging materials previously containing explosives, in accordance with the U.S. Department of Labor Safety Regulations. (6)  Fires in recreational fire pits, as defined in the Unified Development Code (the "UDC") and subject to the size and location requirements contained in the UDC. Such fires are not required to be approved in advance by the public safety department and are not limited to cooking purposes. Fires in fire pits must be attended at all times, and smoke from a fire pit that creates a nuisance is prohibited. For the purposes of this section only, nuisance is defined as smoke that enters a neighboring home with windows and doors closed. If the public safety department receives complaints from more than one neighboring household within a twenty-four hour period, an officer shall respond and inspect, and make a reasonable determination based upon the nuisance standard in this section as to whether a fire should be extinguished and whether a warning or citation should be issued. (c)  The fire chief, or his designee, and the director of environmental services, or his designee, shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this section, and may issue citations for violations thereof. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, any person violating any provision of this section which results in a fire requiring the response of the fire department shall also be liable for the costs incurred by the fire department in responding to the fire, including actual labor costs, costs of equipment operation, and costs of materials. (Code 1989, § 9-13; Ord. No. 187, § 16, 9-20-1982; Ord. No. 199, 5-14-1984; Ord. No. 439, § 1, 3-6-2000; Ord. No. 770, § 1, 11-12-2018) 
Sec. 20-9. - Use of fire plugs. (a)  No person, other than a city employee in the discharge of official duty, shall use water from a city fire plug for any purpose whatsoever unless that person has been granted a permit to do so by the city. (b)  Any person found using water from a city fire plug by deliberately turning on such fire plug for personal use without the express permission of the qualified officials as required in subsection (a) of this section will be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1989, § 9-14; Ord. No. 95, §§ 1, 2, 10-26-1965) 
Sec. 20-10. - Fire safety standards for plan review of new commercial construction. (a)  The city adopts the minimum fire safety standards as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(a). (b)  The fire chief shall be responsible for the reviews, inspections and enforcement required by such minimum fire safety standards. (c)  At such time that the minimum standards are revised by the state, such revisions shall be incorporated into the city's standards, provided that nothing herein shall prohibit the city from adopting fire safety provisions more stringent than the state standards. (Code 1989, § 9-15; Res. No. 396, 4-8-1991) 
Sec. 20-11. - Enforcement powers.     Officers of the city fire department are authorized to enforce the provisions of the fire prevention code and this chapter. This authority shall include the power to arrest by the issuance of a citation. (Code 1989, § 9-16; Ord. No. 319, § 1, 9-27-1993) 
Secs. 20-12—20-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS FOR MULTIFAMILY HOUSING 
Sec. 20-34. - Scope. (a)  The fire prevention standards set forth in this article shall apply to multifamily housing with three or more units and containing three or less stories. (b)  Sections 20-42 and 20-43 shall apply to all attached and detached residential units. (Code 1989, § 9-20; Ord. No. 204, 10-22-1984) 
Sec. 20-35. - Accessibility for firefighting equipment. (a)  Reasonable accessibility shall be provided to all buildings for firefighting equipment including ladder trucks on multiple-story projects. A minimum of ten feet of level ground on all sides of the building shall be considered reasonable for ground ladders. Accessibility for ladder trucks shall be determined and approved by the city fire department. (b)  Access to the job site shall consist of roads or streets being finished to the extent that curbing and base coat must be applied before combustible construction starts, and shall be maintained throughout construction operations. (Code 1989, § 9-22; Ord. No. 204, § 2, 10-22-1984) 
Sec. 20-36. - Partitions for multifamily dwellings. (a)  Every dwelling unit shall be separated from every other dwelling unit, hallway, or breezeway by partitions and floor-ceiling assemblies having a fire resistance rating of not less than one hour and be completely firestopped at each floor-ceiling level. The one-hour wall assemblies of the halls, corridors or breezeways may stop at the ceiling level if the ceiling is five-eighths-inch type X sheetrock and a smoke stop of one layer of one-half-inch regular sheetrock on the hall side of each wall and is continued to the roof deck. Exception: if the ceiling of the uppermost unit is one layer five-eighths-inch type X sheetrock, the one-hour partition shall be allowed to stop at the ceiling. (b)  Buildings having only a single row of units shall have fire-stops between each unit. These fire-stops shall be not less than five-eighths-inch type X sheetrock, taped with one coat of joint compound. This firestopping must extend into soffits. (c)  In buildings having units back to back, where roof trusses are perpendicular to the tenant separations, the fire stops shall separate every two units, but shall not, however, exceed 3,000 square feet between stops. (d)  Doors to hallways and breezeways shall have a minimum fire rating of 20 minutes in a 20-minute wood frame with a closer. Door openings within 15 feet horizontally of a single exit stair shall have a three-quarter-hour door, with a closer in steel frame. (e)  Buildings within 20 feet of other buildings shall have exterior exposed walls of not less than a one-hour fire rating with no openings. (f)  Buildings using floor truss systems shall protect the end of these trusses where they meet the one-hour rated wall between units. The trusses shall be banded at the wall by two-inch nominal wood of sufficient width to completely fire stop the trusses horizontally. Note: Fee simple townhouses require two-hour separation, per city building code. (Code 1989, § 9-23; Ord. No. 204, § 3, 10-22-1984) 
Sec. 20-37. - Fire wall requirements for multifamily dwellings. (a)  No building shall have more than 6,000 square feet per floor, nor more than six units between a four-hour fire wall. (b)  Fire wall definition. Fire walls shall be self-supporting from the foundation, and shall extend through and 36 inches from combustible roofs, and flush with the outside of roof overhang. Fire walls need not extend through fire-resistance roof decks. Fire walls shall be four-hour rated. Certification of block will be required. There shall be no unprotected opening in fire walls. (Code 1989, § 9-24; Ord. No. 204, § 4, 10-22-1984) 
Sec. 20-38. - Requirements for early fire detection system and exits in multifamily dwellings. (a)  An approved single station smoke detector, powered by the house electrical system, shall be installed in every living unit. There shall be additional detectors located in each exit corridor every 30 feet. For additional protection, a battery-powered backup detector is required. (b)  Exits in multifamily units shall be as follows: every living unit shall have access to at least two separate exits remote from each other as required by 5-5.1 of the Life Safety Code adopted by the city. (c)  Exception 1. Any living unit which has an exit directly to the street or yard at ground level or by way of an outside stairway, or an enclosed stairway with a fire resistance rating of one hour or more serving that apartment only and not communicating with any floor below the level of exit discharge or other area not a part of the apartment served, may have a single exit. (d)  Exception 2. A building of any height with not more than four living units per floor with a smoke-proof tower or outside stair in accordance with the requirements of 5-2.3 of the Life Safety Code, adopted by the city, as the exit immediately accessible to all living units served thereby, may have a single exit. (The term "immediately accessible" means there is not more than 20 feet of travel distance to reach an exit from the entrance door of any living unit.) (e)  Exception 3. Any building three stories or less in height with one-hour horizontal and vertical separation between living units, may have a single exit, under the following conditions: (1)  The stairway is completely enclosed with a partition having a fire resistance rating of at least one hour, with self-closing one-hour fire protection rated doors protecting all openings between the stairway enclosure and the building. (2)  The stairway does not serve more than one-half story below the level of exit discharge. (3)  All corridors serving as access to exits have at least a one-hour fire resistance rating. (4)  There is not more than 35 feet of travel distance to reach an exit from the entrance door of any living unit. (Code 1989, § 9-25; Ord. No. 204, § 5, 10-22-1984) 
Sec. 20-39. - Protection of hazardous areas.     All hazardous areas shall be separated from other parts of the building by construction having a fire resistance of at least one hour, with three-quarter-hour labeled doors, with steel frame and a closer. These areas shall include, but not be limited to, boiler or furnace rooms, general storage and maintenance shops, or parking or storage of motorized vehicles. This does not include furnaces or hot water heaters located within individual units which serve only that unit, nor does this include storage rooms in individual units. (Code 1989, § 9-26; Ord. No. 204, § 6, 10-22-1984) 
Sec. 20-40. - Control of flame spread.     The flame spread on carpet, wall coverings, paneling, or wood in multifamily units shall be as follows: (1)  Vertical exits, corridors and breezeways shall have a Class "B" (26-75) flame spread rating. (2)  The interior of the units shall have a Class "C" (76-200) flame spread rating. (Code 1989, § 9-27; Ord. No. 204, § 7, 10-22-1984) 
Sec. 20-41. - Opening through floors. (a)  Any opening through floors from one unit to another for heating or plumbing shall be sealed with lightweight concrete or other permanently attached non-combustible material. (b)  Any opening through any floor for any purpose shall be sealed in a like manner. (c)  The double wall furnace vent must be sealed tight at each floor level and at the ceiling level of the top unit. The double wall furnace vent is not required to be enclosed in the attic space, but proper clearances must be maintained. (d)  If a combustion air vent pipe is required for combustion air to the furnace, it shall extend up through the floor-ceiling assembly and into the attic 18 inches above the ceiling, with proper firestopping at each floor level. (e)  Each attic space shall have an attic access measuring 22 inches by 36 inches. This access cannot be located in a closet, unless the closet is a walk-in, and must be shown on the plans. (Code 1989, § 9-28; Ord. No. 204, § 8, 10-22-1984) 
Sec. 20-42. - Chimney chases. (a)  Exterior chase. A chimney chase located on an exterior wall shall have a five-eighths-inch type X fire rated sheetrock on the inside of the chimney chase, on the house side only. (b)  Interior chase. The chase shall be constructed of metal studs with five-eighths-inch type X fire sheetrock on the outside, completely sealed from the rest of the building with no combustibles inside the chase. (c)  General. If there is no fireplace above, firestopping at floor-ceiling levels may be omitted if there are no combustibles inside the chase. If there is a fireplace on the floor above, the bottom of the floor joist must be covered with five-eighths-inch type X fire rated sheetrock with metal fire stops installed around the flue. (Code 1989, § 9-29; Ord. No. 204, § 9, 10-22-1984) 
Sec. 20-43. - Firebox and fireplace openings. (a)  The firebox must be installed on a wooden platform with a one-half-inch plywood floor. No wood shall be used to construct the raised hearth above the sub-floor. The hearth must extend at least 20 inches from the firebox. (b)  The woodwork shall not be placed within six inches of the fireplace opening. The woodwork above and projecting more than 1½ inches from the fireplace opening shall not be placed less than 12 inches from the top of a fireplace opening. (Code 1989, § 9-30; Ord. No. 204, § 10, 10-22-1984) 
Secs. 20-44—20-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CLEAN-UP, ABATEMENT, REMOVAL OF DEBRIS, HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR REFUSE[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. 
Sec. 20-62. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Debris means any loose material not attached to the land or any structure, or the remains of anything broken or destroyed.     Fire chief means the fire chief of the city or his appointed designee.     Hazardous material means any material that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety if released into the environment. Hazardous materials include, but are not limited to, explosives, pyrotechnics, flammable gas, flammable liquid, poisonous gas, poisonous liquid, irritating material, material that causes diseases in humans, radioactive material, corrosive material, or liquefied petroleum gas.     Refuse means all waste substances, including garbage, as well as combustible and non-combustible wastes. (Code 1989, § 9-51; Ord. No. 257, § 1, 5-8-1989) 
Sec. 20-63. - Deposit or release of debris, hazardous material and refuse; clean-up or abatement; liability for costs.     In the event the city fire department is summoned to clean up or abate the effects of any deposit or release of debris, hazardous material or refuse in the city, the following described persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the payment of all costs incurred by the city as a result of such clean-up or abatement activity: (1)  Any person whose negligent or willful act or omission proximately caused such deposit or release; (2)  The person who owned or had custody or control of the debris, hazardous material or refuse at the time of or immediately prior to such deposit or release, without regard to fault or proximate cause; and (3)  The person who owned or had custody or control of the container which held such debris, hazardous material or refuse at the time of or immediately prior to such deposit or release, without regard to fault or proximate cause. (Code 1989, § 9-52; Ord. No. 257, § 2, 5-8-1989) 
Sec. 20-64. - Verification and supervision.     In the event that any person other than a member of the city's fire department undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order of the fire chief or other city official, to clean up or abate the effects of the deposit or release of any debris, hazardous material or refuse, the fire chief may take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the clean-up or abatement. The persons described in section 20-63 shall be liable to the city for all costs incurred as a result of such supervision or verification. (Code 1989, § 9-53; Ord. No. 257, § 3, 5-8-1989) 
Sec. 20-65. - Determination of costs; charges for service; disposition of funds; fee schedule. (a)  The charges to persons under this article shall be based on actual costs incurred by the city and shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, actual labor costs or city personnel, including benefits and administrative overhead, cost of equipment operation, cost of materials obtained directly by the city and the cost of any contract labor and materials. Labor costs shall be based on the current fiscal year salary and benefit budget established for each employee. Equipment costs shall be based on the equipment cost schedule established in the city's financial system. The cost for materials used shall be based on the actual costs incurred to purchase, lease, or contract for goods and/or services during clean-up and abatement activities. (b)  The charges for the provision of services under this article shall be binding upon all persons liable under this article as well as their successors in interest, assigns, estates and heirs. (c)  All moneys received under this article shall be placed in a general fund revenue account. (Code 1989, § 9-54; Ord. No. 257, § 4, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 595, 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 20-66. - Fire suppression services.     The authority to recover costs under this article shall not include actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the city's fire department. (Code 1989, § 9-55; Ord. No. 257, § 5, 5-8-1989) 
Sec. 20-67. - Collection of charges.     The city may enforce the provisions of this article by civil actions in an appropriate court for the collection of amounts due or other appropriate relief. (Code 1989, § 9-56; Ord. No. 257, § 6, 5-8-1989) 
Sec. 20-68. - Service not to be refused for nonpayment.     Nothing in this article shall authorize any city department or city personnel to refuse or delay any service to any person who has not reimbursed the city as provided in this article. (Code 1989, § 9-57; Ord. No. 257, § 7, 5-8-1989) 
Chapter 21 - RESERVED 
Chapter 22 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Smoke-free air, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 et seq., the Georgia Smoke-free Air Act of 2005. 
Sec. 22-1. - Air pollution control; adoption of regulation.     The county board of health regulation number 24 entitled "Air Pollution Control," attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived, is hereby adopted by the city by reference, and incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein. One or more copies thereof are on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1989, § 10-1; Ord. No. 110, 11-29-1969) 
Sec. 22-2. - Clean community system. (a)  The city council hereby endorses the clean community system, and supports the participation of the city in the system. (b)  In keeping with the design of the clean community system, the city council hereby recognizes the city clean and beautiful commission. Such commission shall be an official committee of the city and accountable to the mayor. The members and chairperson of the clean and beautiful commission shall be appointed by the city council. (Code 1989, § 10-2; Res. of 2-10-1986) 
Sec. 22-3. - Burial of materials on property under development. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, or cause or permit any person to bury, glass, cans, tires, appliances, and similar manmade materials on any property under development. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, or cause or permit any person to bury, tree stumps, limbs and similar natural materials on any property under development, except in compliance with the following conditions: (1)  No burial shall be permitted on any lot having an area of 20,000 square feet or less, exclusive of the right-of-way of any road; (2)  No portion of any burial site shall lie within 50 feet of any roadbed, driveway, building or other structure; (3)  Prior to any burial, the city director of planning and community development shall receive and approve a detailed site plan which shall set forth, in addition to other information required by ordinances of the city, the location of the proposed burial site; (4)  In the event that a burial is permitted in accordance with the foregoing provisions, the location of the burial site shall be shown on the final plat submitted for recording. (Code 1989, § 10-3; Ord. No. 215, § 2, 10-14-1985) 
Sec. 22-4. - Regulation of smoking in certain public places. (a)  Areas where prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any facility owned or leased by the city, and in any private facility where a public meeting is called by the city, or an agency thereof, during the time such meeting is being held. For the purposes of this section, the term "smoking" or "to smoke" means the act of smoking or carrying a lighted or smoldering cigar, cigarette or pipe of any kind or lighting a cigar, cigarette or pipe of any kind. (b)  Posting of signs. Signs prohibiting smoking shall be conspicuously posted in those areas in which smoking is prohibited by this section. (c)  Enforcement. This section may be enforced by any member of the city police department or fire department. (d)  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined according to the penalties described in section 1-8 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Code 1989, § 10-4; Ord. No. 329, §§ 1—4, 1-24-1994) 
Sec. 22-5. - Spill containment kits required. (a)  The city shall acquire and equip all city vehicles with appropriate spill containment kits as selected and designated by the city's director of environmental services. (b)  All employees operating city vehicles shall be appropriately trained in the safe and effective use of spill containment kits. (Code 1989, § 10-5; Res. No. 800, 10-18-1999) 
Chapter 23 - RESERVED 
Chapter 24 - IMPACT FEES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 24-1—24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SAFETY IMPACT FEE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. 
Sec. 24-19. - Short title; authority; applicability. (a)  Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Alpharetta, Georgia," or, for brevity, the "Impact Fee Ordinance." (b)  Authority. The ordinance from which this article is derived has been prepared and adopted by the city council in accordance with the authority provided by article 9, section 2, paragraph 3 of the state constitution, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq., as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. (c)  Applicability. (1)  The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. (2)  This article shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of the city and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
Sec. 24-20. - Findings; purpose; intent. (a)  Findings. The city council finds and declares: (1)  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city; (2)  That certain public facilities as herein defined have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development; and (3)  That it is fair and equitable that new growth and development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. (b)  Purpose. (1)  The purpose of this article is to impose impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined. (2)  It is also the purpose of this article to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in the city and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. (c)  Intent. This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the Alpharetta Comprehensive Plan, as it may be adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq.); and the applicable Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning and the Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements, both as adopted by the state board of community affairs and amended from time to time. 
Sec. 24-21. - Rules of construction; definitions.     The provisions of this article shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. (1)  Rules of construction. Unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: a.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between words or phrases as used in this article and as used in other codes, regulations or laws of the city, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this article. b.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. c.  The use of "either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. d.  The term "includes" or "including" and the phrase "such as" shall not limit a term to the specific example given but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. e.  The article, section, and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this article are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this article. (2)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Administrator means the director of community development of the city, or the director's designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this article.     Building permit means the document issued by the city authorizing the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure, or authorizing the installation of a mobile home or recreational vehicle. For the purposes of this article, the term "building permit" also means a change of use permit.     Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility.     Capital improvements element means that portion of the city comprehensive land use plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement, as most recently adopted or amended by the city council.     Commencement of construction , for private development, means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development or building permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, the term "commencement of construction" means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they are development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project.     Comprehensive plan means the city plan or planning elements as adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq.) and the applicable minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning as adopted by the state board of community affairs.     Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a work day, or other designation, when used in the text.     Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development.     Development means any action which creates demand on or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; any change in use of land, a building, or structure; or the connection of any building or structure to a public utility.     Development approval means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, land disturbance permit or other approval, for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction.     Development impact fee means the payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it.     Dwelling unit means one or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment designed for use by one family with provisions for cooking, eating, sleeping, bathing and personal sanitation, and physically set apart from any other rooms or dwelling units in the same structure or another structure. A dwelling unit may be a single-family detached home, an apartment or condominium in a multifamily structure, or a manufactured home.     Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of the city council.     Excess capacity means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard.     Feepayor means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees that are required by this article has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest.     Floor area means the total number of square feet of heated floor space within the exterior walls of a building. Also referred to as the "gross floor area."     Individual assessment determination means a finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this article or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom.     Individual assessment study means the engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule.     Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by the city in terms of demand-to-capacity ratios, or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities, or both.     Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of net present value.     Project means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or other development approval, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park.     Project improvements means site-specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not system improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by the city shall be considered a project improvement.     Property owner means that person or entity who holds legal title to property.     Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project.     Public facilities. The term "public facilities" means: (1)  Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; (2)  Public safety facilities, including police, fire and emergency medical and communications facilities; and (3)  Roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping, and any other components of local, state or federal streets or highways.     Service area means a geographically defined area as designated in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide, or are proposed to provide, service to existing or future development.     System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. The term "system improvement costs" includes the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three percent of the total of all other system improvement costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs.     System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contrast to project improvements.     Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc.     Unused or excess impact fee means any individual impact fee payment from which no amount of money, or only a portion thereof, has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of this article. 
Sec. 24-22. - Exceptions; grandfathered projects; method of calculation.     Any person who, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, engages in development, shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. (1)  Construction not subject to impact fees. a.  The following projects and construction activities do not constitute development as defined in this article, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 1.  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development (as defined in this article) that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property. 2.  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 3.  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 4.  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 5.  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential housing unit that may increase the floor area or number of rooms, but does not increase the number of housing units. 6.  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, detached garage or utility shed, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facility such as a swimming pool or tennis court. b.  A person claiming to be not subject to impact fees under subsection (1)a.1 of this section shall submit to the administrator information and documentation sufficient to permit the administrator to determine whether such claim is correct. (2)  Grandfathered projects. a.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be subject to development impact fees, so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. b.  Any building for which a valid and complete application for a building permit has been received prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may proceed without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this article, provided that: 1.  All fees and development exactions in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be or have been paid in full; and 2.  Said construction shall be commenced, pursued and completed within the time established by the building permit, or within 180 days, whichever is later. (3)  Method of calculation. a.  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this article shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development, as established in the capital improvements element. b.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, the calculation of impact fees shall be the net of credits for the present value of ad valorem taxes or other revenues as established in the capital improvements element, and which: 1.  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new growth and development; and 2.  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category for which an impact fee is imposed. c.  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this article shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of the city, and may be amended from time to time by official act. d.  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee may also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements, to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities, as established in the capital improvements element. e.  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the capital improvements element. 
Sec. 24-23. - Fee schedule; payment; individual assessment; certification. (a)  Fee schedule. (1)  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and incorporated herein as Attachment A, shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by the city, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. (2)  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure other than a shopping center, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. Shopping centers shall be assessed a single impact fee, in accordance with Attachment A, as a single use without regard to its individual tenants. (3)  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: a.  The administrator, in his reasonable discretion, shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee. b.  In making such determination, the administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. c.  If a land use designation is not in a category contained in this article, then an appropriate new category may be added by the administrator and an appropriate fee established under the city's current impact fee methodology, subject to annual confirmation by the city council. d.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. (b)  Timing of assessment and payment. (1)  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of application for a building permit. (2)  All development impact fees shall be collected no earlier than at the time of issuance of a building permit, and no later than as a prerequisite to issuance of an interior finishes permit or a certificate of occupancy for the building or building shell. (3)  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction or to commence use of a property. (4)  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the following: a.  Prior to the completion of the project, and as a condition to the issuance of an interior finishes permit or a certificate of occupancy, as applicable, the developer shall recertify in writing to the administrator the actual land use or uses of the project, and shall present an architect's certificate of the actual gross square footage of floor area attributable to each use. b.  In the event that the actual land use or uses and/or the actual gross square footage applicable to the actual land use or uses differs from that originally certified, and in the event that the impact fee applicable to the actual land use or uses and/or gross square footage exceeds the impact fee previously paid, the developer shall be required to pay the amount of the excess as a condition to the issuance of an interior finishes permit or a certificate of occupancy. c.  The amount of the excess shall be based upon the impact fee schedule in effect on the date the interior finishes permit or the certificate of occupancy is issued. d.  If the actual gross square footage constructed after the issuance of the building permit is less than the amount originally certified, the developer shall be entitled to a refund of the excess portion of the fee. (5)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any future change in demand for public facilities in excess of the average demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the building permit shall be assessed such additional fee as would otherwise have been due. Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined herein), or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the building permit. (c)  Individual assessment determinations. An individual assessment of development impact fees for a particular property or proposed use may be established as follows: (1)  At his option, an applicant for development approval may petition the administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for his project in lieu of the fee established on the fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A. (2)  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. The individual assessment study shall: a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or b.  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in Alpharetta or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and c.  Provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. (3)  The administrator, in his reasonable discretion, shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this article. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. (4)  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by the city, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. (d)  Fee certification. Upon application to the administrator, a property owner or developer may receive a certification of the development impact fee schedule attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and incorporated herein as Attachment A, or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. (1)  The administrator shall provide an applicant with a written certification of the impact fee schedule within five working days after the administrator's receipt of a completed application. The fee schedule certified by the administrator shall establish the impact fee schedule for the proposed development activity for a period of 180 days from the date of certification. (2)  The administrator shall provide the applicant with a written certification of an individual fee determination within 30 days after receipt of a completed application. The individual fee determination certified by the administrator shall establish the total impact fee for the proposed development activity for the 180-day period immediately following the date of such certification. (3)  Notwithstanding the issuance of any certification of an individual fee determination, any additions to the proposed development activity different from the development activity identified in the original application shall be subject to increased or additional impact fees in accordance with the new total amount of development. The impact fees shall be based upon the impact fee schedule in effect at the time of building permit issuance for the development. 
Sec. 24-24. - Exemptions. (a)  Exemption policy. The city recognizes that certain office, retail trade and industrial development projects provide extraordinary benefit in support of the economic advancement of the city's citizens over and above the access to jobs, goods and services that such uses offer in general. To encourage such development projects, the mayor and city council may consider granting a reduction in the impact fee for such a development project upon the determination and relative to the extent that the business or project represents extraordinary economic development and employment growth or public benefit to the city, in accordance with exemption criteria the city may adopt. It is also recognized that the cost of system improvements otherwise foregone through exemption of any impact fee must be funded through revenue sources other than impact fees. (b)  Process for exemption approval. An application for exemption shall be considered under the following procedures: (1)  An application for exemption approval must be made to the administrator prior to or along with an application for a building permit. Any exemptions not so applied for shall be deemed waived. (2)  A building permit may be issued upon approval of an exemption, or may be issued without payment of applicable impact fees following receipt of a complete exemption application and pending its approval, but a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until a decision regarding the exemption has been made, or until such time that the application for exemption is otherwise withdrawn by the applicant and impact fees have been paid. (3)  Documentation must be provided to the administrator that demonstrates the applicant's eligibility for an exemption. This documentation shall address, but need not be limited to, all applicable exemption criteria adopted by the city. This documentation constitutes the application for exemption. (4)  The administrator, in his reasonable discretion, shall determine whether an application for exemption addresses the exemption criteria adopted by the city and is complete. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. (5)  The administrator or the city council shall determine the eligibility for and extent of exemption, in accordance with the standards and procedures contained in the exemption criteria adopted by the city council. If action by the city council is required, the application for exemption shall be considered at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council that falls at least two weeks after a complete application for exemption has been received by the administrator. 
Sec. 24-25. - Deposit and expenditure of fees. (a)  Maintenance of funds. (1)  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this article shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until encumbered or expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. (2)  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements (public safety, recreation and parks, and roads) and for administration fees collected. (3)  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be allocated to each category of system improvements and the administration accounts in proportion to the impact fees collected, shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this article. (b)  Expenditures; restrictions. (1)  Expenditures from the system improvements impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. (2)  Expenditures from the administration account may be expended directly for administrative purposes or transferred to the general fund to cover administrative costs. (3)  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. (4)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, the following shall be considered general revenue of the city, and may be expended accordingly: a.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; b.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by the city for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and c.  Any portion of the impact fee (but not to exceed three percent of the total) collected and allocated by the administrator for administration of the impact fee ordinance, and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. (c)  Annual report. (1)  The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the city council as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year, by category of public facility. (2)  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the state department of community affairs (DCA), and submitted to DCA in conjunction with the annual update of the city's capital improvements element. 
Sec. 24-26. - Credits.     When eligible, feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. (1)  Credits; restrictions. a.  Except as provided in subsection (1)b of this section, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. b.  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his predecessor in title or interest) prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of the city, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements. c.  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements or for system improvements not included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element. (2)  Granting of credits. a.  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 1.  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element; 2.  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the capital improvements element. b.  The credit allowed pursuant to this section shall not exceed the impact fee due for such system improvement unless a greater credit is authorized under a private contractual agreement executed under the provisions of this article. (3)  Guidelines for credit valuation. Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: a.  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the administrator of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. b.  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. c.  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that the city would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. d.  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his predecessor in title or interest accepted by the city, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. e.  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the interest rate being earned on the city's impact fee funds, less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate or inflation rate as the city council, in its sole discretion, may deem appropriate. (4)  Credits; application. a.  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the administrator. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the administrator at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. b.  The administrator, in his reasonable discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. c.  Any credit approved by the administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. d.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. (5)  Credits; registry. a.  Credits shall be recognized in writing setting forth the name of the person or entity to whom the credit is issued and the amount of the credit. b.  The city shall maintain a register (the "credit register") which shall set forth the name of the credit holder and the amount of the credit. c.  Credits are transferable from one developer to another and from one project to another, provided that the transfer is accomplished in accordance with the provisions of this section. 1.  Transfers of credits shall only be effective when entered in the credit register of the city, upon written notification, signed and dated as of the date of the purported transfer, by the person in whose name the credit is registered, or on his behalf by a person legally authorized to so sign. 2.  Any attempted transfer not in compliance with the terms of this section shall not be effective, shall not be recognized by the city, and shall result in the waiver and forfeiture of the credit. (6)  Credits; abandoned building permits. a.  In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the amount of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the city, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. b.  A building permit shall be deemed abandoned if no construction has been commenced prior to the expiration of the building permit. 
Sec. 24-27. - Refunds; private agreements. (a)  Eligibility for a refund. (1)  Upon the request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: a.  Capacity is available in the public facilities for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or b.  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected. (2)  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. (b)  Notice of entitlement to a refund. When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to spend or encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within 30 days after the expiration of the six-year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected, and shall contain a heading: "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." No refund shall be made for a period of 30 days from the date of said publication. (c)  Filing a request for a refund. A request for a refund shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. (d)  Payment of refunds. (1)  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. (2)  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. (3)  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, for any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by the city for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element. 
Sec. 24-28. - Private agreements procedure. (a)  Private agreements; authorized. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the city and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including inter-project transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project. (b)  Private agreements; procedure. (1)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review and negotiation, prior to submission to the city council. (2)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney as to form and sufficiency prior to consideration by the city council. (3)  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the city council prior to the issuance of a building permit. (4)  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the land owner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of the superior court for recording. 
Sec. 24-29. - Amendments; review; continuation. (a)  Article amendments. (1)  This article may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. (2)  Interim amendments to the impact fee schedule regarding the establishment of new land use categories by the administrator under section 24-23(a)(3)c are expressly authorized, and shall be confirmed by the city council when the annual CIE update required under subsection (b)(1) of this section is approved, or when this article is subsequently amended. (b)  Capital improvements element periodic review. (1)  Annual update. At least once each year, the city council shall review and may update the capital improvements element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The capital improvements element update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The capital improvements element update shall be submitted to the Atlanta Regional Commission for its review, in accordance with the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the state board of community affairs. (2)  Amendment. In conducting a periodic review of the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, the city council may determine to amend the capital improvements element. Amendments to the capital improvements element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the state board of community affairs, and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: a.  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; b.  Add new public facility categories for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas or make changes to system improvement projects; c.  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area; or d.  Make any other revisions needed to keep the capital improvements element up to date. (c)  Continuation of validity. Failure of the city council to undertake a periodic review of the capital improvements element shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to periodically review such data shall not invalidate this article. 
Sec. 24-30. - Appeals. (a)  Eligibility to file an appeal. Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the city or who have already received a written determination of individual assessment, refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. Such appeals may address: (1)  The imposition of an impact fee. (2)  The amount of an impact fee. (3)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of credits applicable to an impact fee. (4)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of a refund of an impact fee. (b)  Appeals process. (1)  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor (hereinafter, the "appellant") must file a written appeal with the administrator within 15 days of the decision or receipt of written determination from which the appeal is taken. (2)  Such written appeal shall constitute an application for relief, shall be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought, and shall include: a.  The name and address of the appellant; b.  The location of the affected property; and c.  A copy of any applicable written decision or determination made by the administrator from which the appeal is taken. (3)  Within 15 days after receipt of the appeal, the administrator shall make a written final decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. (4)  Appeals from the final decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council within 30 days of receipt by the appellant of the administrator's final decision. Delivery by hand or certified mail to, or posting upon the property at, the address given by the appellant in the application for relief shall constitute receipt by the appellant under this provision. (5)  The city council shall thereafter hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days, provided that at least two weeks' written notice thereof can be given to the appellant. The city council shall decide the issue within a reasonable time following the hearing, but in no case later than its next regular meeting, unless the appellant agrees to an extension to a later date. Any party making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. (c)  Payment of impact fee during appeal. (1)  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. (2)  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a development approval, and by making such payment, shall not be estopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
Sec. 24-31. - Enforcement; violations. (a)  Enforcement authority. (1)  The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel as the administrator may designate from time to time. (2)  The administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this article and shall have the right to issue a written notice, a stop-work order or citation for violations, as the administrator, in his reasonable determination, may deem appropriate to the circumstances. Refusal of written notice of violation, stop-work order or citation under this article shall constitute legal notice of service. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 days, unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. (3)  The administrator may suspend or revoke any building permit or withhold the issuance of other development approvals if the provisions of this article have been violated by the developer or the owner or his assigns. (b)  Violations. (1)  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this article shall constitute an actionable violation. (2)  Proceeding with construction of a project that is not consistent with the project's impact fee assessment, such as the use category claimed or units of development indicated, shall constitute an actionable violation. (3)  Failure to take corrective action following the receipt of a citation shall constitute an actionable violation. (4)  A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law, including the general penalty provisions of this Code. In addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the city council shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this article, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this article and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. (Ord. No. 714, 9-28-2015) Attachment A: Impact Fee Schedule Impact Fee Schedule City of Alpharetta, Georgia ITE Code Land Use Category Net Impact Fee Administration (3%) Total Impact Fee Residential 210 Single-family detached housing $6,494.69 $194.84 $6,689.53 per dwelling 220 Apartment $6,494.69 $194.84 $6,689.53 per dwelling 230 Residential condominium/townhouse $6,494.69 $194.84 $6,689.53 per dwelling Port and terminal 030 Intermodal truck terminal $0.57 $0.02 $0.59 per sq. ft. Industrial/agricultural 110 General light industrial $0.58 $0.02 $0.60 per sq. ft. 120 General heavy industrial $0.31 $0.01 $0.32 per sq. ft. 140 Manufacturing $0.39 $0.01 $0.40 per sq. ft. 150 Warehousing $0.26 $0.01 $0.27 per sq. ft. 151 Mini-warehouse $0.11 $0.00 $0.11 per sq. ft. 152 High-cube warehouse $0.08 $0.00 $0.08 per sq. ft. Lodging 310 Hotel or conference motel $419.49 $12.58 $432.07 per room 311 All suites hotel $273.07 $8.19 $281.26 per room 320 Motel $295.44 $8.86 $304.30 per room Recreational 430 Golf course $212.75 $6.38 $219.14 per acre 437 Bowling alley $1.32 $0.04 $1.36 per sq. ft. 443 Movie theater $2.98 $0.09 $3.07 per sq. ft. 460 Arena $1,638.82 $49.16 $1,687.98 per acre 480 Amusement park $3,931.18 $117.94 $4,049.12 per acre 490 Tennis court $611.95 $18.36 $630.31 per acre 491 Racquet/tennis club $0.54 $0.02 $0.56 per sq. ft. 492 Health/fitness center $1.27 $0.04 $1.31 per sq. ft. 495 Recreational community center $1.37 $0.04 $1.41 per sq. ft. Institutional 520 Private elementary school $0.65 $0.02 $0.67 per sq. ft. 530 Private high school $0.55 $0.02 $0.56 per sq. ft. 560 Church/place of worship $0.39 $0.01 $0.40 per sq. ft. 565 Day care center $0.71 $0.02 $0.74 per sq. ft. 566 Cemetery $189.34 $5.68 $195.02 per acre Medical 610 Hospital $0.82 $0.02 $0.85 per sq. ft. 620 Nursing home $0.56 $0.02 $0.57 per sq. ft. 630 Clinic $1.55 $0.05 $1.59 per sq. ft. Office 710 General office building $0.88 $0.03 $0.90 per sq. ft. 714 Corporate headquarters building $0.77 $0.02 $0.80 per sq. ft. 715 Single-tenant office building $0.88 $0.03 $0.90 per sq. ft. 720 Medical-dental office building $1.94 $0.06 $2.00 per sq. ft. 760 Research and development center $0.71 $0.02 $0.73 per sq. ft. 770 Business park $0.90 $0.03 $0.92 per sq. ft. Retail 812 Building materials and lumber store $1.72 $0.05 $1.77 per sq. ft. 813 Freestanding discount superstore $1.72 $0.05 $1.78 per sq. ft. 814 Variety store $1.44 $0.04 $1.49 per sq. ft. 815 Freestanding discount store $1.73 $0.05 $1.78 per sq. ft. 816 Hardware/paint store $0.99 $0.03 $1.02 per sq. ft. 817 Nursery (garden center) $2.73 $0.08 $2.82 per sq. ft. 818 Nursery (wholesale) $1.55 $0.05 $1.60 per sq. ft. 820 Shopping center $1.58 $0.05 $1.62 per sq. ft. 823 Factory outlet center $1.13 $0.03 $1.16 per sq. ft. 826 Specialty retail center $1.77 $0.05 $1.83 per sq. ft. 841 Automobile sales $1.28 $0.04 $1.31 per sq. ft. 843 Auto parts store $1.27 $0.04 $1.31 per sq. ft. 848 Tire store $0.87 $0.03 $0.90 per sq. ft. 849 Tire superstore $0.88 $0.03 $0.91 per sq. ft. 850 Supermarket $2.00 $0.06 $2.06 per sq. ft. 851 Convenience market (open 24 hours) $6.43 $0.19 $6.62 per sq. ft. 853 Convenience market with gasoline pumps $5.91 $0.18 $6.09 per sq. ft. 854 Discount supermarket $2.28 $0.07 $2.35 per sq. ft. 860 Wholesale market $0.28 $0.01 $0.29 per sq. ft. 861 Discount club $1.24 $0.04 $1.28 per sq. ft. 862 Home improvement superstore $0.53 $0.02 $0.55 per sq. ft. 863 Electronics superstore $0.64 $0.02 $0.66 per sq. ft. 870 Apparel store $1.59 $0.05 $1.64 per sq. ft. 875 Department store $0.74 $0.02 $0.76 per sq. ft. 880 Pharmacy/drugstore $1.74 $0.05 $1.79 per sq. ft. 890 Furniture store $0.10 $0.00 $0.10 per sq. ft.  Impact Fee Schedule City of Alpharetta, Georgia ITE Code Land Use Category Net Impact Fee Administration (3%) Total Impact Fee Services 912 Drive-in bank $2.01 $0.06 $2.08 per sq. ft. 931 Quality restaurant $2.44 $0.07 $2.52 per sq. ft. 932 High-turnover (sit-down) restaurant $3.04 $0.09 $3.13 per sq. ft. 934 Fast food restaurant $7.09 $0.21 $7.30 per sq. ft. 941 Quick lubrication vehicle shop $1,675.45 $50.26 $1,725.72 per service bay 944 Gasoline/service station $1,433.65 $43.01 $1,476.66 per pump 945 Gasoline station w/convenience market $954.49 $28.63 $983.13 per pump 947 Self-service car wash $1,836.45 $55.09 $1,891.55 per stall Notes: All dollar amounts are shown rounded to cents. See the fee schedule for each public facility component for more accurate amounts to four decimals.  "ITE Code" means the land use code assigned in the Trip Generation Manual published by the Institute of Transportation    Engineers, 9th Edition.  Parks fee applies only to residential uses.  "Square foot" means square foot of gross building floor area.  (Ord. No. 714, 9-28-2015) 
Chapter 25 - RESERVED 
Chapter 26 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Abandoned vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 26-19. - Person's responsibility—Generally.     No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or let or sublet to another for occupancy, or keep and maintain, whether in use or abandoned, any vehicle, whether motorized or non-motorized, upon such person's premises or on city property adjacent to such person's premises for any purpose whatsoever which, under the provisions of this article, constitutes a nuisance. (Code 1989, § 10-30; Ord. No. 167, § (A), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-20. - Same—Specifically.     It shall be the duty of both the owner and the occupant or inhabitant of any building, dwelling, or dwelling unit to keep the interior and exterior of any vehicle, whether motorized or non-motorized, and the exterior of such building, dwelling and dwelling unit, including its premises, yards, lawns, grounds, courts and alleys, clean, clear and free of any attractive nuisance created by abandoned, useless, worn-out or damaged vehicles (defined for purposes of this article as any vehicle which is not in working order and which does not possess a valid license tag and inspection sticker of the current year), from filth, rubbish, garbage, debris, combustible materials, or excessive growth of weeds or grass, or similar matters which are conducive to rodent, vermin or insect infestation, or conditions conducive to the spread of fire or disease, in and around such vehicles, and the same duty shall rest on the owner of any vacant lot or land adjacent to such vehicle. (Code 1989, § 10-31; Ord. No. 167, § (C), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-21. - Declaration of nuisance generally.     Any vehicle, whether motorized or non-motorized, is a nuisance where it is perilous to life or property by reason of abandonment, neglect, filth, dilapidation, overcrowding or of a condition that it is not fit for the purpose for which it was originally intended, and is susceptible to fire or accessible to children playing who could be injured because of such condition, and as such, is a danger to the health of the citizens because of such vehicle's providing a harboring place for vermin and the spread of disease. (Code 1989, § 10-32; Ord. No. 167, § (A), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-22. - Specific nuisance conditions. (a)  Any vehicle, whether motorized or non-motorized, which may have one or more of the following defects shall be deemed unfit and as junk and shall constitute a nuisance: (1)  Those which have propelling mechanisms which have failed and are no longer operational. (2)  Those which have bodies and/or frameworks which are useless, worn out and damaged to such an extent that they are no longer fit for the use for which originally intended. (3)  Those which have become worthless and discarded and are only fit to be turned to some use other than the use originally intended, such as salvaging the useable parts of the machinery and re-melting the remainder of the metal for recycling. (4)  Those which are abandoned in the same or approximately the same location for 30 days or longer without the owner or person in possession making some repair disposition and removing such vehicle from the premises. (5)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other cause so as to have become dangerous to the life, safety, or the general health and welfare of the occupants of the premises or of the adjacent premises or the people of the city. (6)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to their intended use that they are unfit for human use or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, safety and general welfare of those living around the same. (7)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached or detached that they may injure members of the public or property. (8)  Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of the city. (9)  Those outside and/or inside of premises which are not clean, clear and free of any attractive nuisance or accumulation of dirt, junk, filth, rubbish, garbage, debris, combustible materials, excessive growth of weeds or grass, or similar conditions conducive to rodent, vermin or insect infestation or the spread of fire or disease. (b)  Any vehicle, premises or place in which one or more of the foregoing defects shall exist shall not be permitted to remain in such condition without the abatement of the nuisance for any period longer than 30 days after service of official notice upon the owner or agent that such conditions exist, except upon the specific written authority of the city council. (Code 1989, § 10-33; Ord. No. 167, § (B), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-23. - Noncompliance deemed nuisance; abatement by city authorized.     Noncompliance with this article shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated by the city in the manner provided herein below. (Code 1989, § 10-34; Ord. No. 167, § (D), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-24. - Inspection of premises—Procedure.     The enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of any vehicles located on the premises or adjacent to the premises of any building, dwelling or dwelling units, the premises, yards, lawns, grounds, courts and alleys of any such building unit, or any vacant lot or land located within the city, in the interest of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants and of the public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enter onto, examine, survey and photograph at all reasonable times any such vehicles and the premises thereabout. (Code 1989, § 10-35; Ord. No. 167, § (E), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-25. - Same—Disinterested city employees required; restriction on giving out information.     No official or employee of the city making inspection of properties for the purpose of determining the necessity for repairs or corrections thereto shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any repairs or corrections which may be required; nor shall any such official or employee give to any person, other than those authorized persons listed, any information relative to any such repairs or corrections; nor shall such officials or employees give to any mechanic, automobile body repair establishment or individual or other persons engaged in the business of automobile repairs the locations of any vehicles complained of under this article or the names of the owners thereof, on which repairs or corrections have been ordered. (Code 1989, § 10-36; Ord. No. 167, § (L), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-26. - Notice; required, contents.     Whenever the enforcement officer finds that any vehicle located on the premises or adjacent to the premises of any building, structure, enclosure, place or the premises, yards, lawns, grounds, courts and alleys thereof, or any vacant lot or land has one or more of the defects set out hereinabove, or that other conditions exist which, in such officer's opinion, constitute a nuisance, such officer shall give written notice to the owner and/or the occupant of such property stating that, in such officer's opinion, the conditions constitute a nuisance; such notice shall: (1)  Be signed by the enforcement officer; (2)  Be served upon the owner or the owner's agent, or the occupant of the premises adjacent to such vehicle, as the case may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to such person's last-known address; or if such person is served with such notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of the state; (3)  Service may also be obtained by determining the name of the owner of the vehicle as listed in the vehicle registration files for the tag number located upon such vehicle; (4)  Outline the conditions complained of; (5)  Outline the remedial action deemed necessary to abate the nuisance; (6)  Specify a reasonable time (not more than 30 days) which shall be allowed for taking the required remedial action; (7)  State that unless the required action is taken within the time specified, the party notified will be summoned to appear before the municipal court to have determined the question whether the conditions complained of constitute a nuisance and should be abated. (Code 1989, § 10-37; Ord. No. 167, § (F), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-27. - Jurisdiction of municipal court.     Should the remedial action specified in the notice provided hereinabove not be taken within the time allowed, the enforcement officer shall cause the party notified to be summoned to appear before the municipal court to have determined the question whether the conditions complained of constitute a nuisance and should be abated. (Code 1989, § 10-38; Ord. No. 167, § (G), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-28. - Failure to appear.     Any person who shall fail to appear in response to a summons issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense for such failure to appear, and may be punished as hereinafter provided. (Code 1989, § 10-39; Ord. No. 167, § (I), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-29. - Separate offense.     If, upon such hearing, the judge shall find that the conditions complained of constitute a nuisance, and shall order the same abated, each ten days that such condition shall be maintained subsequent to the expiration of the time fixed by the court for the same to be abated shall constitute a separate offense, punishable as herein provided. (Code 1989, § 10-40; Ord. No. 167, § (H), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-30. - Emergency power authorized.     Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, whenever the enforcement officer shall determine that the conditions found constitute imminent and immediate danger or hazard to persons or property, such officer is authorized forthwith to cause the summons provided for herein to be issued, without the necessity of giving any preliminary notice to the owner or occupant. (Code 1989, § 10-41; Ord. No. 167, § (J), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-31. - Appeals to city council.     Any person receiving written notice from the enforcement officer pursuant to the provisions of this article, within 15 days following the date of such notice, may enter an appeal in writing to the city council. No appeal filed later than 15 days after the date of such notice shall be acted upon by the city council unless the enforcement officer shall consent thereto. (Code 1989, § 10-42; Ord. No. 167, § (M), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-32. - Reports, etc., available to specified persons.     After any order, report or recommendation has been made by any official or employee of the city and is on file in the respective department, such information shall, upon request, be available to the press, the owner of the property, or such person's authorized agent, the manager of the property, the attorney for any of the foregoing, any licensed attorney for the examination of titles, any official or employee of the city for official purposes, and to any other persons upon written application to the respective department where such order or other information is on file. (Code 1989, § 10-43; Ord. No. 167, § (K), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-33. - Placarding of premises.     After written notice has been given by the enforcement officer to the owners of such vehicle or the owners or agents of properties adjacent to such vehicle that conditions have been found therein which, in such officer's opinion, constitute a nuisance under this article, the enforcement officer, with concurrence of the city council, is authorized to place a signed notice on such vehicle reciting the findings and action taken with respect thereto following condemnation by the court. It shall be unlawful for such notice to be mutilated or removed from such vehicle, premises, or place until required improvements have been made or the nuisance abated. (Code 1989, § 10-44; Ord. No. 167, § (N), 7-23-1979) 
Sec. 26-34. - Appeals to court.     Any persons found to be in violation of this article by the municipal court and upon appeal to the city council shall have the right of appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction, and upon appeal, the city authorities shall be authorized to defend their decision in determining such violations to be a nuisance and in need of abatement for the public interest. (Code 1989, § 10-45; Ord. No. 167, § (P), 7-23-1979) 
Secs. 26-35—26-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GRAFFITI 
Sec. 26-57. - Purpose and intent. (a)  The mayor and city council are enacting this article to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the removal of graffiti from public and private property. The city council is authorized to enact this article pursuant to its police powers, as set forth in the city Charter. (b)  The city council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. (c)  The city council intends, through the adoption of this article, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement. The city council does not intend for this article to conflict with any existing anti-graffiti state laws. (Code 1989, § 13-101; Ord. No. 429, § 1, 9-20-1999) 
Sec. 26-58. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the city council.     Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface. (Code 1989, § 13-102; Ord. No. 429, § 2, 9-20-1999) 
Sec. 26-59. - Prohibited acts; defacement.     It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface on any city-owned property or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any non-city-owned property. (Code 1989, § 13-103; Ord. No. 429, § 3, 9-20-1999) 
Sec. 26-60. - Penalties. (a)  Fines and imprisonment. Any person violating this article shall be punished by a fine according to the penalties described in section 1-8. (1)  In the case of a minor, the parent or legal guardian shall be jointly and severely liable with the minor for payment of all fines. (2)  Failure of the parent or legal guardian to make payment will result in the filing of a lien on the parent's or legal guardian's property that includes the fine and administrative costs. (b)  Restitution. In addition to any punishment specified in this section, the court shall order any violator to make restitution to the victim for damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in the amount or manner determined by the court. In the case of a minor, the parent or legal guardian shall be ordered jointly and severely liable with the minor to make the restitution. (c)  Community service. In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified in this section, a minor or adult may be required to perform community service as described by the court, based on the following minimum requirements: (1)  The minor or adult shall perform at least 30 hours of community service. (2)  At least one parent or guardian of the minor shall be in attendance a minimum of 50 percent of the period of assigned community service. (Code 1989, § 13-104; Ord. No. 429, § 4, 9-20-1999) 
Sec. 26-61. - Graffiti as nuisance. (a)  The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this article is expressly declared to be a public nuisance. (b)  It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has been applied and any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such property to at all times keep the property clear of graffiti. (Code 1989, § 13-105; Ord. No. 429, § 5, 9-20-1999) 
Sec. 26-62. - Removal of graffiti by perpetrator.     Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the city or the private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the chief of police, the director of the department of public works, or any additional city department head, as authorized by the city council. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the removal or for the payment of the removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this article. Where graffiti is applied by an un-emancipated minor, the parent or legal guardian shall also be responsible for such removal or for the payment for the removal. (Code 1989, § 13-106; Ord. No. 429, § 6, 9-20-1999) 
Sec. 26-63. - Removal of graffiti by property owner or city.     If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator according to section 26-62, graffiti shall be removed pursuant to the following provisions: (1)  Property owner responsibility. It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of property or for repair or maintenance of property in the city to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of ten days after service by first class mail of notice of the defacement. The notice shall contain the following information: a.  The street address and legal description of the property sufficient for identification of the property; b.  A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance property with a concise description of the conditions leading to the finding; c.  A statement that the graffiti must be removed within ten days after receipt of the notice. (2)  Right of city to remove. Whenever the city becomes aware or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly- or privately-owned property viewable from any park, greenway, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building or structure, the city shall be authorized to use public funds for the removal of the graffiti, or for the painting or repairing of the graffiti, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive an area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the city administrator, or the designee of the city administrator, determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner or responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area. (Code 1989, § 13-107; Ord. No. 429, § 7, 9-20-1999) 
Secs. 26-64—26-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; egregious litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51 et seq. 
Sec. 26-85. - General provisions. (a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are to: (1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and (2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. (b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all public and private property within the jurisdiction of the city. (c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. (Code 1989, § 10-19; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 3-15-2004) 
Sec. 26-86. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Litter means any discarded or abandoned refuse, rubbish, junk, or other waste material; or dead animals that are not subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-5-4.     Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. (Code 1989, § 10-20; Ord. No. 209, § 1, 5-27-1985; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 3-15-2004) 
Sec. 26-87. - Dumping, depositing, etc. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, place, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city limits or any waters in the city unless: (1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; (2)  The litter is placed into a non-disposable litter receptacle or container designed for the temporary storage of litter and located in an area designated by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property; or (3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. (b)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. (Code 1989, § 10-21; Ord. No. 209, § 2(a), 5-27-1985; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 3-15-2004) 
Sec. 26-88. - Punishment for violation. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. (b)  Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: (1)  By a fine of not less than $25.00; (2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and (3)  a.  In the sound discretion of the municipal court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter such person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or b.  In the sound discretion of the municipal court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or, with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the offender has deposited litter. Pick-up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and (4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. (Code 1989, § 10-22; Ord. No. 209, § 2(b), 5-27-1985; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 3-15-2004) 
Sec. 26-89. - Prima facie evidence. (a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, the trier of fact may, in his discretion, and in consideration of the totality of the circumstances, infer that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. (b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which displays the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, the trier of fact may, in his discretion, and in consideration of the totality of the circumstances, infer that such person has violated this article. (Code 1989, § 10-23; Ord. No. 209, § 3, 5-27-1985; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 3-15-2004) 
Sec. 26-90. - Containers—Receptacles to be provided; notice to public.     The director of public works is hereby authorized, empowered, and instructed to establish and maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where the property is frequented by the public, to post signs directing persons to the receptacles and serving notice of the provisions of this article, and to otherwise publicize the availability of the litter receptacles and the requirements of this article. (Code 1989, § 10-24; Ord. No. 209, § 5, 5-27-1985; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 3-15-2004) 
Sec. 26-91. - Same—Misuse or vandalization.     It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any container provided by the city for the dumping of trash, garbage or litter. (Code 1989, § 10-25; Ord. No. 209, § 6, 5-27-1985; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 3-15-2004) 
Sec. 26-92. - Enforcement officials.     All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. (Code 1989, § 10-26; Ord. No. 209, § 4, 5-27-1985; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 3-15-2004) 
Secs. 26-93—26-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 26-113. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     A-weighting means the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing frequency sensitivity.     Background sound level means the total sound pressure level in the area of interest, excluding the noise source of interest.     Commercial or business property category means all property which is used primarily for the sale of merchandise or goods, or for the performance of services, or for office or clerical work.     Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, or demolition of buildings or structures.     dBA means the A-weighted unit of sound pressure level.     dBC means the C-weighted unit of sound pressure level.     Decibel (dB) means the unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location.     Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action.     Emergency work means any work or action performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency.     Impulsive sound means a sound having a duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.     Industrial or manufacturing property category means any property which is used primarily for manufacturing or processing.     Institutional property category means any property which is used primarily for public purposes, such as the city hall or a city park.     Muffler means a sound-dissipative device or system for attenuating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine where such a device is part of the normal configuration of the equipment.     Multifamily dwelling means any building or other shelter that has been divided into separate units to house more than one family.     Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.     Noise disturbance means any sound that: (1)  Endangers the safety or health of any person; (2)  Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or (3)  Endangers personal or real property.     Noise-sensitive facility means any facility whose operations may be detrimentally impacted by excessive sound levels. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, hospitals, and places of worship.     Octave band means all the components in a sound spectrum whose frequencies are between two sine wave components separated by an octave.     Real property line means the line, including its vertical extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another.     Residential property category means all property on which people live and sleep or that which is not commercial or industrial.     Sound level meter (SLM) means an instrument used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to type 1 or type 2 standards as specified in ANSI standard S1.4-1983, or the latest version thereof.     Sound pressure level (SPL) means 20 multiplied by the logarithm, to the base ten, of the measured sound pressure divided by the sound pressure associated with the threshold of human hearing, in units of decibels. (Code 1989, § 13-20; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 10-3-2005) 
Sec. 26-114. - Sound level limitations. (a)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound source in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits set forth in Table 1 when measured at or within the real property line of the receiving property using the slow response setting unless otherwise noted. Such a sound source would constitute a noise disturbance. Table 1. Sound Level Limits by Receiving Property Receiving Property Category Time Sound Level Limit (dBA) Residential or noise sensitive facility 7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m. 60 11:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 55 Commercial or business 7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m. 65 11:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 60 Industrial or manufacturing At all times 70    (b)  If the noise is an impulsive sound, the fast response setting shall be used and the daytime (7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.) limits of Table 1 shall be increased by ten dBA. (c)  In a multifamily dwelling, it shall be unlawful to create or permit to be created any noise that exceeds the daytime (7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.) limit of 55 dBA and the nighttime (11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) limit of 45 dBA, as measured from the closest neighbor's dwelling. (d)  In places of public entertainment having a capacity of 5,000 or more persons, it shall be unlawful to create or permit to be created any noise that exceeds an average of 95 dBC in any ten-minute period from 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Sunday through Thursday, and from 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. for events commencing on Friday or Saturday. The sound level limit for all other times shall be 55 dBC. The sound shall be measured at a point which is found by traveling a straight line distance from the center of the sound board through the center rear of the facility a distance of 500 feet or to the property line of the facility, whichever is less. The measurement assumes that the sound board is not more than 100 feet from the center stage. The 500-foot measurement shall be reduced one foot for each foot that the sound board is more than 100 feet from center stage. (e)  Separately-owned properties located solely within an MU-zoned master planned project shall be deemed one collective property for the purpose of complying with the sound level limitations set forth in subsection (a) of this section. (f)  Within an MU-zoned master planned project, it shall be unlawful for any person to employ or permit to be employed at a commercial or business establishment located therein any machine, device or instrument for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise (including, but not limited to, any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, amplifier, loudspeaker, or device that plays recorded music) at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noise or sound that is plainly audible within any residential dwelling unit located at a distance of 100 feet or more from the premises of such commercial or business establishment between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. For the purposes of this section, the term "plainly audible" shall mean any sound for which the information content of that sound is distinguished by the listener possessing normal hearing sensitivity, such as, but not limited to, understandable speech, comprehension of whether a voice is normal or raised, repetitive bass sounds, or comprehension of musical rhythms, without the aid of any listening device. (Code 1989, § 13-21; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 8-28-2017) 
Sec. 26-115. - Exemptions. (a)  Noise generated from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or events shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. (b)  The following are exempt from the sound level limits of section 26-114(a): (1)  Sound by public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or authorized public safety personnel for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; (2)  Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building, provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted or ten minutes if intermittent; (3)  Noise from any automobile alarm, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted or ten minutes if the sound is intermittent; (4)  The generation of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration; (5)  Noise resulting from any practice or performance sponsored by or associated with the educational process administered by a recognized institution of learning, including, but not limited to, band, choir, and orchestral performances; (6)  Noise that results from the activities of an organized sports league; (7)  Unamplified bells, chimes or carillons while being used in conjunction with religious services between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; (8)  Emergency work; (9)  Events with amplified sound that are operating within the time and volume parameters set forth in an approved special administrative permit. (Code 1989, § 13-22; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 10-3-2005) 
Sec. 26-116. - Restricted uses and activities.     Notwithstanding the provisions of section 26-114(a) and the exceptions in section 26-115, the following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth below: (1)  Non-commercial or non-industrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall not be operated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or on Saturday or Sunday before the hour of 8:30 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable limits set forth in section 26-114(a). At all other times, the limits set forth in section 26-114(a) do not apply to non-commercial or non-industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment, provided that all motorized equipment is operated with a functioning muffler. (2)  Commercial or industrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall be operated with a muffler. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall not be operated on a residential property, or within 250 feet of a residential property line, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, unless: a.  Such activities are deemed emergency work; or b.  Such activities meet the limits set forth in section 26-114(a). At all other times, the limits set forth in section 26-114(a) do not apply to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment. (3)  Construction and demolition activity shall not be performed between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, unless: a.  Such activities are deemed emergency work; or b.  Such activities meet the limits set forth in section 26-114(a). This provision shall not apply if the chief of police determines that the loss or inconvenience that would result to any party in interest is of such a nature as to warrant special consideration. In such cases, the chief of police may grant a renewable permit for a period not to exceed ten days for this work to be done within the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. (4)  Domesticated animals may not make any vocalizations (including barking, baying, howling, crying, or making any other noise) for more than ten minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if intermittent. (5)  The collection of trash or refuse in residential districts is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (6)  No person shall operate, play, or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device in such a manner as to create a continuing noise disturbance at 50 feet from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space. (Code 1989, § 13-23; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 600, § 1, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 26-117. - Procedures for the determination of sound levels. (a)  Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including, but not limited to, design, maximum and fluctuating rates. All noise measurements shall be made at or within the property line of the impacted site, unless otherwise directed in this article. When instrumentation cannot be placed at or within the property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto as is reasonable. For the purposes of this article, noise measurements are measured on the A- or C-weighted sound scale, as applicable, of a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics established by ANSI (American National Standards Institute). (b)  Measurements shall be taken by police officers appropriately trained in the use of a sound level meter. (Code 1989, § 13-24) 
Sec. 26-118. - Special variances. (a)  The chief of police or the chief's designated representative shall have the authority, consistent with this article, to grant special variances. (b)  Any person seeking a special variance pursuant to this article shall file an application with the chief of police or the chief's designated representative. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound into compliance with this article would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. Notice of an application for a special variance shall be given by the chief or the chief's representative to persons who frequent the area of the sound or activity and who may be adversely affected by the granting of the variance. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the special variance may file a statement with the chief or the chief's representative containing any information to support such individual's claim. (c)  In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the chief or the chief's designated representative shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community, and other persons of not granting the special variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse impact of granting the special variance. Applicants for special variances may be required to submit any information the chief or the chief's representative may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the chief or the chief's representative shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the special variance. (d)  Special variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. The special variance shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the special variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this article regulating the source of sound or activity for which the special variance was granted. (e)  Application for extension of time limits specified in special variances or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial special variances. (f)  The chief of police or the chief's designated representative may issue guidelines approved by city council defining the procedures to be followed in applying for a special variance and the criteria to be considered in deciding whether or not to grant a special variance. (Code 1989, § 13-25; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 10-3-2005) 
Sec. 26-119. - Enforcement procedures; miscellaneous. (a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the city may prosecute noise-related violations by issuance of a city ordinance citation, in which case, the penalty for a violation shall be as set forth in section 1-8. In addition to issuing a fine as provided in section 1-8, or in lieu thereof, the municipal court judge may issue an order requiring immediate abatement of any sound source alleged to be in violation of this section. (b)  Whenever any city resident shall complain to the police department that a dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or a cat which habitually cries or howls, is being kept by any person in the city, a city law enforcement officer, prior to the issuance of a citation, shall notify the owner of such dog or cat that a complaint has been received. If the notice given to the owner alleged to be keeping a dog or a cat in violation of this article is ineffective, then the police shall issue a formal warning to the owner of such dog or cat that the owner shall take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the barking, howling, yelping or crying. If the warning given to the owner is ineffective, a citation shall be issued to the owner of the dog or cat. (c)  No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefor, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this section or from other laws. (Code 1989, § 13-26; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 10-3-2005) 
Secs. 26-120—26-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UNFIT BUILDINGS[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Application of building and fire-related codes to existing structures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq. 
Sec. 26-137. - Use of buildings and dwelling units constituting nuisances; definition of nuisance. (a)  No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or let or sublet to another for occupancy, or keep and maintain, whether in use or abandoned, any building or dwelling unit constructed for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein which, under the provisions of this article, constitutes a nuisance. (b)  Any building, structure, enclosure, place or premises is a nuisance where it is perilous to life or property by reason of its construction, or of the condition or quantity of its contents, or of the use of the building or its contents or the enclosure, or of the overcrowding at any time of persons therein, or of deficiencies in its fire alarm or fire prevention equipment, or of conditions in its construction likely to cause fire or the spreading of fire, or of conditions therein which would hamper or impede the fire department in combating a fire in or about the building; or where the condition of the walls, floors, or roof is such that the building is likely to fall on account thereof, thereby endangering the safety of its occupants or of the public; or where the conditions or contents of the structure, place or premises are such as to endanger health, provide harboring places for vermin, or spread disease. (c)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-1-1 ("Nuisances—Definition in General") and 41-2-8 ("Nuisances—Abatement of Nuisances Generally—Definition") shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-1-1 and 41-2-8, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-1-1 and 41-2-8. (Code 1989, § 5-20; Ord. No. 164, § (A), 3-12-1979) State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 26-138. - Specific instances of nuisance; abatement.     Any building, structure, enclosure, place or premises which may have one or more of the following defects shall be deemed unfit for human habitation and shall constitute a nuisance: (1)  Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base; (2)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or coverings; (3)  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs, or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used; (4)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city; (5)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein; (6)  Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein; (7)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication; (8)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or damage property; (9)  Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, insanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the city; (10)  Those whose exterior walls stand so close to other structures as to deny the entrance of light and air to the extent that such condition is dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of persons living therein; and (11)  Those whose outside and/or inside premises are not clean, clear and free of any attractive nuisance or accumulation of dirt, junk, filth, rubbish, garbage, debris, combustible materials, excessive growth of weeds or grass, or similar conditions conducive to rodent, vermin or insect infestation or the spread of fire or disease and more particularly described in section 26-139. (Code 1989, § 5-21; Ord. No. 164, § (B), 3-12-1979) State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; nuisance abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.; adoption of ordinances to enforce, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 26-139. - Duty of owner. (a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. (b)  Cleanliness referred to on the interior of dwelling units shall mean keeping the walls, floors and ceilings sanitary and free from accumulation of dirt or trash. Cleanliness referred to on the exterior of dwelling units shall mean keeping the walls and roofs sanitary and free from accumulation of dirt and trash. Where appropriate, this may require a coating on exterior surfaces or chemical treatment to make them resistant to vermin and insect infestation. (Code 1989, § 5-22; Ord. No. 164, § (C), 3-12-1979) 
Sec. 26-140. - Abatement by city authorized.     Noncompliance with sections 26-137 through 26-139 shall be deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by the city in the manner provided hereinbelow. (Code 1989, § 5-23; Ord. No. 164, § (D), 3-12-1979) 
Sec. 26-141. - Inspection of premises.     The enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of any building, dwelling, or dwelling unit, the premises, yard, lawn, ground, court and alley of any such building unit, or any vacant lot or land located within the city, in the interest of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants and of the public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enter onto, examine, survey, and photograph, at all reasonable times, any such building unit, or any vacant lot or land. (Code 1989, § 5-24; Ord. No. 164, § (E), 3-12-1979) 
Sec. 26-142. - Notice; required, contents. (a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists, and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. (b)  Upon the filing of a complaint as hereinabove provided, the city clerk shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance complained of is located and, if the person maintaining the same is a different person from the owner, then also to the person maintaining the nuisance, calling on such person to show cause, either personally or by attorney, at the time and place directed by the court, why such activity alleged to be a nuisance should not be ordered abated and removed by the judge of the municipal court. (c)  The complaint shall: (1)  Identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; (2)  Identify the interested parties; (3)  State with particularity the factual basis for the action; and (4)  Contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. (d)  The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court, at a date and time certain, and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. (Code 1989, § 5-25; Ord. No. 164, § (F), 3-12-1979) 
Sec. 26-143. - Separate offense.     If, upon such hearing, the judge of the municipal court shall find that the conditions complained of constitute a nuisance, and shall order the same abated, each ten days that such condition shall be maintained subsequent to the expiration of the time fixed by the court for the same to be abated shall constitute a separate offense, punishable as hereinafter provided. (Code 1989, § 5-27; Ord. No. 164, § (H), 3-12-1979) 
Sec. 26-144. - Offense of failure to appear or noncompliance. (a)  Any person who shall fail to appear in response to a summons issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense for such failure to appear, and may be punished as provided in section 1-8. (b)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes, or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." (c)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged material. (d)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. (Code 1989, § 5-28; Ord. No. 164, § (I), 3-12-1979) 
Sec. 26-145. - Emergency power authorized.     Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, whenever the enforcement officer shall determine that the conditions found constitute imminent and immediate danger or hazard to persons or property, such officer shall be authorized forthwith to cause the summons provided for herein to be issued, without the necessity of giving any preliminary notice to the owner or occupant. (Code 1989, § 5-29; Ord. No. 164, § (J), 3-12-1979) 
Sec. 26-146. - Reports, etc., available to specified persons.     After any order, report or recommendation has been made by any official or employee of the city and is on file in his respective department, such information shall, upon request, be available to the press, the owner of the property or the owner's authorized agent, the manager of the property, the attorney for any of the foregoing, any licensed attorney for the examination of titles, any official or employee of the city for official purposes, and to any other person upon written application to the respective department where such order or other information is on file. (Code 1989, § 5-30; Ord. No. 164, § (K), 3-12-1979) 
Sec. 26-147. - Disinterested city employees required; restriction on giving out information.     No official or employee of the city making inspection of properties for the purpose of determining the necessity for repairs or corrections thereto shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any repairs or corrections which may be required, nor shall any such official or employee give to any person, other than those authorized persons listed in this article, any information relative to any such repairs or corrections, nor shall such officials or employees give to any contractors or other persons engaged in the business of house repairs the locations of any properties, or the names of the owners thereof, on which repairs or corrections have been ordered. (Code 1989, § 5-31; Ord. No. 164, § (L), 3-12-1979) 
Sec. 26-148. - Placarding of premises.     After written notice has been given by the enforcement officer to owners or agents of properties that conditions have been found therein which constitute a nuisance under this article, the enforcement officer is authorized to place a signed notice on such property reciting the findings and action taken with respect thereto following condemnation by the court. It shall be unlawful for such notice to be mutilated or removed from such structure, premises, or place until required improvements have been made or the nuisance abated. (Code 1989, § 5-33; Ord. No. 164, § (N), 3-12-1979) 
Chapter 27 - RESERVED 
Chapter 28 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IX, ¶ I(a) and (b)(2); revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. title 48; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 
Sec. 28-1. - Financial institutions.     The following type of business shall be exempted from the general provisions of classes V and VI, and shall be treated as follows: (1)  Gross receipts tax imposed on banks. There is hereby levied for each year an annual business license tax upon each banking institution doing business within the city, based solely upon gross receipts, in an amount equal to twenty-five-hundredths percent of the gross receipts of such bank during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(a). Gross receipts as used in this subsection shall mean the total amount of revenue generated from sources, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-95. (2)  Gross receipts tax imposed on savings and loan associations. There is hereby levied for each year an annual business license tax upon each savings and loan association doing business within the city, based solely upon gross receipts, in an amount equal to twenty-five-hundredths percent of the gross receipts of such savings and loan association during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(a). Gross receipts as used in this subsection shall mean the total amount of revenue generated from sources as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-95. (3)  Filing of gross receipts return by depositing financial institutions; due date. Every depository financial institution doing business in this city and subject to this tax as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city tax office on or before March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and form as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). In the event fees go unpaid after the due date, a ten percent penalty will be charged based upon the past due amount, and interest at the rate of one percent per month shall accrue until the fees are paid in full. (4)  Assessment and collection. The city tax department shall assess and collect the tax provided for by this section based upon the information provided in the returns as filed by each depository financial institution annually. (Code 1989, § 12-17; Ord. No. 193, §§ 11.1—11.4, 12-15-1983; Ord. No. 506, 9-23-2002) State Law reference— Municipality and county business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; state occupation tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-95; taxation of financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-90 et seq. 
Chapter 29 - RESERVED 
Chapter 30 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 30-1. - Idling or loitering on or near street.     It shall be unlawful for any person to idle or loiter on or near any public street in the city. (Code 1989, § 13-1; Ord. No. 131, § 1, 9-10-1973) State Law reference— Loitering, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 30-2. - Congregating on or near street.     It shall be unlawful for two or more persons to congregate on or near any public street in the city for the purpose of making loud noises or otherwise disturbing the peace. (Code 1989, § 13-2; Ord. No. 131, § 1, 9-10-1973) State Law reference— Obstructing street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; riot, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-30. 
Sec. 30-3. - Disorderly conduct. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or endanger the public peace or decency by any disorderly conduct. (b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be disorderly conduct: (1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of such person's life, limb or health; (2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; (3)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; (4)  Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of, or with the intent to engage in, gaming; (5)  Be in or about any place, alone or with others, with the purpose of or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable thing or to aid or abet any person doing so; (6)  Be in or about any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated, for the purpose of or intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcohol; (7)  Direct fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace; (8)  Interfere, by acts of physical obstruction, with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; (9)  Congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear that public way after being ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority; (10)  Stand or remain in or about any street, sidewalk, overpass, or public way so as to impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear such street, sidewalk, overpass or public way after being ordered to do so by a police officer or other lawful authority; provided, however, no further order by a police officer or other lawful authority shall be required when such person has previously engaged in similar acts and has been ordered on two or more occasions by a police officer or other lawful authority to clear any other street, sidewalk, overpass or public way in the city; (11)  Disrupt, by actions which tend to cause an immediate breach of the peace, the undisturbed activities of any house of worship, hospital or home for the elderly; or (12)  Throw bottles, paper, cans, glass, sticks, stones, missiles, or any other debris on public property. (Code 1989, § 13-3; Ord. No. 87, § 3, 9-3-1962; Ord. No. 745, 7-17-2017) State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 30-4. - Disorderly while under the influence. (a)  Acts constituting violation. It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to be disorderly while under the influence of alcohol or drugs on the streets, sidewalks or other public places. The following acts are declared to be in violation of this section: (1)  Any person who acts in a reckless manner so as to create an unreasonable risk of harm to himself, to other persons or to property in the vicinity while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. (2)  Any person who shall defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks or in the halls or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view in the city while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. (3)  Any person who, without provocation, uses to or of another, in such person's presence, fighting words, or who shall panhandle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. (4)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. (5)  Any person who shall lie down or otherwise obstruct, block or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any sidewalk, street, or entrance or exit to any other public way, house of worship, business, public hall, theater, public conveyance or other public place and who shall refuse to remove themselves when ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. (6)  Any person who shall act in a boisterous, turbulent, or agitated manner, or who shall use profane, vulgar, loud or unbecoming language while under the influence of alcohol or other drugs while on the streets, sidewalks, or other public places within the corporate limits of the city. (b)  Duty of peace officer. Any peace officer, in accordance with standards set out in standard operating procedures promulgated by the director of public safety or his designee, may take or send an individual under the influence of alcohol or other drugs to such person's home, in lieu of incarcerating such person, for violations of this section. Any peace officer so acting shall be considered as carrying out such peace officer's official duty. (c)  Penalty. Upon a finding of guilty for violation of this section, the offender shall be punished according to the penalties described in section 1-8. Such punishment may be probated by the municipal judge for those offenders desiring to participate in a detoxification program. (Code 1989, § 13-3.1; Ord. No. 621, § 1, 5-19-2008) State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 30-5. - Firearms.     It shall be unlawful for any person to use, discharge, or shoot firearms in the city except in defense of persons or property. This section shall not apply to authorized officers of the law. (Code 1989, § 13-4; Ord. No. 87, § 4.1, 9-3-1962) State Law reference— Firearms, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-126 et seq. 
Sec. 30-6. - Air guns. (a)  As used in this section: (1)  The term "air gun" means and includes the following: air guns, paint ball guns, air pistols, air rifles, BB guns and similar guns that propel, through the force of compressed air, compressed gas or mechanical spring action, or any combination thereof, any pellet, dart, hard-tipped arrow, bean, pea, BB, rock, gel cap, paint ball or other hard substance a distance of more than 25 feet with sufficient force to break, crack or tag windows, or inflict injury upon persons or animals; (2)  The term "direction and control of such adult" means that the adult must be present on the same property or premises as the minor and that the adult must approve the circumstances under which the air gun is being used, but it does not mean that the adult must maintain continuous visual contact with the minor. (b)  Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful: (1)  For any person under 18 years of age to carry or shoot any air gun within the city when not in the presence of his parent or other adult acting in the role of a parent and under the direction and control of such adult; (2)  For any person to point or shoot an air gun at any person or property of another, or to aim or discharge an air gun in the direction of the person or residence of another while within range to cause or inflict injury to the person or damage the property of another; (3)  For any person to carry or shoot any air gun within a public place or on public property, including city parks; (4)  For any parent or person in loco parentis to allow, give or permit the possession of an air gun by any child under the age of 18 years, except under the provisions of subsection (b)(1) of this section. (c)  The provisions of subsections (b)(1), (b)(3) and (b)(4) of this section shall not apply when: (1)  A person possesses or uses an air gun on a gun range or similar facility operated or conducted by an individual or entity duly authorized and licensed to conduct such activities; (2)  A person possesses or uses an air gun within a regulated or supervised course or range provided by the city parks and recreation department under applicable regulations or ordinances; or (3)  A person carries an air gun unloaded or otherwise properly dismantled, to and from a licensed or authorized range, course or facility, or an authorized service or repair facility. (d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, it shall not be unlawful: (1)  To possess or use an air gun while in the act of lawfully defending persons or property; (2)  For participants in an authorized and supervised paint ball competition conducted within a licensed range or facility (including any range or facility operated by the city parks and recreation department) to point or shoot a paint ball gun at other participants; (3)  To be in possession of an unloaded or otherwise properly dismantled air gun within one's own house of residence. (e)  Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished according to the penalties described in section 1-8. (Code 1989, § 13-5; Ord. No. 489, § 1, 2-4-2002) 
Sec. 30-7. - Urban camping and improper use of property. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Camp means residing in or using a public street, sidewalk, or park for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for any substantial prolonged period of time; regularly cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities.     Public park means all municipal parks, public playgrounds, public plazas, attractions, and monuments.     Public street means all public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots, and medians.     Storing personal property means leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for any substantial prolonged length of time. This term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. (b)  Public parks. It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any park, as defined above, owned by the city. (c)  Other public property; blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, sit or to lie down on any public property so as to interfere with ingress or egress from buildings. (d)  Private property. It shall be unlawful for anyone other than the owner, a leaseholder, or other rightful occupant to camp, sleep, reside, store personal property, or lie down outside on any private property without the owner's or leaseholder's permission. (e)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this section until he has received an oral or written warning to cease the unlawful conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, he is subject to arrest for urban camping. In addition, city officials shall have the right to remove any debris or property that creates a legitimate concern for health and safety or that creates an immediate and substantial danger to the environment. (f)  Exceptions. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the following behavior: (1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; (2)  Reserved; (3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades; (4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing sidewalk cafes; (5)  Persons lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals, concerts, fireworks, or other special events; (6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; (7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; (8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; (9)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provision of meals; (10)  Children sleeping while being carried in a stroller or baby carriage; or (11)  Persons camping in a city park pursuant to a city authorized permit, such as scout groups, etc. (Code 1989, § 13-6; Ord. No. 670, § 1, 12-3-2012; Ord. No. 725, 5-23-2016) 
Secs. 30-8—30-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUVENILE CURFEW 
Sec. 30-33. - Findings and purpose.     It is the responsibility of the city council to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. The city council is concerned about the increase in criminal activity engaged in by minors, especially those crimes that occur after hours and/or at times in which juveniles should be at home. During public hearings held in the city, many citizens voiced their concerns about the increase in youth vandalism and violence, the need to protect children and adults from being victims of crimes that occur after hours, and the need to make parents more responsible for their children. A child curfew ordinance is one initiative in protecting our children from being the victims and perpetrators of crime. In an effort to keep our communities drug-free and our streets safe by reducing the numbers of crimes that are committed by and against minors after hours, the city council believes that a child curfew ordinance is in the best interest of the citizens of the city. Accordingly, the city finds and declares that the purpose of this section is to reduce the number of crimes committed by and against juveniles after hours, and to safeguard the welfare of our citizens. (Code 1989, § 13-108; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 30-34. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Adult means a person who is at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor, or an emancipated minor.     Curfew hours means 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on the following day, and 11:59 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday until 6:00 a.m. on the following day.     Emancipated minor means: (1)  Any person under the age of 18 years who is or has been married or who is not under the care, custody, and control of a parent, guardian, person standing in loco parentis, or the juvenile court of competent jurisdiction; or (2)  Any person under the age of 18 years who has had the disabilities of minority removed by a court of competent jurisdiction.     Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances, or the resulting state, that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.     Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.     Guardian means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor, or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.     Minor means any person 17 years of age or under.     Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and officers of a corporation.     Parent means a person who is a natural parent, an adopted parent, or step-parent of another person.     Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access that includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.     Remain means linger or stay, or fail to leave a premises when requested to do so by an officer or the owner, operator, or the person in control of the premises.     Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that causes death or creates a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Code 1989, § 13-108; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 30-35. - Curfew.     Curfew for persons 17 years of age or younger shall be as follows: (1)  It is unlawful for any minor 17 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public places, streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, establishments, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, or any place in the city unsupervised by an adult, parent, or guardian having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. on the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays, the effective hours are between 11:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. (2)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any minor 17 years of age or younger to knowingly, or by insufficient control, allow such minor to be in or upon the public places, streets or any other places listed in subsection (1) of this section in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 11:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except as provided by section 30-37. (3)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to be in or upon the premises of an establishment in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 11:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except as provided by section 30-37. (Code 1989, § 13-108; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 30-36. - Offenses. (a)  A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment in the city during curfew hours. (b)  A parent or a guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment in the city during curfew hours. (c)  An owner, operator, or employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain in or upon the premises of any establishment in the city during curfew hours. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the city police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. (Code 1989, § 13-108; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 30-37. - Exceptions.     The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: (1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult having the lawful care and custody of the minor; (2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor, or if such minor is seeking medical treatment; (3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity, or dance; (4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the prescribed period of time; (5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; (6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle of parental consent for normal travel. All cases of interstate travel through the city are excepted from the curfew; (7)  When the minor is an emancipated minor as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-16.03(3). (Code 1989, § 13-108; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 30-38. - Violations and penalties.     Penalties for violation of this section are as follows: (1)  Upon conviction of violations of this section for the first time, an adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator or employee of an establishment shall be given a warning citation. Upon further convictions, an adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator or employee of an establishment shall be subject to a fine according to penalties described in section 1-8. Any adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator or employee of an establishment who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Except as otherwise provided, each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (2)  Adjudication of violations of this section by minors shall be made in accordance with state law. (Code 1989, § 13-108; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 30-39. - Enforcement.     Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a city police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and the reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstance, that no exception listed in section 30-37 is present. (Code 1989, § 13-108; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 2-2-2004) 
Chapter 31 - RESERVED 
Chapter 32 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— State parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 32-1. - Recreation fees for multifamily projects—Levied.     All owners and developers of subdivisions and multifamily housing projects shall pay a recreation fee to the director of community planning. (Code 1989, § 14-1; Ord. No. 214, 8-12-1985) 
Sec. 32-2. - Same—Amounts.     The total base recreation fee shall be assessed at the rate of $250.00 for each residential unit. Credits against the total base recreation fee shall be permitted for providing any one or more of the following amenities according to the schedule set forth herein:    Amenity Amount of Credit Swimming pools $2,500.00 Tennis courts $2,000.00 Handball/racquetball courts $2,000.00 Picnic areas (at least one acre) $500.00 Softball/baseball fields $1,500.00 Football/soccer fields $1,500.00 Bicycle paths (at least one mile long) $1,000.00 Lakes/ponds $1,500.00 Golf courses (at least nine holes) $5,000.00 Community centers $10,000.00 Arenas, coliseums or cultural centers $20,000.00 Parks/passive areas:  1—10 acres $500.00  11—20 acres $1,000.00  21—30 acres $1,500.00  31—40 acres $2,000.00  41—50 acres $2,500.00  51+ acres $3,000.00    (Code 1989, § 14-2; Ord. No. 214, 8-12-1985) 
Sec. 32-3. - Same—Payment before plat approval.     The recreation fee must be paid in full prior to final plat approval. (Code 1989, § 14-3; Ord. No. 214, 8-12-1985) 
Sec. 32-4. - Rules and regulations for parks owned and operated by city. (a)  Adopted. There shall be a set of rules and regulations developed to set standards of conduct in the parks and recreational facilities owned or operated by the city. These rules shall be designed to ensure the safety and enjoyment of park participants. The rules of the city parks are attached to Ordinance Number 286 and made part of this section by reference. (b)  Enforcement. (1)  All law enforcement officers of the city and officials and officers of the city are authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with this section. (2)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the enforcement of city and county ordinances and regulations or state statutes or codes in any park or recreation facility owned or operated by the city. (3)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined according to the penalties described in section 1-8, or sentenced to labor under city supervision on the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public works for a period not to exceed 45 days. (c)  Public notification. (1)  The recreation director shall reproduce the rules in a format suitable for public distribution. Such copies of the park rules shall be available to the public at all city recreation buildings and other city locations, as deemed necessary by the recreation director. (2)  The public works director shall have the rules reproduced on all-weather signs and shall post the signs in the city's parks. Locations of such signs shall be determined by the recreation director and shall be placed in plain public view. (Code 1989, § 14-4; Ord. No. 286, §§ 1—3, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 32-5. - Tobacco use within city parks.     It shall be unlawful for any person to use tobacco products within any city park. Examples of tobacco products include, but are not limited to, cigarettes, e-cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, snuff, pipes, etc., For purposes of this section, the term "city park" means any park within the city owned or operated by the city, including all facilities, buildings, stands, concession areas, grounds, fields, playgrounds, parking lots, trails, greenspaces and greenways. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as other violations of city park rules and regulations. The director of recreation and parks shall cause signs reflecting this policy to be posted in appropriate locations throughout city parks, but the failure to post any such sign shall not relieve persons from the obligation to comply with the provisions of this section. (Code 1989, § 14-5; Ord. No. 648, § 1, 3-21-2011) 
Secs. 32-6—32-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION COMMISSION 
Sec. 32-29. - Created.     There is hereby created, pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 36-64-1 through 36-64-14, a recreation commission of the city. (Code 1989, § 14-20; Res. No. 104, § 1, 10-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-30. - Number of members.     The recreation commission shall consist of a minimum of five persons and a maximum of nine persons serving without pay. (Code 1989, § 14-21; Res. No. 104, § 2, 10-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-31. - Terms of office; filling vacancies. (a)  The terms of office for the recreation commission members shall be for five years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that the appointing authority, in making initial appointments or in filling vacancies, is hereby authorized and directed to vary the initial terms of members or the terms of persons appointed to fill vacancies in such a manner that thereafter the term of at least one member shall expire annually. (b)  Vacancies on the recreation commission occurring other than by expiration of a term shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term only. (Code 1989, § 14-22; Res. No. 104, §§ 3, 4, 10-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-32. - Organization.     Immediately after their appointment, recreation commission members shall meet and organize by electing a chair and other necessary officers. (Code 1989, § 14-23; Res. No. 104, § 5, 10-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-33. - Adopting bylaws, rules and regulations for parks, etc.     The recreation commission shall have the power to adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the proper conduct of parks, playgrounds and recreation for the city. (Code 1989, § 14-24; Res. No. 104, § 6, 10-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-34. - Providing, conducting and supervising playgrounds, etc.     The recreation commission shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, playfields, indoor recreation centers and other recreation facilities owned or controlled by the city. It shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the citizens of the city in a wholesome or constructive manner. It may conduct such activities on properties under its own control, on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof, and on private properties with the consent of the owners of such properties. (Code 1989, § 14-25; Res. No. 104, § 7, 10-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-35. - Control, etc., of parks.     The recreation commission shall have control, superintendence and charge of all public parks and any land or lots, heretofore or hereafter devised or bequeathed to the city for park purposes, and shall direct the ornamenting, adorning, laying-out and improving of the grounds of such parks, and for that purpose may employ such workers and purchase or contract for materials as it may deem necessary, provided that, in no case shall the amount paid for the workers or to be paid for such purchases or contracts exceeds the amount of money appropriated for the purpose by the city council. (Code 1989, § 14-26; Res. No. 104, § 8, 10-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-36. - Director.     The recreation commission shall have the power to appoint or designate someone to act as director who is trained or properly qualified for the work, and such other personnel as the recreation commission deems proper. Such appointment or designation shall be subject to approval by the city council. The salary of such appointee or designee shall be set by the city council. (Code 1989, § 14-27; Res. No. 104, § 9, 10-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-37. - Finance—Budget; receiving gifts, etc.     The recreation commission shall submit annually a budget to the city council for approval. The recreation commission may also solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes; but if the acceptance thereof for such purposes will subject the municipality to additional expense for improvements, maintenance, or renewal, the acceptance of any grant or devise of real estate shall be subject to the approval of the city council. The money received for such purposes, unless otherwise provided by the terms of the gift or bequest, shall be deposited with the city treasurer to the account of the board and the same may be withdrawn and paid out by such board in the same manner as money appropriated for recreation purposes. (Code 1989, § 14-28; Res. No. 104, § 10, 10-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-38. - Same—Collecting rents.     The recreation commission shall collect all rents for any building in the parks and playgrounds and shall deposit the proceeds collected in the city treasury. (Code 1989, § 14-29; Res. No. 104, § 8, 10-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-39. - Same—Expenditures.     All receipts on account of the city parks, playgrounds, or recreational activities, whether arising from rentals, donations, sale or any part thereof, or of any lands so willed and devised by any person to the city, shall be exclusively expended and applied under the direction and control of the recreation commission, with the approval of the city council. (Code 1989, § 14-30; Res. No. 104, § 11, 10-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-40. - Reports.     The recreation commission shall make an annual report to the city council and such other reports as may be requested from time to time by the city council. (Code 1989, § 14-31; Res. No. 104, § 12, 10-27-1980) 
Chapter 33 - RESERVED 
Chapter 34 - PERSONNEL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— There is presently in effect a personnel manual, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. Retirement ordinances are presently in effect, the same being on file in the office of the city clerk. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 34-1. - Deferred compensation plan adopted; administrator appointed. (a)  The city (the "employer") adopts the deferred compensation plan, and appoints Transamerica to serve as administrator there under. (b)  The plan administrator shall be the coordinator for this program and shall receive necessary reports, notices, etc., from the Transamerica Retirement Corporation as administrator, and shall cast, on behalf of the employer, any required votes under the program. Administrative duties to carry out the plan may be assigned to the appropriate departments. (c)  The employer hereby executes the Transamerica Retirement Trust. (d)  The employer hereby adopts a trust agreement, and appoints Transamerica as trustee there under, and directs Transamerica, as trustee, to invest all funds held under the deferred compensation plan through the Transamerica Retirement Trust as soon as is practicable. (Code 1989, § 15-1; Res. of 10-14-1985) State Law reference— Deferred compensation contracts, O.C.G.A. § 45-18-31. 
Sec. 34-2. - Police department administrative manual.     The operation, administration, rules and regulations for the city police department shall be in accordance with the "Administrative Manual, Alpharetta Police Department," a copy of which is attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived, and by reference is made a part hereof as if written in full herein. (Code 1989, § 15-2; Ord. No. 178, 8-11-1980) 
Sec. 34-3. - Workers' compensation insurance for volunteer firefighters.     Volunteer firefighters of the city shall be included within the term employee of the city. Such volunteer firefighters shall be covered by workers' compensation insurance as provided for by the city for its employees. However, a volunteer firefighter shall be deemed an "employee" of the city only for and during such times as such person is engaged in volunteer firefighting services, and when traveling to and from the scene of a fire, and when such services are rendered to the city. (Code 1989, § 15-3; Res. No. 137, §§ 1—3, 9-13-1982) 
Sec. 34-4. - Employee safety and health handbook. (a)  The safety manual entitled "Employee Safety and Health Handbook," attached to the resolution from which this section is derived, is hereby adopted for the guidance and use of all city employees. (b)  Such handbook shall be made available to all city employees along with periodic training in safety matters. (c)  The provisions of such manual may, from time to time, be amended, augmented, deleted, or otherwise modified by the personnel director with the consensus of the city administrator as is consistent with prudent management. (Code 1989, § 15-4; Res. No. 308, § 1, 2-27-1989) 
Sec. 34-5. - Fire department policies and procedures. (a)  The manual entitled "Alpharetta Fire Department, Policy and Procedures, October 10, 1988," attached to the resolution from which this section is derived, is hereby adopted as the official standard operating procedures for the fire department. (b)  These operating procedures may, from time to time, be amended, augmented, deleted or otherwise modified by the fire chief with the consensus of the city administrator as is consistent with prudent management. (Code 1989, § 15-5; Res. No. 300, § 1, 2-13-1989) 
Secs. 34-6—34-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Random drug testing of state employees in high risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq., Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990. 
Sec. 34-29. - Statement of purpose.     It is the policy of the city that the abuse of alcohol and drugs by public employees is detrimental to the health, safety and morals of the public. The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable standards and procedures for drug and alcohol testing of city employees and applicants for city employment. The city council also recognizes that individuals have certain rights to privacy and dignity. In adopting this article, the city council has attempted to balance the city's interest in protecting the health and safety of its employees and the public with the employees' legitimate expectations of privacy. Accordingly, certain procedural safeguards, limitations and due process guarantees are set forth in connection with the testing required by this article. (Code 1989, § 15-20; Ord. No. 242, § 1, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 34-30. - Drugs included in tests.     When drug and alcohol screening is required under the provisions of this article, a urinalysis test will be given to detect the presence of the following drug groups: (1)  Alcohol (ethyl); (2)  Amphetamines (e.g., speed); (3)  Barbiturates (e.g., Amobarbital, Butabarbital, Phenobarbital, Secobarbital); (4)  Cocaine; (5)  Methaqualone (e.g., Quaalude); (6)  Opiates (e.g., Codeine, Heroin, Morphine, Hydromorphone, and Hydrocodone); (7)  Phencyclidine (PCP); (8)  THC (marijuana). (Code 1989, § 15-21; Ord. No. 242, § 2, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 34-31. - Current employee testing; general standard. (a)  The city may require a current city employee to undergo drug and alcohol testing if there is reasonable suspicion that the employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol during work hours. The term "reasonable suspicion" means an articulable belief based on specific facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts that an employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. Circumstances which constitute a basis for determining reasonable suspicion may include, but are not limited to: (1)  A pattern of abnormal or erratic behavior; (2)  Information provided by a reliable and credible source; (3)  A work-related accident; (4)  Direct observation of drug or alcohol use; or (5)  Presence of the physical symptoms of drug or alcohol use (e.g., glassy or bloodshot eyes, alcohol odor on breath, slurred speech, poor coordination and/or reflexes). (b)  Supervisors are required to detail in writing the specific facts, symptoms, or observations which formed the basis for their determination that reasonable suspicion existed to warrant the testing of an employee. This documentation shall be forwarded to the appropriate department head or designee. (c)  All employees holding the position of detective or evidence custodian must submit to random drug and alcohol testing. The city administrator and chief of police are hereby directed to develop procedures for uniform random drug and alcohol testing of all employees in these positions. The procedures shall be subject to the approval of the city council. Any transfer to the position of detective or evidence custodian is contingent upon the successful completion of a drug and alcohol test. Any employee tentatively selected for such transfer shall be advised in writing of the drug and alcohol testing requirement. (Code 1989, § 15-23; Ord. No. 242, § 4, 4-25-1988; Ord. No. 271, § 2, 2-12-1990) 
Sec. 34-32. - Supervisor training.     The city shall develop a program of training to assist supervisory personnel in identifying drug and alcohol use among employees. Such training will be directed toward helping supervisors recognize the conduct and behavior that give rise to a reasonable suspicion of drug and alcohol use. (Code 1989, § 15-24; Ord. No. 242, § 5, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 34-33. - Prior notice of testing policy.     The city shall provide written notice of its drug and alcohol testing policy to all employees and job applicants. The notice shall contain the following information: (1)  The need for drug and alcohol testing; (2)  The circumstances under which testing may be required; (3)  The procedure for confirming an initial positive test result; (4)  The consequences of a confirmed positive test result; (5)  The consequences of refusing to undergo a drug and alcohol test; (6)  The right to explain a positive test result and the appeal procedures available; and (7)  The availability of drug and alcohol abuse counseling and referral services. (Code 1989, § 15-25; Ord. No. 242, § 6, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 34-34. - Consent.     Before a drug and alcohol test is administered, employees and job applicants will be asked to sign a consent form authorizing the test and permitting release of test results to those city officials with a need to know. The consent form shall provide space for employees and applicants to acknowledge that they have been notified of the city's drug testing policy and to indicate current or recent use of prescription or over-the-counter medication. The consent form shall also set forth the following information: (1)  The procedure for confirming an initial positive test result; (2)  The consequences of a confirmed positive test result; (3)  The right to explain a confirmed positive test result and the appeal procedures available; and (4)  The consequences of refusing to undergo a drug and alcohol test. (Code 1989, § 15-26; Ord. No. 242, § 7, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 34-35. - Refusal to consent; applicants.     A job applicant who refuses to consent to a drug and alcohol test will be denied employment with the city. (Code 1989, § 15-27; Ord. No. 242, § 8, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 34-36. - Refusal to consent; employees. (a)  An employee who refuses to consent to random drug testing as prescribed by section 34-31, or drug and alcohol testing when reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use has been identified, is subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. The reasons for the refusal shall be considered in determining the appropriate disciplinary action. (b)  An employee tentatively selected for transfer to the position of detective or evidence custodian who refuses to consent to the pre-transfer drug and alcohol test will be denied the transfer to such position. (Code 1989, § 15-28; Ord. No. 242, § 9, 4-25-1988; Ord. No. 271, § 3, 2-12-1990) 
Sec. 34-37. - Confirmation of test results. (a)  An employee or job applicant whose test yields a positive result shall be given a second test using a gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (G.C./M.S.) test. The second test shall use a portion of the same test sample withdrawn from the employee or applicant for use in the first test. (b)  If the second test confirms the positive test result, the employee or applicant shall be notified of the results in writing by the appropriate department head or designee. The letter of notification shall identify the particular substance found and its concentration level. (c)  An employee or applicant whose second test confirms the original positive test result may, at the employee's or applicant's own expense, have a third test conducted on the same sample at a laboratory selected by the city. (Code 1989, § 15-29; Ord. No. 242, § 10, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 34-38. - Consequences of a confirmed positive test result. (a)  Applicants. Job applicants will be denied employment by the city if their initial positive test results have been confirmed. Applicants shall be informed in writing if they are rejected on the basis of a confirmed positive test result. (b)  Employees. If an employee's positive test result has been confirmed, the employee is subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. Factors to be considered in determining the appropriate disciplinary response include the employee's work history, length of employment, current job performance, and the existence of past disciplinary actions. (Code 1989, § 15-30; Ord. No. 242, § 11, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 34-39. - Right to a hearing. (a)  If an employee's positive test result has been confirmed, the employee is entitled to a hearing before denial of a transfer to the position of detective or evidence custodian or any disciplinary action may be taken by the city. The employee must make a written request for a hearing to the appropriate department head or designee within three days of receipt by the employee of the confirmation test results. Employees may be represented by legal counsel, present evidence and witnesses on their own behalf, and confront and cross-examine the evidence and witnesses used against them. (b)  No employee otherwise entitled to a transfer to the position of detective or evidence custodian may be denied such transfer based on a confirmed positive drug test result unless the hearing officer finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the employee's pre-transfer drug and alcohol test results are accurate. No adverse personnel action may be taken against an employee subjected to a random drug and alcohol test as prescribed by section 34-31 based on a confirmed positive drug and alcohol test result unless the hearing officer finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the employee's drug and alcohol test results are accurate. With respect to drug and alcohol tests based upon reasonable suspicion, no adverse personnel action may be taken against an employee based on a confirmed positive drug and alcohol test result unless the hearing officer finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the employee's supervisor had reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee was under the influence of drugs or alcohol while on the job, and the employee's drug and alcohol test results are accurate. (c)  Within five days following the close of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision and a brief summary of the facts and evidence supporting the decision. (Code 1989, § 15-31; Ord. No. 242, § 12, 4-25-1988; Ord. No. 271, § 4, 2-12-1990) 
Sec. 34-40. - Confidentiality of test results.     All information from an employee's or applicant's drug and alcohol test is confidential, and only those with a need to know are to be informed of test results. Disclosure of test results to any person, agency, or organization is prohibited unless written authorization is obtained from the employee or applicant. The results of a positive drug test shall not be released until the results are confirmed. The records of confirmed positive test results and negative test results shall be destroyed by the testing laboratory. (Code 1989, § 15-32; Ord. No. 242, § 13, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 34-41. - Privacy in drug testing.     Urine samples shall be provided in a private restroom stall or similar enclosure so that employees and applicants may not be viewed while providing the sample. Employees and applicants will be given hospital gowns to wear while they are providing test samples in order to ensure that there is no tampering. Street clothes, bags, briefcases, purses and other containers may not be carried into the test area. The water in the commode shall be colored with blue dye to protect against dilution of test samples. (Code 1989, § 15-33; Ord. No. 242, § 14, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 34-42. - Laboratory testing requirements.     All drug and alcohol testing of employees and applicants shall be conducted at medical facilities or laboratories selected by the city. To be considered as a testing site, a medical facility or laboratory must submit in writing a description of the procedures that will be used to maintain test samples. Factors to be considered by the city in selecting a testing facility include: (1)  Testing procedures which ensure privacy to employees and applicants consistent with the prevention of tampering; (2)  Methods of analysis which ensure reliable test results, including the use of gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, to confirm positive test results; (3)  Chain of custody procedures which ensure proper identification, labeling and handling of test samples; and (4)  Retention and storage procedures which ensure reliable results on confirmation of tests of original samples. (Code 1989, § 15-34; Ord. No. 242, § 15, 4-25-1988) 
Chapter 35 - RESERVED 
Chapter 36 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Planning, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 
Sec. 36-1. - City planning commission—Created and established.     In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the municipality which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the city planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission, is hereby created and established. (Code 1989, § 16-1; Ord. No. 79, 7-31-1961) 
Sec. 36-2. - Same—Membership.     The planning commission shall consist of seven members, who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the city council. The terms of the members shall be for four years, except that in the appointment of the first planning commission, the first member shall be appointed for a term of one year, the second member shall be appointed for a term of two years, the third member shall be appointed for a term of three years, and the remaining members for terms of four years each. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city council, who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. (Code 1989, § 16-2; Ord. No. 79, § 1, 7-31-1961; Ord. No. 264, § 1, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 36-3. - Same—Organization; rules; staff; finances. (a)  The planning commission shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson shall be one year, with eligibility for re-election. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. (b)  The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council. (Code 1989, § 16-3; Ord. No. 79, § 2, 7-31-1961) 
Sec. 36-4. - Same—Powers and duties.     From and after the time the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then the planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities provided by law. (Code 1989, § 16-4; Ord. No. 79, § 3, 7-31-1961) State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
Sec. 36-5. - Determination of fees.     The following fees shall be administratively determined by the director of planning and community development and may be changed from time to time as determined by the director of planning and community development without further approval by the city council: (1)  Building permit. (2)  Certificate of occupancy. (3)  Heating and/or air-conditioning permit. (4)  Plumbing permit. (5)  Demolition permit. (6)  Development permit. (7)  Zoning application and filing. (8)  Preliminary and final plat. (9)  Conditional use permit. (10)  Special use permit. (11)  Annexation application. (12)  Variance request. (13)  Sewer tap inspection. (14)  Sign permit. (15)  Temporary certificate of zoning compliance. (16)  Master plan review. (Code 1989, § 16-5; Ord. No. 213, 8-12-1985) 
Sec. 36-6. - Major thoroughfare plan—Adopted.     The major thoroughfare plan is hereby adopted. It shall be known as the "City of Alpharetta Major Thoroughfare Plan—August, 1987." (Code 1989, § 16-6; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 9-28-1987) 
Sec. 36-7. - Same—Application to development. (a)  The road improvements set forth in the major thoroughfare plan shall constitute required improvements with respect to the development of residential subdivisions and all commercial developments within the city, including, but not limited to, the development of offices, institutions, shopping centers, retail sales facilities, manufacturing facilities, apartment complexes, hotel and motel developments, and mixed use developments. (b)  All development plans presented to the city, including, but not limited to, preliminary and final plats, and engineering design plans, shall, with respect to any existing or proposed road identified in the major thoroughfare plan, provide for the dedication and construction by the developer (at no cost to the city) of those road improvements identified in the major thoroughfare plan which abut or are contained within the development. The inclusion of such provisions within any plan submitted to the city shall be a precondition to the approval of such plans and the issuance of any city permit pertaining to the development. (Code 1989, § 16-7; Ord. No. 230, § 2, 9-28-1987) 
Sec. 36-8. - Same—Enforcement officer; appeals.     The provisions of sections 36-6 through 36-10 and the major thoroughfare plan shall be enforced by the director of planning and community development. The director, or the director's duly authorized representative, may enter upon any premises to perform any duty imposed upon the director by such sections. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director may appeal such decision to the board of appeals. (Code 1989, § 16-8; Ord. No. 230, § 3, 9-28-1987) 
Sec. 36-9. - Same—Additional remedies. (a)  Upon notice from the director, work on any required improvements that is being done contrary to the provisions of the plan shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and should go to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. (b)  When an emergency exists, the director shall not be required to give written notice prior to stopping the work. (c)  Further, in the event that the required improvements are being done contrary to the provisions of the plan, the director may revoke any permit previously issued by the city or any department of the city, and may refuse to issue any further permit until, in the discretion of the director, the work on the development is brought into compliance with the provisions of sections 36-6 through 36-8. (Code 1989, § 16-9; Ord. No. 230, § 4, 9-28-1987) 
Sec. 36-10. - Same—Interpretation, purpose and conflict.     The provisions of sections 36-6 through 36-8 and the major thoroughfare plan shall be considered as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, morals and general welfare. The provisions thereof are not intended to abrogate or eliminate other required improvements which may be set forth in the zoning ordinance, the subdivision regulations, the design standards, or other such ordinances; provided, however, where such sections impose greater requirements with respect to required improvements, the provisions of such sections shall govern. (Code 1989, § 16-10; Ord. No. 230, § 5, 9-28-1987) 
Secs. 36-11—36-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 36-39. - Adoption by reference.     The design standards, attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance Number 230-A and incorporated herein by reference, are hereby adopted as the design standards for development within the city. Exhibit "A" to Ordinance Number 230-A is available for inspection in the city clerk's office. (Code 1989, § 16-31; Ord. No. 230-A, § 1, 9-14-1987) 
Sec. 36-40. - Scope.     The design standards shall apply to the development of residential subdivisions and all commercial developments within the city, including, but not limited to, the development of offices, institutions, shopping centers, retail sales facilities, manufacturing facilities, apartment complexes, hotel or motel developments, and mixed use developments. (Code 1989, § 16-32; Ord. No. 230-A, § 2, 9-14-1987) 
Sec. 36-41. - Enforcement officer.     The provisions of this article and the design standards shall be enforced by the director of the department of community development (the director of community development), and the director of community development, or the director of community development's duly authorized representative, may enter upon any premises to perform any duty imposed upon the director of community development by this article. The director of community development may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. (Code 1989, § 16-33; Ord. No. 230-A, § 3, 9-14-1987; Ord. No. 276, § 1, 6-11-1990) 
Sec. 36-42. - Remedies.     Upon notice from the director of community development, work on any development that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. When an emergency exists, the director of community development shall not be required to give written notice prior to stopping the work. Further, in the event that work on any development is being done contrary to the provisions of this article, the director of community development may revoke any permit previously issued by the city or any department of the city, and may refuse to issue any further permit until, in the discretion of the director of community development, the work on the development is brought into compliance with the provisions of this article. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director of community development may appeal such decision to the board of zoning appeals. (Code 1989, § 16-34; Ord. No. 230-A, § 4, 9-14-1987; Ord. No. 276, § 1, 6-11-1990) 
Sec. 36-43. - Alternative materials and methods.     The provisions of this article and the design standards are not intended to prevent the use of any material or standard not specifically prescribed by this article, provided that any such alternative has been approved by the director of community development. The director of community development may, in his discretion, approve any such alternate, provided the director of community development finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this article. The director of community development shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. (Code 1989, § 16-35; Ord. No. 230-A, § 5, 9-14-1987; Ord. No. 276, § 1, 6-11-1990) 
Sec. 36-44. - Conflict regarding construction standards in subdivision regulations.     If, and to the extent, there exists any conflict between the construction standards specified in the city's subdivision regulations and Ordinance Number 230-A to adopt design standards for development within the city, it shall be the right and responsibility of the director of community development to specify the standard that shall apply with respect to the development under review, and the development and/or owner of the development shall adhere to the standard selected and specified by the director of community development. (Code 1989, § 16-36; Ord. No. 276, § 2, 6-11-1990) 
Secs. 36-45—36-61. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DESIGN REVIEW BOARD 
Sec. 36-62. - Finding of fact and determination of city council.     The historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city are among the city's most valued and important assets, and the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, safety, education, prosperity and general welfare of the people. (Code 1989, § 16-37; Ord. No. 437, § 1, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 473, § 1, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 637, §§ 1(exh. A), 2, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 36-63. - Purpose and declaration of public policy. (a)  Purpose. The city council finds that many places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art, having a special character or a special historic or aesthetic interest or value, or representing the finest architectural products of distinct periods in the history of the city, have been destroyed or uprooted, notwithstanding the feasibility of preserving and continuing the use of such places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art, and without adequate consideration of the irreplaceable loss to the people of the city of the aesthetic, educational, economic and historic values represented by such places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art. In addition, distinct areas may be similarly uprooted or may have their distinctiveness destroyed, although the preservation thereof may be both feasible and desirable. It is the finding of the city council that the standing of this city must be maintained and enhanced by preserving the historical and architectural heritage of the city and preventing the destruction of such cultural assets. The city council further finds that certain aspects of development, such as the spatial relationships of structures and open spaces to each other and the appearance of buildings and open spaces as they contribute to the attractiveness, function, and character of a district or the city as a whole, require the timely exercise of judgment in the public interest by a public body qualified to evaluate the design of proposed new developments or redevelopments within the city. (b)  Declaration of public policy. It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the identification, protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art of special character of a special historic or aesthetic interest or value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of health, prosperity, safety, education and general welfare of the people. It is further declared as a matter of public policy that the promotion of sound design principals, in order to provide a built environment which is attractive and functional, is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the health, prosperity, safety, education and general welfare of the people. Accordingly, the public policy objectives of this division are as follows: (1)  To effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of such places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art which represent or reflect special elements of the city's cultural, social and economic and architectural history; (2)  To safeguard the city's historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art; (3)  To stimulate historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to residents, tourists and others and thereby promote and stimulate business; (4)  To enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; (5)  To promote traffic safety and the general welfare of the public through the protection of the community property values, character and vistas of various city entrance corridors and the prevention of unnecessary clutter, congestion and poor definition of properties and development edges along routes of primary access leading into areas and sites of significant historical, cultural, educational, social and/or aesthetic value, and to ensure that any development or redevelopment is consistent with the goals of the comprehensive plan; (6)  To improve the environment of the city and quality of life for the general welfare of all citizens of the city; (7)  To protect and enhance the attractiveness of the city to home buyers, tourists, visitors and shoppers, and thereby support and promote business, commerce, and industry, and provide economic benefit to the city; (8)  To foster and encourage preservation, restoration and rehabilitation of structures, areas, and neighborhoods and thereby prevent urban blight; and (9)  To encourage the concept of sustainability, use of energy efficient design and promote conservation of natural resources. (Code 1989, § 16-38; Ord. No. 437, § 2, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 473, § 2, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 637, §§ 1(exh. A), 2, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 698, § 2, 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 36-64. - Interpretation.     In addition to any restrictions imposed by the ordinance from which this article is derived, all buildings, structures, sites and areas and the property on which they are located shall remain and continue to be subject to all building, sign, zoning and other ordinances of the city. If any conflict arises between this division and regulations promulgated thereunder, the more restrictive shall control. (Code 1989, § 16-39; Ord. No. 437, § 3, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 473, § 3, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 637, §§ 1(exh. A), 2, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 698, § 3, 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 36-65. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Accessory structure means a structure detached from a principal building on the same lot, and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or structure.     Action means any decision made by the board including approval, deferral or tabling.     Adaptive use means the process of converting a building to a use other than that for which it was designed (e.g., changing a factory into housing). Such conversions are accomplished with varying alterations to the building.     Alpharetta Highway (State Route 9) corridor of influence means any and all properties contiguous with or within the portion of the city along Alpharetta Highway or State Route 9, extending from Upper Hembree Road to the south, to Windward Parkway to the north.     Alteration of building means any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, columns or girders); any change in the non-supporting interior walls of a building; any addition or reduction to the building; any change in use; or any relocation of a building from one location or position to another.     Board means the city design review board, as established by the Unified Development Code and appointed by the mayor and city council.     Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, accessory building or similar structure.     Canopy (or marquee or awning) means a permanent roof-like shelter or overhang extending from part or all of a building face and constructed of a durable material such as fabric, metal, glass or plastic.     Central business district (CBD) means that portion of the city bounded by Mayfield Road to the north, Old Milton Parkway to the South, Haynes Bridge Road and Highway 9 to the east and Roswell and Canton Streets to the west (see Map A).     Certificate of design approval means a document issued by the design review board allowing an applicant to proceed with a proposed alteration, demolition, removal or new construction based upon a design review process and determination of the submitted proposal's suitability according to adopted criteria.     Community development director means the director of the community development department for the city, or his designee.     Construction means the act of erecting a new principal building or structure, and/or adding an accessory building or structure; the act of adding to an existing building, structure or other improvement.     Corridors of influence means the roadways and transportation routes having the greatest visual impact within the city and those roads which are considered to be gateways into the city. The corridors of influence include Alpharetta Highway or State Route 9 (except those portions which are considered to be in the central business district and the historic business district), Haynes Bridge Road, Mansell Road, North Point Parkway, Old Milton Parkway, Westside Parkway, and Windward Parkway (from State Route 9 to Georgia 400).     Demolition means any act or process that destroys, in part or in whole, any existing condition.     Demolition by neglect means neglect in any maintenance of any building or structure which results in its deterioration.     Design review means the process of ascertaining whether modifications to a particular building, structure, site, area, district, landscape feature or any part thereof meets the standards of appropriateness (design guidelines) established by the design review board.     Design standards, guidelines or criteria means adopted and written standards of appropriate activity that will preserve or enhance the historical, cultural, architectural, archaeological, educational, social, or aesthetic character, function and value of a particular resource, district or area of the city as a whole.     Development activity means all new construction, modification, addition, alteration, moving, destruction or demolition which would affect the exterior appearance of any structure, building, land, site or other object, including, but not limited to, the following: (1)  The demolition of any building, structure or object. (2)  The moving or relocation of any building, structure or object. (3)  Except for housecleaning, any material work on the exterior appearance of existing buildings by additions, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alteration or any maintenance (including exterior color), or any exterior material changes. (4)  Any new construction of a principal building or accessory building or structure subject to view from a street or public way. (5)  Changes in existing walls, fences, steps, sidewalks, streets and paving or construction of new walls, fences, steps, sidewalks, streets and paving, if along street rights-of-way, public lanes or public alleys. (6)  The erection or display on any lot, building or structure of any sign, light, artwork, mural, sculpture or other appurtenant feature.     Director means the director of the community development department for the city.     District means a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of buildings, structures, sites, spaces, or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development.     Exterior features means the architectural style, design, general arrangement and components of all or any of the outer surfaces of an improvement, as distinguished from the interior surfaces enclosed by said exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, the type, color and texture of the building materials and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs and all other features appurtenant to such improvements.     Facades means the exterior face of a building or structure exposed to public view.     Footcandles means a unit of luminance on a surface that is one foot from a uniform point source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot.     Garden district means that portion of Canton Street bounded by Church Street to the south and Hopewell Road to the north.     Gazebo means an accessory, open air structure not exceeding 300 square feet in size.     Haynes Bridge Road corridor of influence means any and all properties contiguous with or within the portion of the city along Haynes Bridge Road, extending from Academy Street to the north to Mansell Road to the south.     Historic business district (HBD) means that portion of the central business district bounded by Church Street to the north, Highway 9 to the east, Marietta Street to the south and the former Milton High School site to the west (see Map A).     Improvement means any building, structure, parking facility, fence, gate, wall, landscape feature, work of art or other object constituting a physical change of real property, or any part of such change.     Interchange districts means all properties within 1,000 feet of each interchange along Georgia 400. These districts include Mansell Road Interchange District, Haynes Bridge Road Interchange District, Old Milton Parkway Interchange District and the Windward Parkway Interchange District.     Island means, in parking lot and street design, built-up curbs (and in parking lots, usually placed at the end of parking rows) as a guide to traffic, and also used for landscaping, signage or lighting.     Landscape strip means a portion of a lot required to be reserved for, installed with, and maintained with vegetation. Such a strip may or may not be required to be of a linear form.     Mansell Road corridor of influence means any and all properties contiguous with or within the portion of the city along Mansell Road, extending from Haynes Bridge Road to the east to Warsaw Road to the west.     Master sign plan means a plan that includes all types of signage on a specific property. It shall include colors, design, placement and mounting styles for each sign type.     Mural means any piece of artwork painted directly on a wall, ceiling, or other permanent surface. If the artwork conveys a message about a product or service, it shall be considered a sign.     North Point Parkway corridor of influence means any and all properties contiguous with or within the portion of the city along North Point Parkway, extending from Kimball Bridge Road to the north to Mansell Road to the south.     Object means a material item of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historic or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment.     Old Milton Parkway corridor of influence means any and all properties contiguous with or within the portion of the city along Old Milton Parkway, extending from Wills Road to the west, and to the eastern city limits.     Ordinary repairs or maintenance means work done to prevent deterioration of a building or any part thereof by restoring the building as nearly as practical to its condition prior to its deterioration, decay or damage.     Owner means the title owner and his agents or assignees.     Parapet means that portion of a wall which extends above the roof line.     Preservation means the act or process of applying measures to sustain, in the existing form, the integrity and material of a building or structure, and the existing form and vegetative cover of a site (i.e., saving from demolition or deterioration buildings, sites, structures and objects and providing for their continued use by means of restoration, rehabilitation or adaptive use).     Principal building means the building or other structure within which is conducted (or intended to be conducted) the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.     Reconstruction means the act or process of reproducing by new construction the exact form and detail of a vanished building, structure or object, or part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of time.     Rehabilitation means the act or process of returning property to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use, while preserving those portions of features of the property which are significant to the historical and architectural values.     Restoration means the act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its settings as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of the later work or by the replacement of earlier work.     Roof line means the top edge of the roof or top of the parapet, whichever forms the dominant top line of the building silhouette.     Sign means any identification, description, illustration, symbol, statue or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible from any public place, each designed to advertise, identify or convey information, including any landscaping where letters or numbers are used for the purpose of directing the public's attention to a product or location, with the exception of window displays and state or national flags. For the purpose of removal, the term "sign" shall also include all sign structures.     Sign structure means any structure which supports, has supported or is designed to support a sign. A decorative cover is part of a sign structure.     Site means the location of a significant event or activity, or a building or a structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains special or unique value regardless of the value of the existing structure.     Site plan means a plan accurately drawn to scale of a development project, depicting the buildings proposed to be placed on the property, related public and site improvements on the site, and additional information as required by this article or conditions of zoning approval, and other applicable ordinances.     Solar panel means the following two types of devices that collect energy from the sun: (1)  Solar photovoltaic modules use solar cells to convert light from the sun into electricity; and (2)  Solar thermal collectors that use the sun's energy to heat water or another fluid such as oil or antifreeze.     Structure means a combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy or ornamentation which is fastened or attached to the ground.     Style means a type of architecture distinguished by special characters or features of a structure and ornament and often related in time; also a general quality of distinctive character.     Westside Parkway corridor of influence means any and all properties contiguous with or within the portion of the city along Westside Parkway, extending from Sanctuary Parkway to the southwest to Windward Parkway to the north.     Windward Parkway corridor of influence means any and all properties contiguous with or within the portion of the city along Windward Parkway, extending from State Route 9 to the west to Georgia 400 to the east. (Code 1989, § 16-40; Ord. No. 437, § 4, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 473, § 4, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 637, §§ 1(exh. A), 2, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 698, § 4, 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 36-66. - Scope of division.     The restrictions imposed by this division shall apply to all non-single-family detached buildings, structures, sites, and areas and the property on which they are located, within the central business district and historic district (as defined and depicted on Map A attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and incorporated by reference), corridors of influence (as defined and depicted on Map B attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and incorporated by reference), interchange districts (as defined and depicted on Map B attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and incorporated by reference), and to all projects which otherwise expressly include, as a condition of development, review by the design review board. (Code 1989, § 16-41; Ord. No. 437, § 5, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 473, § 5, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 637, §§ 1(exh. A), 2, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 698, § 5, 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 36-67. - Design review board. (a)  Establishment. A design review board is hereby established. The board shall consist of seven members and two alternate members. Members shall be appointed and shall serve in accordance with the chapter 2, article III, Boards and Commissions. No member shall be employed by the city, hold public office in the city or be a member of another city board or commission. At least one member of the board shall be a registered architect in the state, in good standing. (b)  Proceedings. (1)  The board shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from its members, during its first meeting in January of every year, who shall serve for one year or until their successors are elected. A staff member of the community development department shall serve as a non-voting secretary to the board. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such times as the board may determine. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. A minimum of four members of the board shall constitute a quorum. Any act of the board shall require a majority vote of the members at a meeting at which a quorum is present. The board shall maintain minutes of its proceedings, including the results of all votes taken, and shall maintain records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the community development department as public record. (2)  Only design review board members present during the initial review of an item may participate in any subsequent reviews of the same items. An exception to this provision can be made in order to maintain a quorum. (3)  If no action is taken by the design review board within three consecutive hearings, the applicant may request to be placed on the next available board of appeals agenda for further consideration and action. (c)  Powers and duties. The board shall: (1)  Review applications for certificate of design approval required in section 36-68 for: a.  All exterior features of new construction. b.  All exterior features of construction, alteration, restoration, moving, demolition, or repair of an existing building or improvements involving or resulting in a change in the existing structural composition or architectural design or character of such building or improvement. c.  All proposed changes, improvements or proposals regarding site plan features such as landscaping, walls, walks, terraces, fences, signs, lights and shopping cart corrals. d.  All proposed screening of dumpsters, satellite antennas and dishes, solar panels, parking lots, rooftop equipment and other mechanical equipment. e.  All proposed outdoor play yards and/or equipment, and outdoor patios with or without seating. f.  All demolition of buildings or portions of buildings that are over 50 years old and may be of significance. (2)  Review all applications for signs within the downtown overlay. Review any sign applications as an appeal to a staff decision. (3)  Grant or deny applications for certificates of design approval based upon a design review of the proposed development activity for compliance with design standards. (4)  The following shall not be subject to review by the board: a.  Repainting of a structure to the same color that was previously approved by the board. b.  The ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior elements of any building or structure. c.  The construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any such elements which the authorized city officers shall certify as required for public safety. d.  Single-family detached residential structures. (5)  Act in an advisory role to other city departments, boards and commissions. (6)  Develop from time to time further design standards consistent with the purposes, intents and standards established in this division, and in accordance with section 36-69. (7)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, the design review board may delegate review responsibility for all nonresidential areas not included within the central business district, corridors of influence and the interchange districts to the director. If the director finds the plans in compliance, the director's decision shall be final, and a development or building permit shall be issued. (Code 1989, § 16-42; Ord. No. 437, § 6, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 473, § 6, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 637, §§ 1(exh. A), 2, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 698, § 6, 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 751, § 5(exh. C), 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 36-68. - Certificate of design approval; application. (a)  When required. No person shall undertake development activity within any area of the city subject to this division without first obtaining a certificate of design approval from the design review board in accordance with the provisions of this division. Such certificate of design approval shall be a pre-condition to the issuance of any land disturbance permit, building permit or other permit. (b)  Application for certificate of design approval. Application for certificate of design approval shall be made to the community development department and shall be accompanied by site plans, detailed development plans, including relevant sketches, perspective or isometric drawings, and written descriptions, affirmatively setting forth provisions for compliance with design standards. No application shall be deemed to be accepted by the community development department unless and until all fees are paid and all information reasonably required by the community development department is provided by the applicant. No application will be heard until all items have been submitted. Submittal shall include, but not be limited to the following: (1)  Site plan requirements. a.  The location of all proposed buildings and structures, accessory and main, indicating the number of stories and height. b.  The location and dimensions of proposed recreation areas, open spaces, outdoor seating areas and similar improvements. c.  Parking areas with parking spaces drawn, tabulated, and dimensioned. Designated number of parking spaces (including handicapped) required by ordinance and provided by proposal. d.  Parking islands and/or raised landscape islands and cart corral locations. e.  The location of all drives. Minimum drive aisle width and direction of vehicular travel. f.  Curb cuts and adjacent and connecting roadways off premises. g.  Security gates, showing swing path. h.  Sidewalks (both public and private). i.  Loading docks. j.  Detention ponds (underground/aboveground). Screening to be depicted on the landscape plan and/or site plan. k.  Sites for solid waste/trash containers with screening, per city design standards. l.  Show all easements, clearly designating as proposed and type (utility, access, etc.). m.  The location, height, type and material of all fences, walls, retaining walls and guardrails. n.  Show diameter, location, drip lines and protection areas of all specimen trees, whether retained or removed. o.  Show all required buffers and setbacks, streams, water and floodplain areas. p.  Such other information as is reasonably necessary to represent the character, nature and exactness of the proposed project being reviewed by the board. q.  Such other information as is reasonably requested by the community development department and/or the board. (2)  Site lighting. A photometric site lighting study certified by a professional to indicate all foot-candle levels extending to all property lines from the project. (3)  Site line study. A site line drawing depicting several views from the public roadways to ensure all roof-mounted equipment is concealed from public view. (4)  Landscape submittal requirements. Provide landscape drawings prepared by a landscape architect (drawn to scale) indicating the locations of all landscape features including, but not limited to, the size and type of all plant materials (including groundcovers) and locations of seasonal beds. An existing tree and landscape survey and assessment of the existing landscaping should be included in the submittal. (5)  Exterior elevation submittal requirements. a.  Provide photographs of the subject property in its current condition and photographs of all contiguous properties. b.  Provide dimensioned and colored exterior elevations (drawn to scale) of all facades of the building identifying and representing the locations and color of all proposed exterior materials. Include locations of all proposed building-mounted light fixtures, equipment or other accessories. Enlarged details of portions of the building to help better understand the interaction of materials and colors are highly recommended. c.  Provide actual material and color samples of all proposed exterior materials. A color copy of such samples shall be included with the submittal (actual materials and color samples shall be brought to the design review meeting). Include cut sheets or other written and pictorial descriptions of all building-mounted lighting or equipment. d.  Indicate the locations of all rooftop-mounted equipment. e.  The use of perspective drawings, three-dimensional digital models or renderings to assist in depicting the exterior architecture of the building is highly recommended. (6)  Building and monument signage requirements. a.  Provide dimensioned and colored exterior elevations (drawn to scale) indicating the locations and dimensions of all building-mounted signs. Include actual color samples, lighting/illumination methods, materials and construction for each sign. Provide a calculation indicating the total area (square footage) of each building sign. b.  Provide a site plan (drawn to scale) indicating locations of ground-mounted monument signs. Indicate required setbacks, adjacent groundcover and landscaping materials. c.  Provide dimensioned and colored elevations of ground-mounted signs. Identify all proposed materials, provide actual material and color samples. Indicate lighting and illumination methods. (c)  Action on application. (1)  The application shall be delivered with the supporting information and materials to the community development department and the board for review and consideration. (2)  The board shall act upon the application within 30 days after the filing of an application with the community development department containing all the information required in this section. The board may extend the period for action 15 additional days for reasonable cause. The community development department or the board shall notify the applicant in advance of any decision to extend the period for action. The community development department, design review board and the applicant may also mutually extend the period for action. (3)  Unless extended, no action after 45 days shall deem the application as approved, and a certificate of design approval shall be issued by the community development department. (4)  If the application is approved, a certificate of design approval shall be issued. In the event an application is not approved, denied or deferred for additional information by the board, the board shall provide the applicant a written denial, indicating the reason for denial. (d)  Appeal. Appeal from the decision of the board is by writ of certiorari to the county superior court, and must be filed within 30 days from the date of the decision by the board. (Code 1989, § 16-43; Ord. No. 437, § 7, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 473, § 7, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 637, §§ 1(exh. A), 2, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 698, § 7, 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 36-69. - Design standards. (a)  Visual compatibility factors. New construction and existing buildings, structures and appurtenances attached thereto which are moved, reconstructed, materially altered, repaired or repainted, including repainting the same color, should reflect the visual character of the surrounding areas and shall be visually compatible with buildings, and places to which they are visually related generally, in terms of the following factors: (1)  Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually compatible with and complement the adjacent buildings and structures. (2)  Scale. The size of a building should be similar in height, width and depth to buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related, except in areas of redevelopment. (3)  Facades. Buildings should follow an established solid-to-void ratio and are to be visually compatible with adjacent buildings. Windows and door openings (height and width) are to be visually compatible with adjacent buildings. Avoid openings exceeding the dimensions of adjacent buildings by more than ten percent. Buildings must have finished front, side and rear elevations where there is visibility to those elevations. Respect and preserve the existing vernacular architecture and its elements. (4)  Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of buildings to open spaces between the building and the adjoining buildings shall be visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related. (5)  Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship of entrances and porch projections to the sidewalks of a building shall be visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related. (6)  Materials, texture and color. The compatibility of the materials, texture and colors for each facade of a building shall be visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related. Buildings and structures shall be visually compatible with adjacent buildings. Buildings adjacent to each other of conflicting architectural styles shall be separated by such means as screens and site breaks. (7)  Roof configuration and shape. The roof configuration and shape of a building shall be visually compatible with the building to which it is visually related. (8)  Continuity. Appurtenances of a building such as walls, wrought iron, fences, evergreen landscape masses and building facades shall, if necessary, form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street, to ensure visual compatibility of the building to the buildings and places to which it is visually related. (9)  Signs. Signs shall be compatible with the buildings and places to which they are visually related. Signs shall reflect the scale and character of their surroundings in size, type, face, graphics, lighting, square footage, style, material, color and related qualities of the building. a.  Ground-mounted signage in all districts are to be monument style with materials and a color to match the parent building's materials. Unless otherwise specified in a master sign plan, the structural supports and foundation shall be of brick, stone or of materials to match the principal material found in the principal structure on the site. The board encourages seasonal and evergreen plants installed in planting beds surrounding the monument sign. b.  All signs must be weatherproof and must be made of enduring materials so as not to become a hazard due to disrepair, damage or inclement weather. All letters or numbers shall be permanently affixed. Neon, fiber optics, and non-traditional illumination techniques are discouraged in lieu of LED or more environmentally friendly styles. Use of neon tubing, fiber optics or other non-traditional illumination techniques which are visible are prohibited unless covered by translucent material. All signs shall provide vertical relief with the use of characters, letters or numbers. Lighting should be limited and shall not be distractive to motorists or pedestrians, or distract from the architecture of the site. c.  In general: 1.  Individual signs should not use more than two colors, plus a background color. 2.  Signage may also utilize white and/or black as predominant colors. 3.  Signage should not utilize more than one color for the primary message copy, unless a second color is used to create a shadowing or outlining effect. 4.  For panel signs, the background color shall mean the panel itself. 5.  For channel letters, the background color shall mean the returns. 6.  If a portion of the building behind a wall sign is painted a different color than the remainder of the wall, then such portion of the wall shall be counted as background color. 7.  Trim colors shall be counted as background colors. (10)  Master signage. a.  For new construction or the exterior remodel of more than 50 percent of a building, a master sign plan is strongly suggested for all multi-building or multi-occupant commercial developments before any permanent signs for such development may be erected. All owners, tenants, subtenants and purchasers of individual units within the development shall comply with the approved master sign plan, or submit to the design review board for approval. b.  The master sign plan shall consist of five elements that shall govern all signs within the development: location, materials, size, color and illumination. c.  The master sign plan shall include details, specifications, dimensions, and plans showing the proposed locations of signs and how such locations conform to the requirements of this article. d.  A master sign plan should show the allocation of permitted wall sign space among proposed tenants and any general building sign or signs. e.  A master sign plan may be amended by filing a new master plan through the design review board (DRB) application process. f.  The master sign plan application may be filed only by the owner of the land affected by the proposed change, or an agent, lessee or contract purchaser specifically authorized by the owner. If a governing board for the property affected exists, then the governing board may provide written authorization for all land owners affected. g.  A tenant sign package is encouraged for multi-tenant buildings. h.  In general, signage should be limited to not more than three approved colors. (11)  Murals. Murals shall be appropriately scaled and visually compatible with the buildings on which they are placed. Not all buildings are appropriate for mural display, and careful consideration shall be given to any mural proposed within the downtown historic district. (12)  Awnings. Awning signs shall be allowed, provided that: a.  The maximum area of an awning sign shall not exceed ten percent of the total awning face front and side area. b.  Awning signs may be illuminated only with direct surface lighting and not with any form of back lighting. (13)  Display of logos and trademarks, generally. Logos and trademarks may be included on signs without separate restriction, provided that such logos and trademarks are consistent with the approved color scheme shown on the master sign plan. Logos for single occupancy projects also shall be limited to the three-color requirement. (14)  Display of registered trademarks. a.  A federally registered trademark or service mark that is registered as a stylized/design mark in colors inconsistent with the applicable master sign plan or the color limitations applicable to a single-occupancy property may nevertheless be displayed on a sign in its registered form and color, provided that it may only occupy up to 20 percent of the permitted area of any sign, without regard to the color limitations otherwise applicable to the sign. b.  Placement on the sign shall be in accordance with any applicable provisions of the master sign plan. This division does not specify where a logo must be placed on a sign. c.  Holders of multi-colored federally registered trademarks or of federally registered trademarks that do not conform to the colors shown in the applicable master sign plan or with the three-color limitation on single-occupancy properties may, at the holder's choice, elect to display the mark in a color pattern consistent with the applicable master sign plan; or, the holder may display the mark in its registered colors, provided that it shall not occupy more than ten percent of the permitted area of the sign on which it appears. d.  The holder of a federally registered trademark that conforms to the colors shown in the applicable master sign plan may display that logo as part of the permitted signage without further restriction. e.  Solar panels should be designed to be visually compatible with the architectural design of the primary structure. (15)  Landscaping. a.  Where existing topographic patterns contribute to the beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance and complement architectural features, strengthen vistas and lines of sight and provide shade. Vehicular areas shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices wherever possible. Where building sites limit planting, the placement of trees and shrubs in the parkways or paved areas is encouraged. Screening of service yards, exterior utilities (includes generators, water chillers, etc.), refuse collection areas and other places which tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by the use of walls, fencing, landscaping or any approved combination of these. Screening shall be effective in winter and summer seasons. Every effort shall be made to respect and preserve existing landforms, trees and other landscape elements. Shielding of vehicular parking areas, service areas and driveways from adjacent properties and public rights-of-ways shall be accomplished through the use of effective screening mechanisms such as landscaped earthen berms, lowering the parking level grade below sight lines from public rights-of-way, and by the use of evergreen screen landscaping. b.  Plant materials are encouraged to be indigenous or naturalizing but not of exotic origin to this region and climate. Care should be taken in selection of plant materials that do not require excessive irrigation or maintenance. Scale and proportion of the building should be considered. Landscaping should be utilized to complement and soften the architecture of buildings, structures and monument signs and soften or screen views of parking areas from public rights-of-way. Equal attention shall be given to landscaping along the side and back of buildings as well as the front. c.  The following minimum requirements must be met: 1.  Provide decorative landscaping near building entrances or patios (planting beds, large pots, etc.). 2.  Screen dumpster and recycling bins with a masonry wall to match the building and opaque metal gates and evergreen plantings. See Standard Plan 700. 3.  Monument signs should not displace required landscaping. Base plantings around signs shall include evergreens and seasonal plantings. 4.  Parking areas should be demarcated from pedestrian connections with pavers, stamped concrete or other material that differentiates the pedestrian walkways. 5.  Provide paved pedestrian connections from public sidewalks to the site interior (may not be located within a required tree island). 6.  Sites should include a minimum of one bicycle rack, one bench and one trash receptacle. 7.  All landscaped areas should be maintained by the use of automatic irrigation systems or as approved by the community development department. Automatic irrigation systems shall comply with the water conservation ordinance. (16)  Streetscape guidelines. a.  Old Milton Parkway. 1.  Brookside area tree placement. Shade trees such as willow oaks, nuttall oaks, American elms, etc., are to be spaced 50 feet on center alternated with groupings of understory trees and accent shrubs. Flowering or variegated leaf color is encouraged. 2.  Granville lights are to be located 80 feet on center. The color is to be black. 3.  Benches are to be placed at the rate of one unit every 100 linear feet. 4.  Medians. Groupings of understory flowering trees and accent shrubs with ends of beds are to be planted with dwarf lemon yellow daylilies or similar. Alternate with blocks of evergreen trees such as holly (Savannah, Foster, or Nellie Stevens), staggered at eight feet on center, and ends of the bed are to be planted with Knockout roses or similar. Planting shall allow for a minimum visual clearance of 24 feet at the end of each median which shall be planted with dwarf daylilies or other groundcover. Median widths of less than two feet shall be brick pavers (no plants). b.  North Main Street. 1.  Shade trees such as hybrid red maples, Asian elms, or American or European hornbeams, etc., shall be spaced 50 feet on center. Alternate with groupings of understory trees and accent shrubs. Flowering or variegated leaf color is encouraged. 2.  Granville lights are to be located 50 feet on center. The color is to be black. Benches are to be placed at the rate of one unit every 150 linear feet. 3.  Medians. Groupings of understory trees shall be under planted with Knockout roses or similar. Flowering or variegated leaf color is encouraged. Alternate with blocks of evergreen trees such as Nellie Stevens holly staggered at eight feet on center. Ends of the bed are to be planted with low ornamental shrubs. Plantings shall allow for a minimum visual clearance of 24 feet at the end of each median which shall be planted with dwarf daylilies or other groundcover. Median widths of less than two feet shall consist of brick pavers (no plants). 4.  The central business district shall comply with the downtown incentive zoning guidelines. (17)  Building, structure and sign material colors. a.  Building color palettes. The use of muted, subdued or earth tone colors are encouraged while the use of novelty and primary colors are strongly discouraged and are to be avoided. It is the intent of these guidelines to establish timelessness in the color schemes incorporated in the building design and project design. Colors are intended to enhance the architecture of the project, not to attract attention to specific features or elements such as roof or parapet lines and signs. Building colors for the central business and historic business districts are to be derived from the "historic" or "Williamsburg" collections or palette by Benjamin Moore, or equivalent. Equivalent colors matching the above named manufacturers are acceptable. b.  Deviation from the approved colors may be considered by the board where appropriate or as part of accented design elements. In general, a project should use no more than three of the approved colors. (18)  Undesirable elements. The following elements are strongly discouraged in all districts and corridors of influence: a.  Visually obtrusive stormwater detention or retention areas. Care should be taken to locate stormwater detention or retention areas in the least conspicuous areas of the project site or design them as a water feature. Additional care should be taken to mitigate the visual intrusion of detention or retention areas through the use of heavy landscaping, or concealing these areas underground. Utilization of the retention or detention pond as an attractive site feature is the preferred alternative. b.  Visible roof-mounted equipment on buildings. Roof-mounted heating and air cooling units, exhaust hoods and fans, vent piping, satellite dishes, antennae and other roof appurtenances on the roof of a building are prohibited from being viewed from the ground by the general public and must be permanently screened. Any exterior ventilated HVAC units shall be internally drained (e.g., condensate lines). c.  Visible dumpsters and recycling bins or containers. Dumpsters, refuse containers and recycling bins are required to be screened from public view with building materials that match the parent building, and their location on the project site is to be as inconspicuous as possible. Enclosure doors are to be constructed of steel or other durable materials that can be easily maintained and their color coordinated with the parent building. d.  Excessive site and building lighting. Site and building lighting should be minimal, with lighting standards and levels being at the discretion of the board. Site lighting should not distract motorists or pedestrians traversing on or near the project site. Building lighting should not distract from the overall architecture of the building but should complement the building. Site or building lighting should not spill over onto adjacent properties, and should be directed specifically at the building in order to limit lighting of the night sky. However, site and building lighting is encouraged to provide a sense of security. e.  Improper landscape design and lack of creativity. Attractive, complimentary landscapes are encouraged throughout the site using a mix of evergreen foundation plants, colorful accent plants and groundcovers. Untested, non-naturalizing or non-indigenous species of plants are strongly discouraged. Trees should be of larger caliper and size to create a pleasant and immediate impact upon installation. Shrubs should be of the largest container size possible. f.  Removal of existing trees important to the character of the site. Large and significant trees should be protected where possible through the use of creative design solutions and manmade protection devices, such as tree wells, aeration systems, etc. g.  Discouraged architectural elements. Mansard roofs; drive-through windows that become a primary visual focus; plastic elements; inappropriately ornate architectural elements (such as elements depicting animals); metal buildings; and mobile units are discouraged. h.  Use of neon, fiber optic, and non-traditional illumination techniques is strongly discouraged. Use of neon tubing or other non-traditional illumination techniques which are visible are prohibited, unless covered by translucent material. i.  Excessive use of building materials. In general, building materials should be limited to three types. Buildings incorporating too many different material types look busy and disjointed. Visual continuity should be considered by balancing building materials within the architectural elevations. j.  Thematic architecture. Building styles that are overly theatrical in character or are designed to represent specific objects are strongly discouraged. Materials used to create theatrical design such as driftwood, netting, corrugated metal and mirrors are strongly discouraged. k.  Excessive use of retaining walls. Use of retaining walls is discouraged. However, where required due to site conditions and grading considerations, care should be taken to mitigate their visual obtrusiveness. Finished materials must match the parent building or structure. Modular block walls are only allowed in non-visible areas of the site. l.  Visually obtrusive parking structures or other accessory buildings. Parking structures must provide architectural details and materials to mitigate their visual obtrusiveness on all exterior elevations. Materials and colors must match those of the parent building. Should no parent building be adjacent, then the parking structure should be visually compatible with other adjacent structures. All surface water and stormwater shall be internally drained. Evergreen landscape trees and shrubs shall be incorporated to aid in screening the structure. m.  Use of plastic materials and primary color accessory structures. Accessory structures such as playgrounds must not be visible from public rights-of-way. Plastic materials and primary colors are to be avoided. n.  Murals. Murals shall be appropriately scaled and visually compatible with the buildings on which they are placed. Not all buildings are appropriate for mural display, and careful consideration shall be given to any mural proposed within the downtown historic district. Murals shall not include advertising or be commercial in nature. o.  The board shall seek to minimize and discourage the use of the following architectural features within the city: mansard roofs, wooden shakes or shingles, drive-through windows that become a primary visual focus, overly plastic elements, metal buildings and mobile units. (b)  General design standards. The board shall also consider the following general design standards when reviewing applications for certificates of design approval: (1)  For new buildings and additions to existing buildings. a.  The height of the rooflines or parapets along the street or public right-of-way. b.  Scale and mass of the building on the site. c.  Placement of the building on the site. d.  Materials, colors and textures of the buildings. e.  Architectural style where there is a predominant style on surrounding and adjacent buildings. f.  Architectural details, including signs, subject to public view from any public street or public way. g.  Incorporation of pedestrian-friendly features and amenities wherever possible. Pedestrian paths (e.g., sidewalks, mulched paths) should encourage pedestrian travel throughout an entire project. Pedestrian paths connecting adjacent properties and projects are also strongly encouraged. (2)  For modifications to existing buildings. a.  The degree to which the distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure or site, including historic materials, are retained. b.  The historic appropriateness of any new features. c.  The compatibility of proposed alterations with other buildings within the street block face or block face across the street, giving consideration to building size, shape, roofline, colors, materials, textures, nature of openings and architectural details. (3)  For bridges and bridge encroachments. a.  Bridges and bridge encroachments in all areas of the city are to be treated with enhanced architectural details. This would include all vehicular and pedestrian bridges and combinations thereof. Enhancements should include the use of brick and/or stone for the exterior and interior (roadway side) of the facades of bridges and all wing walls, abutments, beams, and piers. Horizontal and vertical relief should be provided along the sides to completely cover the substructure with a center point feature. All vehicular bridges shall include a separated (by a decorative barrier) sidewalk of ten feet. Barriers are encouraged to include plantings. All fencing proposed shall be of a decorative nature and should include a planting to create a "green" or "live" wall. The bridge should include decorative lighting of both vehicular and pedestrian heights. Each bridge center piece shall have an official city seal incorporated. b.  Specific design standards. The board will consider the following specific design standards when reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness: 1.  It is the intent of the city to maintain and enhance the "traditional main street" character within the central business district and the historic districts. Outside these areas, the board will evaluate each project proposal based on the quality of its design and relationship to the architectural character and style of the surrounding buildings, structures and streetscape. 2.  Building scale, proportion and massing will be considered as follows: within the central business district and the historic districts, no single building design element shall exceed 100 feet in length; and no continuous, uninterrupted storefront elevation (elevation in the same plane) shall exceed 50 feet in length. 3.  The board shall seek to minimize and discourage the use of the following architectural features within the city: (i)  Mansard roofs. (ii)  Wooden shakes or shingles. (iii)  Drive-through windows that become a primary visual focus. (iv)  Plastic elements. (v)  Inappropriate ornate architectural elements (such as elements depicting animals). (vi)  Metal buildings. (vii)  Mobile buildings. (c)  Additional standards. Subject to the approval of the city council, the board shall have the authority from time to time to promulgate additional design standards. Such additional design standards shall be effective upon approval by the city council. (Code 1989, § 16-44; Ord. No. 437, § 8, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 473, § 8, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 637, §§ 1(exh. A), 2, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 698, § 8, 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 36-70. - Conformance with certificate. (a)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of design approval shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. If work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the community development department shall be authorized to issue a cease and desist order, and all work shall cease. (b)  Appeal from such cease and desist order shall be the same as that set forth in section 36-68(d) for appeal of an application denial by the board. (Code 1989, § 16-45; Ord. No. 437, § 9, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 473, § 9, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 637, §§ 1(exh. A), 2, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 698, § 9, 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 36-71. - Remedies.     In case any activity covered by this division is or is proposed to be initiated in violation of any provision of this division, the community development department may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the appropriate person, issue a citation for violation of this division requiring the presence of the violator in the municipal court of the city or the city code enforcement board, or institute an injunction or other appropriate action of proceedings to prevent such unlawful activity or to correct or abate such violation. (Code 1989, § 16-46; Ord. No. 437, § 10, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 473, § 10, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 637, §§ 1(exh. A), 2, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 698, § 10, 12-1-2014) 
Chapter 37 - RESERVED 
Chapter 38 - SOLID WASTE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 38-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Approved garbage can means any cylindrical or rectangular light gauge steel, plastic or galvanized receptacle which is closed at one end and open at the other, equipped with two handles, a tight fitting top or lid, and watertight. An approved garbage can shall have a capacity of not less than five gallons and not more than 95 gallons. Approved garbage cans shall also include plastic bags or liners of sufficient strength to hold refuse not exceeding 50 pounds gross weight and which are tied securely at the top.     Approved yard waste container means any plastic or galvanized receptacle which is closed at one end and open at the other with two handles and a lid, having a capacity of no more than 40 pounds gross weight when filled.     Commercial and industrial premises/units means commercial and industrial entities within the city limits to which the city is responsible for collection.     Garbage means all accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attend the preparation, use, cooking or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables, and containers originally used for foodstuffs.     Hazardous waste means any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or an appropriate agency of the state to be hazardous as that term is defined by or pursuant to federal or state law or regulation.     Inert trash means trash that is not defined as garbage or yard waste such as appliances (other than those containing Freon), furniture, swings or any non-garbage or non-yard waste material which cannot fit into an approved trash container. The term "inert trash" does not include rocks, concrete, bricks and similar solid material, tires, dirt, plaster or construction waste.     Recyclable material means newspapers, glass bottles and containers, aluminum beverage cans, and bimetal beverage cans.     Refuse means garbage, yard waste, inert trash, or all.     Residential premises/units means a dwelling within the city limits occupied by a person or group of persons. A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when water services, either public or private, are being supplied thereto. Each unit of an apartment or condominium dwelling, whether of single or multilevel construction, shall be treated as a residential unit unless the entire condominium or apartment complex is serviced as a commercial entity.     Rubbish means all refuse other than garbage including pine straw, leaves, hedge and grass clippings and any other material not specifically excluded by this chapter or the agreement of the city and an independent contractor providing collection services. The term "rubbish" does not include tree stumps, tree limbs more than three feet in length or three inches in diameter, rocks, concrete, bricks and similar solid material, dirt or plaster.     Yard waste means plant material including leaves, grass clippings, thatch, hedge clippings, Christmas trees, pine cones, pine straw and tree limbs less than three feet in length or six inches in diameter. The term "yard waste" does not include tree stumps or tree sections larger than herein described. (Code 1989, § 11-50; Ord. No. 187, § 1, 9-20-1982; Ord. No. 277, § 1A, 7-23-1990; Ord. No. 314, § 1, 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 38-2. - Use of service required; those authorized to provide. (a)  The periodic collection of garbage from all places in the city benefits all occupants of places and premises in the city, and such occupants or persons in possession, charge or control of any place in or from which garbage is created, accumulated or produced are liable for and shall pay the garbage collection fees established by the city council. Garbage collection service shall be provided for by the city either on its own or through an independent contractor operating under formal contract with the city, and it shall be mandatory for all occupants or persons in possession, charge or control of places and premises in the city in or from which garbage is created, accumulated or produced to use the collection service provided for by the city or its contractor; provided, however, that there may be joint or multiple use of garbage containers by outside collection services, subject to securing a permit or contract therefor from the city council and pursuant to rules and regulations therefor as established by the council. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than an independent contractor operating under a separate contract with the city or authorized agents and employees of the city to collect, remove or dispose of garbage in the city; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the use of garbage disposal devices as provided in the city plumbing code. (Code 1989, § 11-51; Ord. No. 187, § 6, 9-20-1982) 
Sec. 38-3. - Contracts with independent contractors—Authorized; roll-off services; special handling. (a)  In order for the city to provide adequate service to the citizens of the city for the collection, removal and disposal of accumulated refuse, the city may enter into a contract with an independent contractor, either private or another municipal corporate entity, for such services. In such event, any contract entered into shall be required to meet the standards and regulations of this chapter; provided, however, that the independent contractor shall have the right to offer specific services to all commercial or industrial customers which may involve specialized trucks, compactors, machinery or handling. Under such circumstances, all commercial or industrial customers using such services commonly referred to as roll-off services shall be subject to rates negotiated between the contractor and the building owners and/or occupants, and shall be billed directly by the contractor. (b)  For items requiring special handling due to size, weight, type of material, or method of placement, the charges are to be negotiated between the contractor and the generator/owner prior to collection, and such service fees shall be billed directly to the customer from the contractor. (c)  In the event the city enters into a contract with an independent contractor for the collection of refuse throughout the city, such contract, once approved, shall be adopted by resolution and published in the office of the city hall where utility bills may be paid. (Code 1989, § 11-52; Ord. No. 187, §§ 7, 14, 9-20-1982; Ord. No. 277, § 1B, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 38-4. - Same—Contract price.     The city council may negotiate with an independent contractor or another municipal corporate entity the terms, conditions and consideration to be paid for the services sought under such a contract; and it shall be presumed that any consideration agreed upon between the city and such independent contractor or municipal corporate entity shall be in the best interest and welfare of the citizens of this city. (Code 1989, § 11-53; Ord. No. 187, § 8, 9-20-1982) 
Sec. 38-5. - Collection of yard waste generally. (a)  On or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, it shall be mandatory for each occupier of land in the city to separate all yard waste from other refuse in accordance with the provisions of this section. Grass, leaves, pine straw and thatch shall be segregated from other yard waste and shall be placed together in an approved yard waste container. Pine cones and hedge clippings shall be segregated from other yard waste and shall be placed together in an approved yard waste container. Tree limbs of proper size shall be stacked at curb side. (b)  Each residential or business unit shall provide one or more approved yard waste containers. Each approved yard waste container shall be placed at the curb side for collection on days specified from time to time by resolution of the city council. Initially, yard waste collection shall be every two weeks on the same day the city's contractor collects garbage and recyclables. No more than ten approved yard waste containers will be picked up from any one residence or business at any one time. The approved yard waste containers shall not be placed at the curb side sooner than one day prior to the scheduled collection, and empty containers shall be removed promptly after collection. (c)  Yard waste placed in anything other than an approved yard waste container, such as plastic bags or cardboard boxes, will not be picked up by the city. Each resident or business shall be responsible for the proper disposal of tree stumps, tree limbs more than three feet in length or six inches in diameter, and other trash such as rocks, concrete, bricks or similar solid materials, tires, dirt, plaster and construction materials. Neither the city nor any contractor of the city will pick up such materials for disposal. (d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit an occupier of land within the city from mulching or composting yard waste for use on the premises. (Code 1989, § 11-54; Ord. No. 187, § 10, 9-20-1982; Ord. No. 314, § 2, 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 38-6. - Disposition of inert trash.     Occupiers of land within the city shall call the city public works department and request pick-up of inert trash. Such materials shall be placed at the curb side no sooner than the day before the pick-up date established by the city. Inert trash shall not be commingled with yard waste. (Code 1989, § 11-55; Ord. No. 187, § 12, 9-20-1982; Ord. No. 314, § 3, 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 38-7. - Districts.     The city council may, by resolution, establish districts in the city for the purpose of collecting garbage and rubbish and establishing the fees therefor. (Code 1989, § 11-56; Ord. No. 187, § 13, 9-20-1982) 
Sec. 38-8. - Time of collection.     Collection of garbage shall be made at least once a week from private residences, or as many times per week as the city or its contractor may order from all other places. (Code 1989, § 11-57; Ord. No. 187, § 9, 9-20-1982) 
Sec. 38-9. - Notification for collection. (a)  All occupants or persons in possession, charge or control of premises and places in or upon which garbage is created, accumulated or produced shall notify the city or its contractor that collection of garbage from such places is required. Occupants or persons in possession, charge or control of premises and places other than private premises shall give notice of the frequency of collection required. (b)  In the event the city enters into a contract with an independent contractor entity, the independent contractor shall notify the citizens of this city of the change in collection procedure and furnish to the citizens of this city sufficient information for notifying the independent contractor of the citizens' collection needs. (Code 1989, § 11-58; Ord. No. 187, § 11, 9-20-1982) 
Sec. 38-10. - Approved garbage cans—Regulations. (a)  Each residential unit shall be provided a 95-gallon plastic rollaway cart for garbage disposal. All owners/lessees of residential units shall keep the rollaway carts in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. In the event an owner/lessee loses, destroys or damages a rollaway cart, such owner/lessee shall be required to reimburse the city for the cost of replacing the cart. (b)  It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any place in which garbage is created, accumulated or produced to provide, and at all times keep in a suitable place, as may be required by the city or independent contractor, approved garbage cans capable of holding all refuse which would ordinarily accumulate on such premises between the times of successive collections. Garbage furnished by tenants shall be marked so as to indicate the apartment or flat to which it belongs. (c)  Commercial and industrial consumers shall place all garbage created, accumulated or produced in approved garbage cans or as necessary for front-end container service, roll-off service using specialized trucks, and compactor service involving special machinery. (Code 1989, § 11-59; Ord. No. 187, § 2, 9-20-1982; Ord. No. 277, § 1C, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 38-11. - Same—Recycling services, bins.     The city may from time to time provide, or cause to be provided through an independent contractor, collection bins for collection of recyclable material. Upon receipt of a collection bin, each owner/lessee shall keep such collection bin in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. In the event any collection bin becomes lost, destroyed or damaged, or otherwise unusable for the collection of recyclable materials, said owner/lessee shall reimburse the city for the cost for replacing such collection bin. (Code 1989, § 11-60; Ord. No. 277, § 1D, 7-23-1990) Editor's note— Prior to amendment by Ordinance Number 277, § 1D, adopted July 23, 1990, § 11-60 pertained to the duty of property owners to provide their own garbage containers and derived from Ordinance Number 187, § 3, 9-20-1982. 
Sec. 38-12. - Same—Materials deposited therein.     Rubbish which includes broken glass that has been crushed in a compactor may be deposited in garbage containers. All other broken glass must be set aside in a separate container, clearly visible. Human waste or animal waste and other potentially infectious materials shall not be deposited or placed in garbage containers unless such material is wrapped in a manner satisfactory to the city or its contractor and the city or its contractor has issued an express written consent for the deposit of such waste. Liquid garbage shall not be deposited in such containers. Kitchen garbage shall be drained of all moisture and completely wrapped in paper before it is placed or deposited in garbage containers. (Code 1989, § 11-61; Ord. No. 187, § 4, 9-20-1982) 
Sec. 38-13. - Same—Location. (a)  Residential premises. With respect to residential premises, no garbage containers or other containers for refuse, other than those of the city, shall be placed, kept, stored or located within the right-of-way of a street or alley or at a distance exceeding 100 feet from the street right-of-way; provided, however, that the city or its contractor may authorize the location of such containers within the public right-of-way at specified places and times when such location is necessary for the expeditious collection and disposition of garbage by the city. (b)  Commercial and industrial premises. With respect to commercial and industrial premises, containers shall be kept on the premises at a place near the street, readily accessible to collection vehicles, or as otherwise provided by the city or its contractor. (Code 1989, § 11-62; Ord. No. 187, § 5, 9-20-1982; Ord. No. 277, § 1E, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 38-14. - Nuisance—Described.     The keeping of garbage in containers other than containers prescribed by this chapter or the keeping upon premises of garbage or yard waste which is allowed to become offensive and noisome, shall constitute a public nuisance, and may be abated in the manner provided by law. (Code 1989, § 11-63; Ord. No. 187, § 17, 9-20-1982; Ord. No. 314, § 4, 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 38-15. - Same—Punishment. (a)  Any property owner, tenant, occupant, person in possession or other person allowing or causing garbage or yard waste to accumulate on the premises to the point that such accumulation becomes offensive and noisome to the adjacent property owners shall be guilty of an offense and subject to citation by the city, upon affidavit being made in writing as to the existence of this violation by any citizen of the city. (b)  Upon affidavit being made, the property owner, tenant, occupant, person in possession, or person creating the offensive and noisome act shall be served with a citation by the city police department and allowed to show cause, if any, why such person should not be found guilty of the offense, and upon conviction for failure to show good cause, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1989, § 11-64; Ord. No. 187, § 18, 9-20-1982; Ord. No. 314, § 4, 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 38-16. - Fees for collection of garbage and yard waste—Establishing.     Fees for collection of garbage and yard waste shall be those as established by resolution of the city council, and shall be published in the office of the city hall where utility bills may be paid. (Code 1989, § 11-65; Ord. No. 187, § 14, 9-20-1982; Ord. No. 314, § 4, 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 38-17. - Same—Payment. (a)  With respect to residential and commercial and industrial consumers receiving bills from the city, fees shall be paid on or before 20 days after the billing statement is mailed from the city. With respect to fees billed directly from the contractor, such shall be paid as required by the contractor. (b)  Any fees not paid on time and falling into a delinquent status shall have a penalty imposed thereon. Such penalty rate shall be published in the office of the city hall where utility bills may be paid and be in accordance with the then current resolution as may be adopted from time to time by the city council. (c)  The payment of such fees shall be delinquent 20 days after the bill for such fees has been mailed. The collection of delinquent fees for garbage and yard waste collection shall be the same as for the collection of delinquent taxes. (Code 1989, § 11-66; Ord. No. 187, § 15, 9-20-1982; Ord. No. 277, § 1F, 7-23-1990; Ord. No. 314, § 4, 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 38-18. - Same—Rates generally as prescribed. (a)  In accordance with this chapter, the tenant, occupant, or proprietor of any place from which garbage or rubbish accumulates shall be charged for the services of collection, removal and disposal of such garbage and rubbish at the rates established or approved by the city council. (b)  All county unified school districts requiring refuse collection from the public schools shall be upon such terms and conditions as they are mutually agreed upon or considered as a special collection point. (c)  The city council, by resolution, may set or approve a flat monthly rate for removal from a business establishment of extra materials such as waste paper, wooden boxes and the like. (Code 1989, § 11-67; Ord. No. 187, § 19, 9-20-1982) 
Sec. 38-19. - Same—Fee for removal of excess garbage and rubbish.     For the removal of rubbish and periodic accumulation of excess garbage and yard waste, the price to be charged for collection, removal, and disposal shall be quoted in advance, and shall be based upon the amount of material to be removed, as well as upon the time involved and the loading thereof. Such price shall be determined by the prevailing cost for providing the requested service. (Code 1989, § 11-68; Ord. No. 187, § 20, 9-20-1982) 
Sec. 38-20. - Same—Advance payment of cost. (a)  If any charges herein provided for are paid in advance and garbage and yard waste collection service is discontinued or cancelled prior to the end of the period for which the charges are paid, a refund shall be made at that portion of the charges which is for the period subsequent to the discontinuance or cancellation of such service; provided, however, that no refund of less than one month's charge for garbage and yard waste collection service shall be made. (b)  Request for such refund shall be processed administratively under such rules and regulations thereof as shall be prescribed by the city or its contractor. Refunds may be granted as herein authorized only upon the written approval of the city or its contractor. (Code 1989, § 11-69; Ord. No. 187, § 21, 9-20-1982) 
Sec. 38-21. - Specific directions to collectors as to handling.     Refuse collectors are instructed to remove only the contents of the refuse containers. It is possible, however, to have a small amount of extra yard waste removed on the regular day of service for an extra charge, providing this material is placed in carton boxes and left next to the refuse containers. The city or its contractor shall be notified by the customer before the day of collection. The city or its contractor will determine the charge according to the amount of material to be removed. (Code 1989, § 11-70; Ord. No. 187, § 22, 9-20-1982) 
Sec. 38-22. - Unauthorized deposits; failure to remove. (a)  No person shall deposit for curbside pick-up any garbage, hazardous waste, inert trash or yard waste not contained within proper containers or otherwise properly prepared for pick-up in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. In addition, it shall be the duty of each person depositing specialized waste at the curb side to first make arrangements with the city's designated contractor for the pick-up of such waste. Specialized waste includes yard waste that is too bulky for authorized containers, large limbs and trees, inert trash, and other items which are not part of the regular garbage collection service provided by the city. (b)  Any person failing to remove or cause the removal of specialized waste or any garbage, yard waste or inert trash not in proper containers or properly prepared for removal within seven days after a written warning notice from the city requesting such removal shall be in violation of this chapter. Any person who is convicted of a first offense under this section shall be subject to a fine of $50.00. Any person who is convicted of a second violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of $125.00. Any person who is convicted of a third or any subsequent violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00, nor more than $1,000.00, and each day that a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. (c)  In addition, in the event that the occupant, owner or other responsible party fails to remove or cause the removal within the time specified, the city shall have the right to remove or cause the removal of such items at the expense of the owner and occupant, and the expense shall be added to and become part of the owner or occupant's garbage bill. In the case of rental property, whether single-family or multifamily, the tenant and the owner shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of removal. In the case of multifamily fee simple property, the owner-occupant and the homeowners' association, if any, shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of removal. If there is no homeowners' association, the management company, if any, shall be jointly and severally liable with the owner-occupant for the cost of removal. In the event that any removal fee remains unpaid for a period of 30 days after written notice, the city may pursue any and all civil remedies available to the city at law or in equity to collect the fee, and the city may, after an additional 15-day period of prior written notice, discontinue water and garbage service to the applicable property. The punishment or conviction of any person under subsection (b) of this section shall not relieve the person from paying any unpaid removal fee; nor shall payment of any unpaid removal fee bar criminal prosecution for any violation of this chapter. (Code 1989, § 11-71; Ord. No. 400, § 1, 2-16-1998) 
Secs. 38-23—38-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1. 
Sec. 38-34. - Non-exclusive commercial services.     Commercial solid waste customers in the city are authorized to contract for commercial solid waste collection and disposal services from any contractor, provided that such contractor first obtains a solid waste collection permit from the city. Rates and other contract terms, including, but not limited to, container size and frequency of collections, shall be negotiated between the contractor and the customer, provided that such terms do not conflict with the provisions of this chapter or other applicable city ordinances. (Code 1989, § 11-81; Ord. No. 354, § 1, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 38-35. - Application process; solid waste collection permit.     It shall be unlawful for any commercial solid waste contractor (hereinafter "commercial contractor") to provide commercial solid waste collection and disposal services within the city without first obtaining a city solid waste collection permit. Contractors desiring to perform such services shall make written application to the city for a permit on forms prescribed by the city director of finance. All applications shall be accompanied by a $500.00 application fee to defray investigative, administrative and regulatory costs. Permits shall be issued to qualified applicants for the full calendar year, or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year, at the time the application is approved. Each commercial contractor issued a permit shall pay a quarterly permit fee to the city as provided in section 38-25. All permits granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year. Commercial contractors desiring to renew their permits shall file renewal applications accompanied by a $500.00 renewal application fee. The renewal application shall be submitted on forms prescribed by the director on or before November 15 of each year. In the event annual permit fees go unpaid after the due date, a ten percent penalty will be charged, based upon the past due amount. Further, a 12 percent per annum interest charge shall accrue until the permit fees are paid in full. (Code 1989, § 11-82; Ord. No. 354, § 2, 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 421, § 1, 4-3-1999; Ord. No. 505, 9-23-2002) 
Sec. 38-36. - Permit fees. (a)  Each commercial contractor shall pay a permit fee to be set by the city council from time to time per cubic yard of solid waste removed from the city, payable in accordance with billing and reporting procedures adopted from time to time by the director. For the purposes of determining the permit fee, solid waste shall be deemed to include trash, construction debris, demolition debris, medical waste, yard waste and rubbish, inert waste, hazardous waste, and any other solid waste not covered under separate contract with the city. In general, the volume and weights of solid waste shall be based upon actual weights of containers. Where actual weighing is not done, the permit fees shall be based upon the sizes of the containers, the frequency of collection and the types of waste mix in the container. The director will provide the average weight factors to be used. For the purpose of fee calculation, all containers shall be deemed full at the time of each collection. On or before the tenth working day of the first month following the end of each calendar quarter, the commercial contractor shall submit a quarterly fee based upon the cubic yards of waste removed from the city for the immediately preceding quarter, together with a report providing such information as the director shall deem appropriate. In the event permit fees go unpaid after the due date, a ten percent penalty will be charged based upon the past due amount. Further, a 12 percent per annum interest charge shall accrue until the permit fees are paid in full. The report shall contain, but shall not be limited to, a listing of customers served during the quarter, together with the size of containers and collection frequency for each customer; total tons of materials landfilled and recycled by city customers; identification of landfills used by the contractor; and identification of end users of recycled materials. The report shall be submitted in written form. The director or his designee shall have the right to examine at any time commercial contractors' books, records and computer data relating to the removal of solid waste from the city in order to verify or determine the amounts which should be remitted to the city. Each commercial contractor shall make its books, records and computer data pertinent to the removal of solid waste from the city available for audit. If the results of any such audit show that any of the commercial contractor's reports understate the amount owing to the city, the underpayment shall be remitted to the city immediately, and if the understatement amounts to five percent or more, the commercial contractor shall also remit to the city a sum equal to ten percent of the underpayment, and shall also reimburse the city for its costs in conducting the audit. (b)  All permitted commercial contractors shall also submit such other reports as the director may reasonably require regarding the removal of solid waste from the city in order to provide information needed by the city to comply with applicable state and federal reporting requirements imposed upon the city. Solid waste refers to trash and to recycling, if the permitted hauler provides recycling services. All permitted commercial contractors shall provide quarterly information regarding tons landfilled and recycled to their city customers that are legally required to reduce their landfilled solid waste by 25 percent. This information shall be provided in a timely and accurate manner. Withholding of this information, delay in providing the information which causes the city customer to miss a legal deadline, or the providing of inaccurate information shall constitute a violation of this chapter and may result in fines, permit revocation, or both, as provided in sections 38-30 and 38-31. (c)  Every permitted commercial contractor is required to provide dependable solid waste service to customers within the city. Failure to provide dependable service may result in fines, permit revocation, or both, as provided in sections 38-30 and 38-31. (Code 1989, § 11-83; Ord. No. 354, § 3, 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 421, § 2, 5-3-1999; Ord. No. 455, § 1, 11-6-2000; Ord. No. 505, 9-23-2002) 
Sec. 38-37. - Minimum vehicle standards.     An adequate number of vehicles shall be provided by the commercial contractor to service its city customers. All such vehicles shall be licensed in the state and shall operate in compliance with all applicable state, federal and municipal regulations. All vehicles and other equipment shall be kept in proper repair and sanitary condition. Each vehicle shall have at least one broom and shovel to clean up solid waste that may be spilled or otherwise scattered during the process of collection. All vehicles shall be sufficiently secure so as to prevent any littering of solid waste and/or leakage of fluid. No vehicle shall be willfully overloaded. Each vehicle shall be operated by a qualified driver holding a valid license of the category required to operate such vehicles. (Code 1989, § 11-84; Ord. No. 354, § 4, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 38-38. - Minimum insurance requirements; indemnification. (a)  Each commercial contractor shall provide and maintain, during the term of its permit, public liability and property damage insurance and umbrella coverage in such amounts as shall be reasonably determined from time to time by the director. The initial insurance requirements are as follows: (1)  Public liability: a.  $500,000.00 per person. b.  $1,000,000.00 per accident. (2)  Property damage: $500,000.00 per any one claim. (3)  Performance bond: varies according to number of city contracts. (b)  Each commercial contractor shall provide a certificate of such insurance to the city prior to undertaking collection services within the city, and, at each annual renewal of the permit, shall submit to the city an updated certificate of insurance together with the annual permit fee. Each commercial contractor shall defend, indemnify and save harmless and protect the city, its officers and agents, from any and all liability, loss or claims, actions, demands or judgments made against it for loss, damage or personal injury sustained by any person or entity whatsoever in connection with the services rendered by the commercial contractor, unless such damages are due to the negligence of the city, its officers, agents or employees. (Code 1989, § 11-85; Ord. No. 354, § 5, 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 421, § 3, 5-3-1999) 
Sec. 38-39. - Minimum financial requirement.     Each commercial contractor shall have a positive net worth and adequate capital and assets to perform its contracts with city customers. As a condition to the issuance of a permit, the director may require the submission of financial statements or similar information to verify these financial requirements. Any information submitted that is proprietary or constitutes a trade secret shall, subject to applicable law, be held confidential by the city. (Code 1989, § 11-86; Ord. No. 354, § 6, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 38-40. - Routes and hours of collection.     Not less than ten days prior to commencing service, each commercial contractor shall furnish for the city's approval the initial schedules and maps of all routes to be used in servicing the commercial contractor's city customers. Any charges in routes and/or schedules shall also be subject to the director's approval, which will not be unreasonably withheld. The commercial contractor shall only undertake collections during the city's normal hours of collection, as adopted from time to time by the director. Exceptions may be made only upon the mutual agreement of the director and the commercial contractor. The commercial contractor shall also comply with all applicable city ordinances, including the city's noise provisions. (Code 1989, § 11-87; Ord. No. 354, § 7, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 38-41. - Violation of chapter.     Any violation of this chapter by the commercial contractor may be punished according to the penalties described in section 1-8. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. The city shall also have the right to initiate civil action to compel compliance with this chapter and to collect any unpaid permit fees. (Code 1989, § 11-88; Ord. No. 354, § 8, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 38-42. - Early termination of permit.     If a commercial contractor fails to perform in accordance with this chapter or other applicable ordinances, the director shall have the right to demand, in writing, adequate assurance from the commercial contractor that steps have been taken to rectify the situation. The commercial contractor must, within seven days of receipt of such demand, return to the director a written statement that explains reasons for non-performance or delayed, partial or substandard performance, and provides adequate assurance as to future performance. In the event that the commercial contractor fails to submit a statement satisfactory to the director, the director may revoke the commercial contractor's permit. Such revocation shall become effective 30 days following a notice of revocation to the commercial contractor. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the right to continue to operate under a permit issued by the city is expressly conditioned upon the commercial contractor's timely payment of permit fees. Continued operation in the city without payment of such fees shall be unlawful. In addition, the city may revoke a permit for nonpayment of fees immediately and without notice. (Code 1989, § 11-89; Ord. No. 354, § 9, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 38-43. - Commercial and industrial refuse collection to be provided on a competitive face market value. (a)  It is the policy and intent of the city that commercial and industrial refuse collection services are provided within the city on a competitive, free market basis. In order to promote this policy and intent, commercial and industrial customers within the city are encouraged to solicit multiple bids from qualified vendors for the provision of refuse collection services. (b)  In furtherance of this policy and intent, qualified vendors are encouraged to solicit commercial and industrial customers within the city for the purpose of providing commercial and industrial refuse collection services. It is also the policy and intent of the city that all qualified commercial and industrial vendors have free access to the market within the city, that all such vendors are afforded an equal opportunity to complete for and provide such services, and that no vendor shall be given preference over another. (Code 1989, § 11-90; Res. No. 536, §§ 1, 2, 6-13-1994) 
Secs. 38-44—38-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WASTE GENERATION ANALYSIS AND REDUCTION PLAN[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 38-54. - Findings.     The mayor and council hereby find that: (1)  The Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act imposes upon municipalities within the state an obligation to develop and implement plans to reduce, on a per capita basis, the amount of municipal solid waste being received at landfills and other disposal facilities by 25 percent; (2)  In order to achieve compliance and facilitate the stated goals of the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, the city has heretofore adopted a solid waste management plan establishing procedures for achieving state-mandated waste reduction; (3)  The Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act also requires municipalities to update municipal solid waste management plans from time to time, to measure performance, and to implement additional procedures, strategies and methods to reduce solid waste by 25 percent; (4)  Strategies included within the city solid waste management plan include provisions encouraging each applicant for a city land disturbance permit to develop a waste generation analysis and reduction plan for the proposed project; (5)  The city is in the process of updating its solid waste management plan and deems it to be appropriate to implement an ordinance to formalize and establish enforcement procedures requiring the submission of a waste generation analysis and reduction plan for approval as part of the city's plan review process, and to provide procedures to ensure ongoing compliance with approved waste reduction plans; and (6)  The mayor and council find that the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is within the basic police powers of the city, and that the provisions contained herein are intended to protect the public health, safety and well-being of city residents, and to protect and enhance the quality of the city's environment in furtherance of a comprehensive statewide program for solid waste management. (Code 1989, § 11-100; Ord. No. 412, § 1, 9-21-1998; Ord. No. 498, § I, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 38-55. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Director means the city director of community development or his designee.     Land disturbance permit means a permit issued by the city authorizing development activity, which permit requires the submission of development plans for review and approval by the community development department.     Plan applicant means any person or entity required to submit plans and apply for a land disturbance permit as a condition to development of a project within the city. (Code 1989, § 11-101; Ord. No. 412, § 2, 9-21-1998; Ord. No. 498, § I, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 38-56. - Waste generation analysis and reduction plan. (a)  Each plan applicant shall, as a condition of undertaking development activity within the city, submit a waste generation analysis and reduction plan (WGA) as part of and in conjunction with the submission of development plans to the community development department. The waste generation analysis and reduction plan shall contain such information as is specified in this chapter and shall be designed to establish a 25 percent reduction in the anticipated solid waste to be generated by the project. No land disturbance permit shall be issued or approved by the community development department unless and until the plan contains an approved WGA. (b)  Each WGA shall be set forth in writing and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following: (1)  The full name of the person applying for WGA approval. (2)  The name and size of the proposed project. (3)  The types of waste that will be generated at the site. (4)  Annual projected tons of waste. (5)  Plans and strategies for achieving a 25 percent solid waste reduction. (6)  Plans for notifying and assuring tenant compliance with the provisions of the WGA. (7)  A list of specific items to be recycled and the anticipated tons of annual reduction. (8)  A list of the size of containers and the frequency of pick-ups to be used for solid waste pick-up and recycling. (9)  A description of design features to be utilized to accommodate waste reduction practices and solid waste collection. (10)  Such other information as the director may reasonably require. (c)  In order to develop the WGA, the plan applicant shall utilize the solid waste generation rates established by the National Solid Waste Management Association and the Atlanta Regional Commission, or generation rates as approved by the director. (Code 1989, § 11-102; Ord. No. 412, § 3, 9-21-1998; Ord. No. 498, § I, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 38-57. - Ongoing compliance.     Following the approval of a WGA, the issuance of a land disturbance permit and the completion of the project, the applicant or project owner shall thereafter submit to the director reports reflecting compliance with the approved WGA. Failure to maintain compliance with the required 25 percent waste reduction shall be a violation of this chapter and may result in non-renewal of any permits or licenses granted by the city to conduct business. Proof of compliance with this chapter is required for a business license renewal. (Code 1989, § 11-103; Ord. No. 412, § 4, 9-21-1998; Ord. No. 498, § I, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 38-58. - Enforcement.     For the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the director may enter upon any public or private land in a reasonable and lawful manner during normal business hours for purposes of sampling, inspection and observation. Failure to provide reasonable access shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Code 1989, § 11-104; Ord. No. 412, § 5, 9-21-1998; Ord. No. 498, § I, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 38-59. - Penalty.     Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the penalties described in section 1-8 for each offense, and each day that the offense occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and in addition to any other relief provided in this chapter, the city attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any such violation of this chapter. Such application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent injunction. Cases involving violations of this chapter may also be heard by the code enforcement board for the purpose of levying fines. (Code 1989, § 11-105; Ord. No. 412, § 6, 9-21-1998; Ord. No. 498, § I, 7-15-2002) 
Chapter 39 - RESERVED 
Chapter 40 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— City has power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); municipal street systems generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; obstructions in streets, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipal authority to regulate streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 40-1. - Obstruction of view at entrances to streets. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any land owner, or the tenant of any land owner, to erect any fence or other device that obstructs the clear view of any adjacent land owner from entering or exiting any street in the city. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any land owner, or the tenant of any land owner, to grow or maintain any hedge that obstructs the clear view of the entrance or exit of any adjacent land owner from entering or exiting any street in the city. (Code 1989, § 17-1; Ord. No. 123, § 1, 10-23-1972) 
Secs. 40-2—40-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET LIGHTING 
Sec. 40-21. - Districts established generally; classification.     The city council does hereby establish for the city, districts to be known as "street lighting districts." Such districts shall be classified according to the local area roads and streets, as follows: (1)  Major thoroughfare districts. (2)  Industrial parkway districts. (3)  Collector street districts. (4)  Local and residential street districts. (Code 1989, § 17-20; Ord. No. 176, § 1, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-22. - District description.     The official zoning map for the city shall be utilized for the purpose of demonstrating the street lighting districts, and the office of the city public works department shall establish records designating these various street lighting districts throughout the city to which reference can be made for a full and complete description of each district. (Code 1989, § 17-21; Ord. No. 176, § 2, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-23. - Establishing districts and providing lighting in special conditions.     In areas where special conditions as to safety, security, land topography, economic and other factors may be involved, the city council may create special street lighting districts and provide for special street lighting under such terms and conditions as may be determined by the city council, any other provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding; provided, however, that in such instances, a public hearing shall be held by the city council after advertisement in the official organ of the city one time at least ten days before conducting such public hearing. (Code 1989, § 17-22; Ord. No. 176, § 14, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-24. - Site plan.     Real estate developers, whether single-family or multifamily residential, commercial, office-institutional, industrial or community unit plan, shall, prior to the receipt of any building permit for their developments, provide the city with detailed site plans of the streets to be used in their developments and showing the location of all street lights; submit proof of payment for pole and electrical installation; and shall comply in every respect with the provisions of this article. (Code 1989, § 17-23; Ord. No. 176, § 3, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-25. - Petition for service authorized.     Property owners residing in the city and desiring street lighting for the area in which they live, may petition the city public works department to have such service. Such petition must contain not less than ten property owners representing not less than 65 percent of the property owners within the district to be established. A petition may be brought by less than ten property owners where such petitioners represent 100 percent of the property owners within the district to be established. (Code 1989, § 17-24; Ord. No. 176, § 4, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-26. - Presenting and action on petition.     After investigation by the public works department as to advisability of establishing such a district, the petition shall be presented to the city council for consideration upon a public hearing. After the public hearing, the petition will be either approved or disapproved by the city council. (Code 1989, § 17-25; Ord. No. 176, § 5, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-27. - Conditions to furnishing service in other than single-family residential districts.     Street lighting in districts other than single-family residential shall be permitted only with the approval of the city building official, subject to the safety, economic and other factors involved, and only upon final approval by the city council, and upon compliance with the standards hereinafter provided. (Code 1989, § 17-26; Ord. No. 176, § 12, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-28. - Retirement of construction cost. (a)  In those districts now in existence or which may hereafter be created in which there is construction cost, the same shall be retired as per agreement or contract with the public utility or other person to whom the indebtedness is owed and shall be billed accordingly per lot. (b)  The term "lot" is hereby defined as any single tract of land which falls within any of the zoning classifications as defined by the zoning ordinance. (c)  In areas zoned for purposes other than single-family residential, different criteria may be adopted by the city council for the payment of energy cost and retirement of construction cost. (Code 1989, § 17-27; Ord. No. 176, §§ 7, 8, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-29. - Payment for service—Not a tax.     The cost of service for creation of street lighting districts created shall be a service cost and not a tax, as such service is authorized by article IX, section 4, paragraph 2 of the 1983 constitution of the state. (Code 1989, § 17-28; Ord. No. 176, § 6, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-30. - Same—Cost to be borne by consumers; computation of charge.     The cost of providing and maintaining the service in existing street lighting districts, and in street lighting districts hereafter created, shall be borne by those citizens and residents receiving the service. The charge therefor shall be the actual cost of the energy, plus the pro-rata share of the retirement of any construction cost, plus ten percent for administrative cost. (Code 1989, § 17-29; Ord. No. 176, § 7, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-31. - Same—Due date; delinquency.     The due date for the payment of the services and sums herein provided for shall be the same date of each month as water bills are due to the city and subject to the same penalties for late payment and for failure to pay. Any service provided by the city may be discontinued for late payment or nonpayment, as herein provided for. (Code 1989, § 17-30; Ord. No. 176, § 9, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-32. - Same—Officer responsibility for billing, etc.     The billing, accounting, collecting, and receiving of moneys herein provided for is hereby declared to be the responsibility of the city clerk. (Code 1989, § 17-31; Ord. No. 176, § 10, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-33. - Providing street lighting by developers, etc.—Conforming to standards.     The owner, developer or other person developing a subdivision, or any other property, shall provide street lighting services to conform to all of the standards herein provided for, and in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain a permit from community development prior to commencing any construction of any street lighting facilities, and the city shall not accept any public streets or roads proposed to be dedicated until such time as the provisions hereof have been complied with. (Code 1989, § 17-32; Ord. No. 176, § 11, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-34. - Same—Specific requirements.     Street lights shall be required to be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions or other projects within the city unless waived by the city council at a regular meeting. Unless so waived, the preliminary plat of the subdivision or other development shall make provisions for street lights. At the time of and as a requirement of the submission of a final plat, unless waived by the city council as herein provided, the developer shall: (1)  Submit a drawing of the subdivision's or development's layout showing location of street lights. The drawing must be approved by the city building official prior to obtaining any building permit within that subdivision or development. Such layout may be shown on the final plat. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities and by the city. The fixtures shall be mounted above the ground and shall have appropriate arm length to place the light over the street. No arm shall be less than 2½ feet long. Post-top luminaries may be permitted when approved by the city building official. Post-top luminary fixtures shall be located not more than 200 feet apart, and at least one light shall be located at each street intersection within the subdivision or development. (2)  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation. (3)  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the city building official. (4)  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. (Code 1989, § 17-33; Ord. No. 176, § 20, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-35. - Same—Use of underground cable.     In subdivisions or other developments utilizing underground cable for electrical service, the developers shall be required to accomplish the same items listed in other sections hereof. (Code 1989, § 17-34; Ord. No. 176, § 21, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-36. - Standard for installation and operation. (a)  In order to ensure adequate illumination of public rights-of-way and promote safety and security, it is hereby ordained that the American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1977), as amended, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the city, with the following exceptions: (1)  Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be: Roadway Classification Commercial Area Intermediate Area Residential Area Major thoroughfares 2.0 1.2 0.9 Industrial parkways 2.0 1.2 0.9 Collector streets 1.2 0.9 0.6 Local and residential streets 0.9 0.6 0.2  The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets, it may be not less than one-sixth of this average. (2)  Any party installing or operating lighting fixtures within a public right-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the city building official for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards, and no lighting shall be installed or operated without this approval. Should the city building official disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any public right-of-way, such official shall communicate the disapproval in writing to the party desiring the same. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. Any disapproval of a light or lighting system by the city building official may be appealed to the city council. If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the building official, a notice of appeal shall be filed with the city council within 30 days from the date following the written notice of disapproval, and it shall be the responsibility of the city building official to transmit forthwith to the city council all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken and to ensure that the appeal is promptly placed upon the agenda of the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. (3)  Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public right-of-way as security lights or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public streets shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite the street side and shall be oriented in such a manner as to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. The approval of the city building official shall be obtained before installation of these lights. (4)  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public right-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public right-of-way. (b)  The publication referred to in this section shall be attached to the minutes of the city council's regular meeting. An official copy thereof shall be made available by the city building official (American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1977), as amended). (Code 1989, § 17-35; Ord. No. 176, §§ 13, 19, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-37. - Contracting with utilities.     The city council may contract with public utilities for the purpose of carrying out the terms of this article. (Code 1989, § 17-36; Ord. No. 176, § 15, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-38. - Granting of exceptions.     The city council may grant exceptions to the literal terms of this article where special conditions or hardships exist. (Code 1989, § 17-37; Ord. No. 176, § 16, 3-10-1980) 
Sec. 40-39. - Conflict of laws.     If any provision of this article is in conflict with any state or federal law or with any rule, regulation or order of any state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the city council that the state or federal law or rule, regulation or order, as the case may be, shall prevail so that the remaining portion of this article shall be deemed to be of full force and effect. (Code 1989, § 17-38; Ord. No. 176, § 17, 3-10-1980) 
Secs. 40-40—40-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEDICATION OF STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
Sec. 40-67. - Authority.     The city council adopts the ordinance from which this article is derived pursuant to its authority to plan and zone in accordance with the provisions of article 9, section 2, paragraph 4 of the state constitution, and pursuant to its general police power to promote the health, safety, order, prosperity and the general welfare of the city. (Code 1989, § 17-51; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 1-22-1990) 
Sec. 40-68. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to establish standard procedures to be observed by developers, engineers and contractors with respect to the dedication to the city of land for rights-of-way for streets and for the dedication and acceptance for perpetual maintenance by the city of certain public improvements, including streets, utilities and other facilities. This article shall be referred to as the "street dedication ordinance." (Code 1989, § 17-52; Ord. No. 269, § 2, 1-22-1990) 
Sec. 40-69. - Application of article.     The provisions of this article shall apply to all development activity within the city that results in the dedication and acceptance by the city of rights-of-way for streets and public uses and for the dedication and acceptance by the city for perpetual maintenance of certain public improvements. (Code 1989, § 17-53; Ord. No. 269, § 3, 1-22-1990) 
Sec. 40-70. - Dedication of land for street rights-of-way and other public uses.     All developers who dedicate land for street rights-of-way or other public use shall provide the city with an accurate survey of such land prepared by a registered land surveyor registered in the state, with the cost of the survey to be borne by the developer. The developer shall convey a good and marketable fee simple title to the land by a general warranty deed in a form customarily utilized in metropolitan Atlanta, Georgia. The general warranty deed shall be executed and delivered in recordable form to the city at such time as the city shall direct. The execution and delivery of the general warranty deed, and the acceptance thereof by the city, shall not, unless otherwise provided herein, constitute the city's acceptance for perpetual maintenance of any required improvements constructed or to be constructed on the land. The city's acceptance for perpetual maintenance of such improvements shall be governed by the provisions of section 40-71, and such acceptance by the city may or may not occur at the same time as the city's acceptance of the land upon which the improvements have or will be constructed. (Code 1989, § 17-54; Ord. No. 269, § 4, 1-22-1990) 
Sec. 40-71. - Dedication and acceptance for perpetual maintenance of public improvements.     The dedication and acceptance for perpetual maintenance of public improvements shall be effected in the following manner: (1)  Prior to the construction of a public improvement, the developer shall submit a detailed site plan of the proposed development, including all public improvements. The detailed site plan shall specify the location of all street lights, and the developer shall submit proof of payment for pole and electrical installation. The plans shall conform in all respects to the city standard construction specifications and standard plans in effect at the time the plans are submitted. (2)  Prior to the construction of such public improvements, the developer shall post a performance bond with the city conditioned upon the faithful performance and completion of the public improvements by the developer. The performance bond shall be in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the public improvements, as determined in the sole discretion of the director of community development. The performance bond shall be issued by a surety authorized to do business in the state and certified by the Department of the Treasury as an acceptable surety on federal bonds. The developer shall notify the director of community development when the construction of the improvements has been completed, and the director of community development shall inspect the improvements to determine if construction has been completed in compliance with city standards. If the director of community development determines that the construction of the improvements has been completed in accordance with city standards, the director of community development shall notify the developer in writing of such determination, and the developer shall promptly post a maintenance bond with the city conditioned upon the developer's maintenance of the improvements for a period of one year. The bond shall be in the amount of one-third of the estimated cost of the improvements; provided, however, that if the developer has previously failed to comply with any provision of this article, the city may require that the amount of the bond be equal to 43 percent of the estimated cost of improvements. At such time as the city has received the required maintenance bond, the city shall release the performance bond. The surety issuing the maintenance bond shall have the same qualifications as the surety issuing the performance bond. The director of community development's inspection and approval of the improvements, and the city's release of the performance bond, shall not constitute a warranty by the city that the improvements have been completed in accordance with all city standards. During the period of the one-year maintenance bond, the director of community development and representatives of other city departments shall have the right to conduct periodic inspections of the improvements, including the taking of core samples and the performing of other tests as the director of community development deems appropriate. The cost of the core sampling shall be borne by the developer. (3)  Not sooner than 75 days nor later than 60 days prior to the expiration of the one-year maintenance bond, the developer shall petition the city to accept the public improvements for perpetual maintenance. Failure to petition the city shall result in forfeiture of the maintenance bond. Upon receipt of the petition, the director of community development shall notify the fire department, police department, department of community development and the public works department. Each department shall conduct inspections of the improvements and shall submit reports to the director of community development on forms and within time deadlines established by the director of community development. The director of community development, through his own inspection and by the reports submitted by the city departments referred to above, shall be responsible for determining if the improvements are in accordance with city standards and are otherwise acceptable for perpetual maintenance. If the director of community development finds that the improvements are deficient in any respect, the director of community development shall so notify the developer and the developer shall timely perform such additional work as the director of community development deems necessary to render the improvements acceptable for perpetual maintenance by the city. The failure of the developer to timely perform the work specified by the director of community development shall result in forfeiture of the maintenance bond. Upon the director of community development's final determination that the improvements are acceptable by the city for perpetual maintenance, the director of community development shall so notify the developer in writing, and the maintenance bond shall be released. Notwithstanding the release of the performance bond or maintenance bond, the developer shall have the responsibility of maintaining all improvements until such time as the director of community development has issued the city's written acceptance for perpetual maintenance of the improvements. (Code 1989, § 17-55; Ord. No. 269, § 5, 1-22-1990) 
Sec. 40-72. - Miscellaneous provisions.     Interpretation, purpose and conflict. The provisions of this article shall be considered as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, morals and general welfare within the city. The provisions of this article are not intended to abrogate or eliminate other requirements which may be set forth in the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, design standards, or other such ordinances; provided, however, where this article imposes greater requirements, the provisions of this article shall govern. (Code 1989, § 17-57; Ord. No. 269, § 7, 1-22-1990) 
Secs. 40-73—40-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TESTING STANDARDS FOR NEW STREETS 
Sec. 40-103. - Statement of purpose.     The purpose of this article is to provide for a method of testing the physical properties and conformity to standards of all new streets prior to the city's acceptance of such streets for perpetual maintenance. This article authorizes the city to arrange for core boring of roads and other tests, provides for reasonable fees for such core boring, and establishes standards for such core boring. (Code 1989, § 17-81; Ord. No. 241-A, § 1, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 40-104. - Coring requirements. (a)  The city shall require core boring of all new roads or streets in the city. Such boring shall be provided by the contractor/developer. (b)  Testing shall be conducted during construction, and such core borings being taken after the binder is in place, but prior to installation of the final layer of asphalt. Core samples shall be made in accordance with ASTM D3549, and at the rate of one core sample every 100 feet in alternating lanes for two-lane roads. Roads with more than two lanes and acceleration lanes shall be cored at the same rate. (c)  Core samples will be measured for thickness of base and thickness of binder layer. Any road with 95 percent or more of the core samples meeting the required standards shall be deemed to pass the sampling process. If any road has less than 95 percent of the core samples meeting the required standards, such road shall not be accepted for perpetual maintenance until the development/owner takes such corrective action as determined by the director of community development. Subsequent to such corrective action, the director of community development may require subsequent testing at the development's/owner's expense. (Code 1989, § 17-82; Ord. No. 241-A, § 2, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 40-105. - Regulations or practices governing public improvements.     This article shall not be construed as invalidating any current regulations or practices governing the acceptance of public improvements. (Code 1989, § 17-85; Ord. No. 241-A, § 5A, 4-25-1988) 
Secs. 40-106—40-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OUTDOOR SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 
Sec. 40-126. - Findings. (a)  The uncontrolled use of outdoor sprinkler systems when outdoor temperatures are near or below freezing, and where located near sidewalks and/or streets, present an inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of persons using the sidewalks and/or streets. (b)  Outdoor sprinkler systems which are left on for an excessive period of time so as to cause puddling of water on sidewalks and/or streets, or which over-spray or spray directly onto sidewalks and/or streets constitute an inconvenience or danger to persons using the sidewalks and/or streets, both by the puddling of water and through the accelerated deterioration of sidewalks and/or streets. (c)  These factors can cause dangerous accidents and accelerated deterioration of public sidewalks and/or streets resulting in additional city expense for repairs. (d)  The mayor and council recognize, however, that the use of outdoor sprinkler systems serves a useful purpose and contributes to the beauty of the city, and that the use of outdoor sprinkler systems should not be absolutely denied. (Code 1989, § 17-100; Ord. No. 410, § 1, 8-24-1998) 
Sec. 40-127. - Purpose. (a)  The purpose of this article is to recognize that although outdoor sprinkler systems are proper and necessary, these systems should be reasonably regulated in the interest of public safety and welfare by the establishment of standards for the timing, coverage and use of sprinkler systems. (b)  In order to protect the public safety, to protect the public investment in sidewalks and streets, and to provide for orderly and reasonable use of outdoor sprinkler systems, the mayor and council hereby determine that the public health, safety and welfare require the adoption of this article. (Code 1989, § 17-101; Ord. No. 410, § 2, 8-24-1998) 
Sec. 40-128. - Operations prohibited. (a)  It shall be a violation of this article to operate an outdoor sprinkler system when it is reasonably anticipated that temperatures are or will be near or below freezing. All outdoor sprinkler systems which operate on an automatic timer basis shall be equipped with a manual override to allow manual termination of the system in the event that temperatures unexpectedly fall below freezing. It shall also be a violation of this article to continually operate a sprinkler system for excessive periods of time where such sprinkling is likely to create puddling on adjacent public sidewalks and streets, or to operate a sprinkler system in a manner that is likely to over-spray or spray directly onto public sidewalks and public streets so as to cause an inconvenience and danger to persons and/or result in the accelerated deterioration of public sidewalks and streets. (b)  No private improvements, such as lawn sprinkler systems, yard lighting, and the like, shall be installed within a public right-of-way or easement except by authorization of the director of public works. Such authorization, if issued, shall require the owner to assume all repair costs of the owner's facilities should they be damaged during the course of installation, maintenance, or repair of any of the improvements authorized to occupy said right-of-way or easement. (Code 1989, § 17-102; Ord. No. 410, § 3, 8-24-1998) 
Sec. 40-129. - Remedies; penalties. (a)  When the director of public works or his designee determines that an outdoor sprinkler system is being operated in violation of this article, a written violation notice shall be issued to the owner/operator of the sprinkler system setting forth the actions deemed necessary to correct or remedy the violation. If the violation pertains to excessive use or over-spraying, the owner/operator shall, within seven days of the violation notice, take such action as is necessary to correct the violation, and shall certify to the director, in writing, the steps that have been taken to correct the violation. If the violation pertains to operating a sprinkler system when temperatures are near or below freezing, the owner/operator, upon receipt of oral or written notice, shall immediately discontinue operation of the sprinkler system, and shall also take such action as is necessary to remove any hazardous condition from the public sidewalks and streets of the city. When an emergency situation exists, and it is not practical to notify the owner/operator of the violation, the director may cause the city to take such action as is necessary to discontinue the operation of the sprinkler system and to remove, or, to the extent possible, eliminate the hazardous condition created by operation of the system. In the event that the city removes or remediates the hazardous conditions created by operation of the system, the owner/operator of the sprinkler system shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for the cost of the removal. In the event that any removal fee remains unpaid for a period of 30 days after written notice, the city may pursue any and all civil remedies available to the city at law or in equity to collect the fee, and the city may, after an additional 15-day period of prior written notice, discontinue water and garbage service to the applicable property. The payment of any unpaid removal fee shall not bar criminal prosecution for any violation of this article. (b)  Any person who is convicted of a first offense under this article shall be subject to a fine according to penalties described in section 1-8, and each day that this violation occurs and continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1989, § 17-103; Ord. No. 410, § 4, 8-24-1998) 
Sec. 40-130. - Exemption.     Owners of single-family residential dwellings shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. However, homeowners' associations maintaining common area entrance ways to residential subdivisions shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this article. (Code 1989, § 17-104; Ord. No. 410, § 5, 8-24-1998) 
Sec. 40-131. - Registration.     All owners/operators of outdoor sprinkler systems may voluntarily file a registration with the city public works department, on a form designated by the director of public works. The registration shall identify the owner/operator, the property address, the locations of any manual override or shut-off valves, the name, address and telephone number of a 24-hour contact person, and such other information as the director of public works deems necessary. The voluntary registration requirements of this article shall become mandatory with respect to any owner/operator receiving a written violation notice pursuant to this article. (Code 1989, § 17-105; Ord. No. 410, § 6, 8-24-1998) 
Chapter 41 - RESERVED 
Chapter 42 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 42-1. - Liability insurance on city vehicles. (a)  The director of finance is hereby authorized and directed to maintain automobile liability in limits not less than $100,000.00 bodily injury per person, $300,000.00 bodily injury per occurrence and $100,000.00 property damage. (b)  All contractors doing business with the city shall provide certificates of the coverage described in subsection (a) of this section to the city, and the city shall maintain files on all owned and contracted vehicles. (Code 1989, § 8-1; Ord. No. 159, § 1, 11-6-1978) 
Sec. 42-2. - Tax exemption to residents 65 years of age or older. (a)  All residents of the city who own and occupy their homes on January 1 of the year and who have attained the age of 65 years or older on or before such date, and do not have an income exceeding $10,000.00, which includes all moneys received by such person or such person's spouse, are hereby granted a $5,000.00 homestead exemption. (b)  If disabled, a certificate provided by the attending physician licensed to practice medicine in the state certifying that the applicant is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed, and that his condition is likely to be permanent, must be submitted to the tax commissioner. An affidavit must be signed by the applicant. (Code 1989, § 8-3; Res. of 3-28-1983) 
Sec. 42-3. - Freeport tax exemption. (a)  Inventory of goods and the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partially finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state is exempt from ad valorem taxation by the city, as provided in article VII, section 1, paragraph IV of the state constitution. (b)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods is exempt from ad valorem taxation by the city, as provided by article VII, section 1, paragraph IV of the state constitution. (c)  Inventory of finished goods which on the first day of January are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the state, and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the state from outside this state and stored for trans-shipment to a final destination outside this state is exempt from ad valorem taxation by the city, as provided in article VII, section 1, paragraph IV of the state constitution. (Code 1989, § 8-4; Res. No. 148, 3-28-1983) State Law reference— Ga. Const. art. VII, § II, ¶ III; freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 
Sec. 42-4. - Fees for checks returned for nonpayment. (a)  Effective with the passage of this section, a returned check fee of $25.00 shall be imposed on all checks returned to the city for nonpayment. (b)  This fee may be adjusted, from time to time, by the finance director, provided that with such adjustments: (1)  The city council is notified; (2)  A public notice is posted announcing the new rate and effective date; and (3)  The adjustment shall not be more than $20.00 or five percent of the face amount of the returned check, whichever is greater. (Code 1989, § 8-5; Res. No. 378, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 507, 9-23-2002) 
Secs. 42-5—42-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURER LICENSE FEES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— General assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c); powers of municipal corporations to impose license fees on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 42-29. - Insurer license fees.     There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $100.00. For each separate business location in excess of one, not covered by section 42-30, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $100.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. (Code 1989, § 12-201; Ord. No. 485, § 1, 12-17-2001) 
Sec. 42-30. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.     For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing, and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $35.00 per location. (Code 1989, § 12-202; Ord. No. 485, § 2, 12-17-2001) 
Sec. 42-31. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers.     There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 42-29. (Code 1989, § 12-203; Ord. No. 485, § 3, 12-17-2001) 
Sec. 42-32. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers.     There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 42-29. (Code 1989, § 12-204; Ord. No. 485, § 4, 12-17-2001) 
Sec. 42-33. - Due date for license fees.     License fees imposed in sections 42-29 and 42-30 shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. (Code 1989, § 12-205; Ord. No. 485, § 5, 12-17-2001) 
Secs. 42-34—42-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 
Sec. 42-55. - Purpose and intent of article.     The purpose and intent of this article is to provide for the levy, assessment and collection of an annual occupation tax on certain businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations located or exerting substantial efforts in the city. This article is implemented pursuant to, and in accordance with, the state-enabling statute codified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. (Code 1989, § 12-29.1; Ord. No. 355, § 1, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-56. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax.     Business means any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity which exerts substantial efforts within the city, engages in, causes to be engaged in, and/or represents or holds out to the public to be engaged in the occupation or activity with the object of gain or benefit, either directly or indirectly.     Business registration certificate means the document issued by the city to a business or to a practitioner of a profession or occupation which gives evidence of compliance with the requirements of this article. The certificate shows the name and address of the business, the business type, and other pertinent information, but not the amount of tax paid.     Dominant business activity means the activity which is the major source of income of a business that conducts multiple activities. Such dominant business activity represents the largest percentage of business revenues but may not represent a majority of revenues.     Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple-line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived.     Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer, and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax from such individual's compensation, or whose employer issues to such individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099.     Location or office means any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project, or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site.     Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes.     Practitioner of profession or occupation shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupational tax.     Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. Development impact fees, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8), or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees.     Taxpayer means any business or practitioner of a profession or occupation responsible for the payment of an occupation tax pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Code 1989, § 12-29.2; Ord. No. 355, § 2, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 2, 8-28-1995; Ord. No. 593, § 1(exh. A), 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 42-57. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. (a)  An annual non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee of $50.00 is imposed on each business and practitioner of a profession or occupation required to pay an occupation tax under this article, except home occupations. The administrative fee shall be due on the same date as the occupation tax. (b)  A regulatory fee may be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. (Code 1989, § 12-29.3; Ord. No. 355, § 3, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 3, 8-28-1995; Ord. No. 593, § 1(exh. A), 6-19-2006) State Law reference— Imposition and collection of regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8; limitation, imposition and calculation of regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
Sec. 42-58. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. (a)  An occupation tax is levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based upon the following criteria: (1)  The taxpayer shall pay the occupation tax based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. (2)  The tax shall be calculated at the following rate: a.  Home occupation (limited to one employee): $90.00. b.  All other businesses (not otherwise addressed herein or by law):     Employees: 1.  One to four: $100.00. 2.  Five to ten: $175.00. 3.  11 to 25: $300.00. 4.  26 to 49: $450.00. 5.  50 and above, plus $7.00 per employee: $150.00. (3)  An administrative fee of $50.00 shall be assessed in addition to the occupational tax for all businesses except home occupations. (4)  The number of employees shall be computed on a full-time position basis and a full-time position equivalent basis. For the purposes of the calculation, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee, and the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. In no event shall the tax exceed $10,000.00. (b)  Restrictions. (1)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have. (2)  The city shall require an occupation tax from those real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the city and who sell property inside the limits of the city. (3)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. (4)  For out-of-state businesses with no location in the state, occupation taxes shall be calculated at the annual rate of $250.00. (c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the imposition of an occupation tax and registration requirements of this section shall not constitute a condition to the practice of law by attorneys. Further, any provision of this section which imposes the criminal sanction of imprisonment for failure to register or pay an occupation tax shall not apply to attorneys. The audit provisions of this section shall not be deemed to require an attorney to provide confidential billing records to the city. (Code 1989, § 12-29.4; Ord. No. 355, § 4, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 4, 8-28-1995; Ord. No. 403, § 1, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 593, § 1(exh. A), 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 42-59. - Applicability of occupation tax to businesses with no location in the state.     The occupation tax levied pursuant to section 42-58 is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city, and the business or practitioner: (1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or (2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. (Code 1989, § 12-29.5; Ord. No. 355, § 5, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 5, 8-28-1995) State Law reference— Taxation of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
Sec. 42-60. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration.     The business registration certificate of each business in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. (Code 1989, § 12-29.6; Ord. No. 355, § 6, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 6, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-61. - The number of businesses considered operating in city.     Where a person conducts business at more than one location, each location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. (Code 1989, § 12-29.7; Ord. No. 355, § 7, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 7, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-62. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18).     Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax: (1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 42-58; or (2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per-practitioner fee shall include all persons in the business who qualify as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. (3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis. (Code 1989, § 12-29.8; Ord. No. 355, § 8, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 8, 8-28-1995; Ord. No. 593, § 1(exh. A), 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 42-63. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government.     Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. (Code 1989, § 12-29.9; Ord. No. 355, § 9, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 9, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-64. - Scope of tax.     The occupation tax levied pursuant to this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes; nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession or trade. The occupation tax applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 through 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the city pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinances. (Code 1989, § 12-29.10; Ord. No. 355, § 10, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 10, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-65. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. (a)  Each business or practitioner of a profession or occupation required to pay an administrative fee and occupation tax or a regulatory fee pursuant to this article shall file an annual registration and return (the "registration") with the city finance department on a form provided by the city. The registration, accompanied by the occupation tax and/or fee, is due on February 15 of each calendar year, and is delinquent on April 1. The registration and tax for a business commencing after January 1 of any year is due on the commencement date and is delinquent 90 days after the commencement date. (b)  A penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax and/or fee shall be assessed on April 1 for businesses required to register on February 15, and on the 19th day after commencement of business for businesses commencing business after January 1. Interest of 1½ percent shall be assessed for each month or fraction thereof that the tax and/or fee remains delinquent after the imposition of the ten percent penalty. (c)  A business registration certificate shall be issued by the city finance department for each registration under this article. The business registration certificate shall be prominently displayed in each office of the business in the city. If any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a business registration certificate shall, after the registration and occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact business in the city, such offender shall, in addition to remedies provided herein, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1989, § 12-29.11; Ord. No. 355, § 11, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 11, 8-28-1995; Ord. No. 593, § 1(exh. A), 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 42-66. - Allocation of employees of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations.     For those businesses having multiple locations inside and outside the city, only the employees who work in the city locations will be counted for occupation tax purposes. (Code 1989, § 12-29.12; Ord. No. 355, § 12, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 12, 8-28-1995; Ord. No. 593, § 1(exh. A), 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 42-67. - Exemption for state and local authorities and nonprofit organizations.     State and local authorities and nonprofit organizations are exempt from any occupation tax, regulatory fee or administrative fee levied pursuant to this article. (Code 1989, § 12-29.13; Ord. No. 355, § 13, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 13, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-68. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed.     Each person required to be licensed under title 43 of the state license examining boards shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. (Code 1989, § 12-29.14; Ord. No. 355, § 14, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 14, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-69. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. (a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, certificates of occupancy or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification. (b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the registration is issued. (Code 1989, § 12-29.15; Ord. No. 355, § 15, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 15, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-70. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain.     All persons subject to the occupation taxes provided in this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as provided in this article, and in default thereof, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a certificate. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration before commencing the same; and any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained such registration shall be subject to penalties provided herein, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1989, § 12-29.16; Ord. No. 355, § 16, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 16, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-71. - City building official; business inspector.     The city code enforcement manager and his duly designated officers and inspectors or his successors shall be classified as deputy officer business inspector with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business tax ordinance for 1995 and succeeding years thereafter. (Code 1989, § 12-29.18; Ord. No. 355, § 18, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 18, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-72. - Businesses not covered by this article.     The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article, but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: (1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. (2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3. (3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. (4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-80 et seq. (5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. (6)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (7)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. (8)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. (9)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. (Code 1989, § 12-29.19; Ord. No. 355, § 19, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 19, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-73. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law.     This occupation tax is not levied upon any business or any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. (Code 1989, § 12-29.20; Ord. No. 355, § 20, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 20, 8-28-1995; Ord. No. 593, § 1(exh. A), 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 42-74. - More than one place or line of business.     Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the number of employees at each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and the tax will be calculated at the rate of the dominant line of business conducted by the business, identified on a form to be furnished by the city. (Code 1989, § 12-29.21; Ord. No. 355, § 21, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 21, 8-28-1995; Ord. No. 593, § 1(exh. A), 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 42-75. - Returns confidential.     Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, the contents of occupation tax returns shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city of statistics, so classified as to reasonably prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state or of the United States, and other local governments. Information provided by a business or practitioner may also be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupational tax purposes. (Code 1989, § 12-29.22; Ord. No. 355, § 22, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 22, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-76. - Inspection of books and records.     In any case, the finance department of the city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The director of the finance department or the director's designee shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the director of the finance department or the director's designee, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax certificate currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the director of the finance department or the director's designee at the director's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and an additional one percent of the deficiency for each month or fraction thereof that the deficiency was due and unpaid shall be assessed. (Code 1989, § 12-29.23; Ord. No. 355, § 23, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 23, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-77. - Business registration certificate to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, or permit inspection of books.     Except for a person whose qualifications to practice his profession are determined by the general laws of the state, upon the failure of any business to pay such occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business registration certificate granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of such business to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business registration certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the finance department in accordance with provisions found in section 42-76. (Code 1989, § 12-29.24; Ord. No. 355, § 24, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 24, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-78. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after business registration certificate revocation.     Any person, their manager, agent or employee, who does business in the city after the certificate for such business has been revoked as above; any person, their manager, agent or employee, hereby required to make returns showing the number of employees, and who fails to make such returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, or refuses to amend such returns so as to set forth the correct information, or who shall make false returns; and any person, their manager, agent or employee who refuses to permit an inspection of books in his charge when the officer, agent, employee or representative of the city requests such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided in section 1-8. (Code 1989, § 12-29.25; Ord. No. 355, § 25, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 25, 8-28-1995; Ord. No. 593, § 1(exh. A), 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 42-79. - Execution for delinquent occupation tax.     In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the director of the finance department of the city, upon any tax or installment of such tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of such tax against the person liable for such tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person liable for such tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of such occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the director of the finance department of the city upon the property of the person liable for such tax, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of such execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the ordinances and the Charter of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in such execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest, penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. (Code 1989, § 12-29.26; Ord. No. 355, § 26, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 26, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-80. - Amendment or repeal of provision.     This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. (Code 1989, § 12-29.27; Ord. No. 355, § 27, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 27, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-81. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance.     This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. (Code 1989, § 12-29.28; Ord. No. 355, § 28, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 28, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-82. - Enforcement of provisions.     It is hereby made the duty of the building official, the finance department and the police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed, and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the building official, director of the finance department, the chief of police and their designees and assistants to inspect all certificates issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the certificate held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. (Code 1989, § 12-29.29; Ord. No. 355, § 29, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 29, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-83. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by council.     This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. (Code 1989, § 12-29.30; Ord. No. 355, § 30, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 30, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-84. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase.     The council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. (Code 1989, § 12-29.31; Ord. No. 355, § 31, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 31, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-85. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax.     The council may, by this article or subsequent ordinance or resolution, provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions or to a designated district as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Any such plan may be designed to attract development to a particular area in the city or to the city at large. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious. (Code 1989, § 12-29.32; Ord. No. 355, § 32, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 32, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-86. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions.     Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. (Code 1989, § 12-29.33; Ord. No. 355, § 33, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 366, § 33, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 42-87. - Information provided to state department of revenue. (a)  Any person who performs any business, occupation or profession subject to an occupation tax or regulatory fee under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. is required to provide the city the following information when paying such occupation tax or regulatory fee: (1)  The legal name of the business; (2)  Any associated trade names for the business; (3)  The mailing address for the business; (4)  The actual physical address of each location of the business, if it is different than the mailing address; (5)  The North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code applicable to such business; and (6)  The sales and use tax identification number assigned to the business by the state department of revenue, if the business is required by law to have such a number. (b)  The city will provide written notice to all persons subject to the city's occupation taxes or regulatory fees that: (1)  This information will be provided to the state department of revenue; and (2)  If the person refuses or fails to provide the required information, the city will notify the state department of revenue of this fact. (c)  Within 30 days after receiving the payment of occupation taxes or regulatory fees pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20, or at such other later date as otherwise reasonable, the city will electronically submit the information received from each business to the state department of revenue. (Code 1989, § 12-29.34; Res. No. 1535, 2-21-2011) 
Secs. 42-88—42-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AD VALOREM TAX[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(a) and (b)(2); ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal power of ad valorem taxation to provide for financial assistance to its development authority, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 42-120. - Ad valorem tax due and delinquency dates; penalties.     Citizens of the city are hereby given the following deadline for filing and paying their property taxes: (1)  All property owners, both real and personal, shall declare their taxable properties in accordance with the rules and regulations provided for by the county tax assessor and the state property tax division. The city shall levy and collect ad valorem taxes based upon tax records provided by the county. These records shall include, but not be limited to, the owner's name, address, property assessment, valuation, and exemptions (if any). (2)  Ad valorem taxes will be billed on or about October 1 of each year for that tax year, and shall be payable within 60 days of the bill date. Any ad valorem taxes due under the provisions of this section shall bear interest at the maximum rate allowed by state law. Additionally, a penalty shall be imposed on any unpaid principal in accordance with state law. (3)  Unpaid accounts shall be delinquent 30 days after the due date and shall be subject to late notices, publication of owners' names within the legal organ for the city, and execution of fi. fas. (4)  The ad valorem tax rate for the city for the 2015 calendar year, on property subject to ad valorem taxation by the city, is hereby fixed at $5.750 on 40 percent of each $1,000.00 of property subject to ad valorem tax by the city. (5)  Said rate of $5.750 on 40 percent of each $1,000.00 of taxable property is hereby levied as follows: a.  For general government purposes: $5.000 on 40 percent of each $1,000.00 of taxable property. b.  For the purpose of retiring outstanding general obligation bonds: $0.7500 on 40 percent of each $1,000.00 of taxable property. (Code 1989, § 8-51; Ord. No. 101, 11-8-1966; Ord. No. 457, § 1, 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 706, §§ I, II, 7-20-2015) State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 48-2-44. 
Secs. 42-121—42-138. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAX EXECUTIONS AND SALES 
Sec. 42-139. - Municipal tax collector. (a)  Creation of office. There is hereby created in the city the office of municipal tax collector. This office shall be held by the city administrator who shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of this division. The municipal tax collector shall also undertake such duties as prescribed, from time to time, by the mayor and council. (b)  Additional powers and authority. The municipal tax collector shall have such further powers and authority as is necessary to carry out the requirements of this division. (Code 1989, § 8-61; Ord. No. 263, §§ 1, 22, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-140. - Records to be kept by municipal tax collector.     The municipal tax collector or his designee shall maintain the following records in carrying out the provisions of this division: (1)  Defaulters book. The municipal tax collector shall prepare and maintain a book listing all defaulters (delinquent taxpayers) and the amount and value of the property in default. (2)  Execution docket. The municipal tax collector shall maintain an execution docket listing the executions against all delinquent taxpayers by entering their names in the docket along with an itemized statement of the taxes covered by the executions. (Code 1989, § 8-62; Ord. No. 263, § 2, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-141. - Issuance, direction and recording of tax executions.     Where any property owner who has property subject to taxation within the limits of the city shall fail, refuse or neglect to pay the taxes imposed according to law or the ordinances of the city, the municipal tax collector is hereby authorized to issue an execution against the property owner for the tax, which execution shall bear interest in the name of the city, be entered on the records of the municipal tax collector, and be directed to the chief of police, commanding him to levy on the personal and real property of the property owner, or so much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the demand and costs. Upon issuance of the execution, the municipal tax collector shall also be authorized to record the execution on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. (Code 1989, § 8-63; Ord. No. 263, § 3, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-142. - Date of issuance; enforcement of executions.     At any time after the last day for the payment of taxes has arrived, the municipal tax collector may notify, in writing, each delinquent taxpayer of the fact that the taxes owing have not been paid, and that, unless paid, an execution shall be issued. The municipal tax collector may issue executions for nonpayment of taxes collectable at any time after 30 days have elapsed since giving the foregoing notice. The execution shall include the owner of the property to which the execution is directed, the year for which the execution is to be issued, a description of the property sufficient to put interested parties on notice as to where the subject property can be located, the amount due including the tax, penalties, execution costs, and interest, the name of the officer conducting the levy and his address, the date the execution was issued, and the official who issued the tax execution. Such tax executions shall be levied and collected as provided by this division and state law. (Code 1989, § 8-64; Ord. No. 263, § 4, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-143. - City's costs and fees on executions.     The costs and fees of the city on executions shall be as follows: the costs and fees associated with the collection of delinquent tax accounts including the execution of fi. fas, settling fi. fas, advertising, and any reasonable collection costs shall be added to the delinquent tax account at the actual proportionate cost paid by the city, with relation to each delinquent tax account. (Code 1989, § 8-65; Ord. No. 263, § 5, 10-23-1989; Ord. No. 457, § 2, 12-18-2000) 
Sec. 42-144. - Alias tax executions.     When a properly issued tax execution is lost or destroyed, an alias tax execution may be issued by the municipal tax collector, and such alias tax execution shall have the same force and effect as the lost or destroyed original execution. (Code 1989, § 8-66; Ord. No. 263, § 6, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-145. - Interest on executions.     All taxes, from the date the same become delinquent and in default, and all penalties and other sums owing under executions, from the date of imposition, shall bear interest from such dates as provided by state law. (Code 1989, § 8-67; Ord. No. 263, § 7, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-146. - Procedures for sales under tax executions.     The property which is the subject of the tax execution shall be advertised and sold as provided by state law for fi. fas and judicial sales, with the exception that the place of sale shall be held in the council chambers of the city. In addition to the notice required under state law, at any sale under tax execution under this division, the defendant in fi. fa shall be given 20 days' written notice of such sale by registered mail to the last-known address as listed in the records of the municipal tax collector. (Code 1989, § 8-68; Ord. No. 263, § 8, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-147. - Duty of levying officers.     The municipal tax collector shall place issued executions in the hands of the city police chief or his designee, who shall be authorized to collect or levy the executions as provided herein. The levying officer shall proceed promptly to enforce by levy and sale the collection of the executions. The levying or collecting officer shall make prompt settlements with the municipal tax collector and return to the municipal tax collector the tax collected and the uncollected executions with proper entries on the executions. (Code 1989, § 8-69; Ord. No. 263, § 9, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-148. - Failure to find property on which to levy.     When the levying officer can find no property belonging to the taxpayer on which to levy, the officer shall place such notation (nulla bona) on the execution and return it to the municipal tax collector. Upon the return of the execution, the city may proceed with the issuance of a summons of garnishment as well as such other remedies as provided under state law. (Code 1989, § 8-70; Ord. No. 263, § 10, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-149. - Payment of excess.     Any excess remaining after the payment of taxes, costs and all expenses of a sale shall be immediately paid to the person authorized to receive the excess. (Code 1989, § 8-71; Ord. No. 263, § 11, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-150. - Authority of levying officer to put purchaser in possession of land.     The officer selling property at a tax sale shall have the authority, subject to requirements of state law, to put purchasers in possession of land sold under tax executions. (Code 1989, § 8-72; Ord. No. 263, § 12, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-151. - Purchase of property by city.     The city may purchase and hold in its official capacity any real or personal property offered for sale by virtue of tax executions, except that the city may bid on such property only when other bids do not cover the amount of the tax execution and related costs. The city shall not bid more for the property than the amount of taxes, interest, penalties and costs due. (Code 1989, § 8-73; Ord. No. 263, § 13, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-152. - Register to be kept showing land sold for taxes and redemption.     The municipal tax collector shall keep a register of all sales of real estate, whether vacant or improved, in a book provided for that purpose, in which the municipal tax collector shall enter each tract or lot of land sold, the precise quantity sold, a copy of the advertisement, the amount of taxes and costs the property was sold for and the purchaser's name. Space shall also be provided to insert the name of the person who may redeem such lot or tract of land, the date of redemption and the amount of redemption money paid. (Code 1989, § 8-74; Ord. No. 263, § 14, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-153. - Persons entitled to redeem land sold under tax execution; payment; time.     Whenever any real property is sold under or by virtue of an execution issued for the collection of ad valorem taxes, the defendant in fi. fa or any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon such property may redeem the property from the sale by the payment of the redemption price as provided in section 42-154: (1)  At any time within 12 months from the date of the sale; and (2)  At any time after the sale until the right to redeem is foreclosed by the giving of the notice provided for in section 42-157. (Code 1989, § 8-75; Ord. No. 263, § 15, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-154. - Amount payable for redemption. (a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, the amount required to be paid for redemption of property from any sale for taxes as provided in this division (the "redemption price") shall be the amount paid for the property at the tax sale, as shown by the recitals in the tax deed, plus any taxes paid on the property by the purchaser after the sale for taxes, plus a premium of ten percent of the amount for each year or fraction of a year which has elapsed between the date of the sale and the date on which the redemption payment is made. If redemption is not made until after the required notice of foreclosure of right to redeem has been given, there shall be added to the redemption price the cost of serving the notice, the cost of publication of the notice, if any, and the sum of ten percent of the amount paid for the property at the sale to cover the cost of making the necessary examinations to determine the person upon whom notice should be served. All amounts required to be paid hereunder shall be paid to the purchaser at the tax sale or to his successors. (b)  In cases where the city purchases property at a tax sale, the redemption price shall be the amount paid for the property at the tax sale, as shown by the recitals in the tax deed, plus a premium of 20 percent of the amount for each year or fraction of a year which has elapsed between the date of the sale and the date on which the redemption payment is made. If redemption is not made until after the required notice of foreclosure of right to redeem has been given, there shall be added to the redemption price the cost in connection with serving the notice, the cost of publication of the notice, if any, and the further sum of 20 percent of the amount paid for the property of the sale to cover the cost of making the necessary examination to determine the person upon whom notice should be served. All of the amounts required to be paid hereunder shall be paid to the purchaser at the tax sale or to his successors. (Code 1989, § 8-76; Ord. No. 263, § 16, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-155. - Effect of redemption.     When property has been redeemed, the effect of the redemption shall be to put the title conveyed by the tax sale back into the defendant in fi. fa, subject to all liens existing at the time of the tax sale. If the redemption has been made by any creditor of the defendant or by any person having any interest in the property, the amount expended by the creditor or person interested shall constitute a first lien on the property and, if the quit-claim deed provided for in section 42-156 is recorded as required by law, shall be repaid prior to any other claims upon the property. (Code 1989, § 8-77; Ord. No. 263, § 17, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-156. - Quit-claim deed by purchaser.     In all cases where property is redeemed, the purchaser at the tax sale shall make a quit-claim deed to the defendant in fi. fa, which deed shall recite the name of the person who has paid the redemption money and the capacity in which, or the claim of right or interest pursuant to which, the redemption money was paid. (Code 1989, § 8-78; Ord. No. 263, § 18, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-157. - Notice of foreclosure of right to redeem; time.     After 12 months from the date of a tax sale, the purchaser at the sale or his heirs, successors or assigns may terminate, foreclose, divest and forever bar the right to redeem the property from the sale by causing a notice of the foreclosure as prescribed by state law to be served as provided by state law. (Code 1989, § 8-79; Ord. No. 263, § 19, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-158. - Sale of property bought by city at tax sale and not redeemed.     Where property purchased by the city at a tax sale by the municipal tax collector has not been redeemed as provided by law, it may be sold by the city in accordance with state law. (Code 1989, § 8-80; Ord. No. 263, § 20, 10-23-1989) 
Sec. 42-159. - Execution of deeds.     It shall be the duty of the municipal tax collector to execute deeds to purchasers at tax sales under executions. (Code 1989, § 8-81; Ord. No. 263, § 21, 10-23-1989) 
Secs. 42-160—42-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL-MOTEL TAX[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 42-187. - Title.     This article shall be referred to and commonly known as the "Alpharetta Hotel/Motel Tax Ordinance." The authority to levy this tax is granted through O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(2). (Code 1989, § 8-21; Ord. No. 256, § 1, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 507, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004) 
Sec. 42-188. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed.     Guestroom means a room in any hotel (as defined in this section) which is occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants as living quarters or as residential use.     Hotel means any building or structure kept, used or maintained as or advertised or held out to furnish for value to the public any room, lodging, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodging or accommodations are regularly furnished for value.     Monthly period means any calendar month of any year.     Occupancy means the use or possession of, or the right to use or possess, any guestroom, or the right to use or possess any of the furnishings, services or accommodations accompanying the use of possession of a guestroom.     Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guestroom under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement.     Operator/innkeeper means any person operating a hotel (as defined in this section) in the city, including, but not limited to, the hotel owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel.     Person means any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise.     Rent or rental means the consideration or value received in money or otherwise for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.     Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided.     Tax means the tax imposed by this article, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(2). (Code 1989, § 8-22; Ord. No. 256, § 2, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 507, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004; Ord. No. 633, § 1, 6-22-2009) 
Sec. 42-189. - Imposition and rate. (a)  This excise tax shall be imposed on any person or legal entity licensed by or required to pay a business or occupation tax to the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground or any other place in which rooms, lodging, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value and shall apply to the furnishing for value of any room, lodging, or accommodation. Every person or entity subject to a tax levied as provided in this article shall be liable for the tax at the applicable rate on the lodging charges actually collected or, if the amount of taxes collected is in excess of the total amount that should have been collected, the total amount actually collected must be remitted. (b)  Any tax levied as provided in this article is also imposed upon every person or entity who is a hotel guest and who receives a room, lodging, or accommodation that is subject to the tax levied under this article. Every such guest subject to the tax levied under this article shall pay the tax to the person or entity providing the room, lodging, or accommodation. The tax shall be of a debt of the person obtaining the room, lodging, or accommodation to the person or entity providing such room, lodging, or accommodation until it is paid, and shall be recoverable by law by the person or entity providing such room, lodging, or accommodation in the same manner as the recovery of other debts. The person or entity collecting the tax from the hotel guest shall remit the tax to the city in concurrence with the provisions of this article. (c)  Commencing on October 1, 2015, there is hereby imposed and there shall be paid to the city an excise tax in the amount of eight percent of the gross rental charge for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(2). (Code 1989, § 8-23; Ord. No. 256, § 3, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 397, § 1, 12-16-1997; Ord. No. 443, § 1, 6-6-2000; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004; Ord. No. 709, § 2, 8-17-2015) 
Sec. 42-190. - Exemptions. (a)  The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to charges made for any rooms, lodging, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such rooms, lodging, or accommodations as a result of the destruction of their homes or residences by fire or other casualty. (b)  The tax authorized by this article shall apply to the fees or charges for any rooms, lodging, or accommodations during the first 30 days of continuous occupancy, and shall not apply to charges imposed for any continuous occupancy thereafter. (c)  The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to charges made for the use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or to any rooms, lodging, or accommodations provided without charge. (d)  The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to the charges for any rooms, lodging, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodging, or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card, such rooms, lodging, or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this section. (Code 1989, § 8-24; Ord. No. 256, § 4, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 507, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004; Ord. No. 633, § 2, 6-22-2009) 
Sec. 42-191. - Collection.     The tax levied herein shall be secured by the operator from the occupant when collecting the rent to which it applies. (Code 1989, § 8-25; Ord. No. 256, § 5, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004) 
Sec. 42-192. - Registration of operator; form and content; execution; certificate of authority.     No person shall be granted a license as an operator in this city until such person meets all the requirements for operating a hotel within the city and registers with the finance director pursuant to this section. The registration set forth in this section shall require the name under which such person operates a hotel or intends to operate a hotel, the location of the hotel, and such other information which the finance director deems necessary in facilitating the collection of the tax. The registration shall be signed by the operator/owner, if a natural person, and, if the operator shall not be a natural person, then anyone authorized to sign on behalf of the operator. The finance director shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to the registered operator to collect the tax. A separate registration shall be required for each hotel of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the hotel to which it is applicable. (Code 1989, § 8-26; Ord. No. 256, § 6, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 507, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004) 
Sec. 42-193. - Returns; due dates of taxes and payments; collection fee allowed operators. (a)  Returns; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period for which the tax is levied, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the finance director showing the gross rent, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the mayor and council or finance director. (b)  Due date of taxes. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the 20th day of every month following each respective monthly period for which the tax is levied. (c)  Collection fee allowed operators. In reporting and paying the amount of tax due under this article, each operator shall be allowed a deduction of three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. (Code 1989, § 8-27; Ord. No. 256, § 7, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 507, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004) 
Sec. 42-194. - Determination of deficiency; notice of determination; interest on deficiency. (a)  Determination of deficiency. Should the finance director believe that any return filed pursuant to this article does not reflect accurately the amount of tax required to be paid to the city, the finance director may determine the amount which is believed to be the appropriate amount of tax due. (b)  Notice of determination; service of notice. The finance director or his designee shall give written notice of the determination of deficiency. The notice may be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If notice is given by certified mail, it shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the business license issued to the operator. Service by certified mail will be deemed complete on the date the return receipt is signed by the addressee. Should the addressee fail for any reason to accept delivery, notice shall be deemed given upon the expiration of five days after the notice is mailed by the finance director or his designee. (c)  Collection of deficiency. Within 15 days after the operator receives a notice of determination of deficiency, the operator shall remit to the finance director the amount of deficiency owing, or provide the finance director with a satisfactory explanation in writing which sets forth the reasons such deficiency amount is not owing to the city. (d)  Penalty. The amount of the deficiency shall bear a penalty of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, on the past due amount, from the original due date of the tax. (e)  Interest. The amount of the deficiency shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the original due date of the tax. (f)  Repeated failure to file accurate return. Upon an operator's filing two inaccurate returns within any 24-month period, the city shall have the right to revoke an operator's business license. (Code 1989, § 8-28; Ord. No. 256, § 8, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 507, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004) 
Sec. 42-195. - Failure to make return; effect. (a)  Failure to make return. If any operator fails to make any return required by this article, the finance director shall notify the operator in writing of such failure. The operator shall have 15 days from the date of the notice to remit the return, along with the tax owing. In addition to the tax owing, taxes shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H. 15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid. Should any operator fail to make a return after such 15-day period, the finance director or his designee shall review the operator's records and make a determination as to the tax owing for the monthly period for which the operator failed to make a return. After making a determination of the tax due, the finance director shall mail written notice of such determination to the operator. The operator shall have five days from the date of the notice to pay all sums owing, together with interest, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the determination is made. In addition, the operator shall pay to the city a penalty of five percent of the total amount of tax owing. (b)  Repeated failure to file return. Upon an operator's failure to make two returns within any 24-month period, the city shall have the right to revoke an operator's business license. (Code 1989, § 8-29; Ord. No. 256, § 9, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 507, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004) State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40; O.C.G.A. § 48-2-44. 
Sec. 42-196. - Administration of article. (a)  Authority. The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. (b)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Each operator required to make a return and pay any tax under this article shall keep and preserve: (1)  Suitable records of the charges taxable under this article; and (2)  Other books of account which are necessary to determine the amount of tax due. (c)  Examination of records; audits. The finance director or his designee may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator in the city in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount of tax owing to the city. (d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the finance director may require the filing of additional reports by any persons or class of persons having custody of information relating to the rental of guestrooms in the city. The reports shall be filed when required by the finance director and shall set forth such information as the finance director may require. (Code 1989, § 8-30; Ord. No. 256, § 10, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 507, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004) 
Sec. 42-197. - Successors and assigns of operator; liability for tax.     If any hotel or operator liable for any tax, interest, or penalty imposed by this article sells his business or quits the business, a final return with payment shall be made within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. The operator's successor or assigns, if any, shall be liable for any unpaid tax, interest, or penalties accrued under this article and unpaid by any former owner or assignor. (Code 1989, § 8-31; Ord. No. 256, § 11, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004) 
Sec. 42-198. - Overpayment of tax; tax credit.     In the event an operator remits to the finance director any sum greater than the amount of tax owing, and such fact is brought to the attention of the finance director, the finance director shall credit the amount of overpayment to the operator's account and such credit shall be applied to the amount owing for a successive monthly period. (Code 1989, § 8-32; Ord. No. 256, § 12, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 507, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004) 
Sec. 42-199. - Appropriation of sums collected.     All sums collected under this article shall be expended for any purpose authorized by law. (Code 1989, § 8-33; Ord. No. 256, § 14, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 397, § 2, 12-16-1997; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004) 
Sec. 42-200. - Penalties for violation.     Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished according to the penalties described in section 1-8 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the city shall be entitled to bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect any amount of delinquent tax, together with interest, court costs, and reasonable attorney's fees, and to recover any other damages which the city may suffer. The imposition or payment of a fine under this section shall not relieve the operator from the obligation to pay any and all taxes due under this article, including applicable interest and penalties. (Code 1989, § 8-34; Ord. No. 256, § 13, 5-8-1989; Ord. No. 507, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 538, 2-23-2004) 
Chapter 43 - RESERVED 
Chapter 44 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Powers to grant franchise, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; regulation of cable television systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 44-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Article means this article and all modifications and amendments thereto.     Cable services means the term "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that the term "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, the term "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act, or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable.     Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act.     Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets, and, where applicable, other city property, to provide telecommunications services.     Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable services or other telecommunications services to inhabitants within the franchise area.     Telecommunications services means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial cable, optical fiber, or satellite or microwave transmission, of one or more audio, voice or data signals. The term "telecommunications services" includes both cable services and non-cable telecommunications services. (Code 1989, § 17.5-20; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 8-4-1997) 
Secs. 44-2—44-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 44-21. - Delegation.     Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and re-delegate, and to revoke such delegation or re-delegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, re-delegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this article or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or franchisee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this article. (Code 1989, § 17.5-30; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 8-4-1997) 
Secs. 44-22—44-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 
Sec. 44-48. - Telephone companies. (a)  Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9). (b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. (c)  Authorized designee. The director of finance shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq., and shall perform the following duties: (1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. (2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. (3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this section. (4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this section. (5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. (6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. (Code 1989, § 12-21; Ord. No. 114, § 1, 4-12-1971; Ord. No. 632, § 1, 6-22-2009) State Law reference— Construction of telegraph or telephone lines, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1. 
Secs. 44-49—44-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISE PROCEDURE 
Sec. 44-70. - Granting authority. (a)  No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article, and no person shall use or occupy city property, including streets, to provide any telecommunications services without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. (b)  The city council may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. (c)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. (d)  Any franchise granted shall be non-exclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to: (1)  Grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate; and (2)  Engage, for itself, in the provision of telecommunications services. (e)  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, governing cable television franchises and renewals thereof. (Code 1989, § 17.5-21; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 44-71. - Franchise applications. (a)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. (b)  Any application for a franchise shall contain the following information with respect to the proposed franchise unless waived by the city council, and shall contain such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: (1)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; a copy of the applicant's corporate charter, partnership agreement or other appropriate organizational documentation as is applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by the applicant; (2)  A detailed statement of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers, directors, members, managing partners and/or managing principals of the applicant as may be applicable; b.  The names, and residence and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; c.  The name and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including, but not limited to, telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the city council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications or cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable or telecommunications system in the city; e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing, for each year of the franchise, the projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; and f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system or telecommunications franchise awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable or telecommunication system; and the amount of the applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof; (3)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: a.  A description of the cable services and any other telecommunications services proposed to be provided; b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, charges for cable service, and charges for any other telecommunications service; d.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to or for cable services or any other telecommunications services; and f.  A detailed statement setting forth in entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; (4)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including, but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and (5)  Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law. (Code 1989, § 17.5-22; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 44-72. - Non-refundable application fees for new franchises. (a)  Application fees. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. (b)  Purpose. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing and analyzing the application and related documentation, evaluating the applicant and any related entities or matters, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's fees and expenses. (c)  Payment. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant must furnish with his proposal a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $10,000.00, by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. (Code 1989, § 17.5-23; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 44-73. - Responsibilities of applicants.     It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. (Code 1989, § 17.5-24; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 44-74. - Public availability of applications.     To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. (Code 1989, § 17.5-25; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 44-75. - Evaluation criteria.     In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: (1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; (2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant, and where applicable, related entities; (3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; (4)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to be provided, including the type of cable services and telecommunications services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those cable and telecommunications services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; (5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and (6)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. (Code 1989, § 17.5-26; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 44-76. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. (a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. (b)  If the city council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider one or more applications, the city council may set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application, fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing in accordance with applicable law. (c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. (d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received, except that the city as franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. (Code 1989, § 17.5-27; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 44-77. - Terms and conditions of franchise.     The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects, unless otherwise waived by the city: (1)  The term of the franchise; (2)  The franchise area and the cable services and other telecommunications services and purposes of such other telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of a franchise; (3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; (4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or canceled; (5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to insure the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise; (6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee; (7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee; (8)  The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; (9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; (10)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; (11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the franchisee by the city; (12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; (13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; (14)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; (15)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; (16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and (17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. (Code 1989, § 17.5-28; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 8-4-1997) 
Chapter 45 - RESERVED 
Chapter 46 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); powers of cities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; jurisdiction of municipal court of violation of driver's license statute, O.C.G.A. § 40-5-124; operating motor vehicle without license, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-22; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 46-1. - Adoption of state law by reference. (a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, entitled "definitions," and O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, known as the "Uniform Rules of the Road," are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality with like effect as if recited herein. (b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. (c)  The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-160 regarding school buses are hereby adopted and made applicable to and shall be effective upon the private roads in the city to the same extent and with the same effect as the provisions of such sections apply to the public streets in the city. Further, the city police department is hereby empowered and authorized to enforce all provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-160 through 40-6-164 upon all private roads in the city. (Code 1989, § 18-1; Ord. No. 229, § 1, 8-10-1987; Ord. No. 254, § 2, 3-13-1989; Ord. No. 411, § 1, 8-24-1998) 
Sec. 46-2. - Speed limits—Schedule. (a)  The speed limit schedule shall be determined by the city council from time to time, and is on file at the city court. (b)  School zone hours effective: (1)  School days only (a.m.): from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time. (2)  School days only (p.m.): from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time. (c)  Signs are to be erected by the city. (Code 1989, § 18-2; Ord. No. 253-A, § 2, 2-13-1989; Ord. No. 262, 9-25-1989; Ord. No. 309, 9-28-1992; Ord. No. 348, § 1, 6-20-1994; Ord. No. 375, 4-1-1996; Ord. No. 385, 1-27-1997; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 6-21-1998; Ord. No. 449, §§ 1—3, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 487, §§ 1—29, 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 543, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 599, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 617, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 628, §§ 1—5, 2-2-2009; Ord. No. 645, §§ 1—34, 9-20-2010; Ord. No. 669, §§ 1—31, 11-5-2012) State Law reference— Maximum limits generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-181; authority to alter, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 46-3. - Same—Erection of signs.     Signs on the state highway system shall be erected by the state department of transportation. All others shall be erected by the city. (Code 1989, § 18-3; Ord. No. 253-A, § 2, 2-13-1989) 
Sec. 46-4. - Truck routes—Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Truck means a motor vehicle having a gross vehicular weight rating (G.V.W.R.) in excess of 36,000 pounds or having an overall length in excess of 30 feet, except vehicles designed to carry passengers.     Truck route means any street or portion thereof, within the city, over which trucks are not prohibited to operate by the provisions of section 46-4.5. (Code 1989, § 18-4; Ord. No. 140, § 1, 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 754, § 1, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 46-4.5. - Same—Designated. (a)  Except as specifically set out herein, trucks are prohibited from using any street within the city except those designated below: (1)  SR 9 (North Main Street - South Main Street). (2)  SR 120. (3)  Haynes Bridge Road (SR 120 to city limits). (4)  Hembree Road (Westside Parkway to Roswell city limits continuing on Roswell truck route). (5)  Mansell Road. (6)  Maxwell Road (SR 9 to Hembree Road). (7)  McGinnis Ferry Road. (8)  North Point Parkway. (9)  Union Hill Road. (10)  Westside Parkway. (11)  Windward Concourse. (12)  Windward Parkway (SR 9 to Union Hill Road). (b)  Exceptions to the above schedule are as follows: (1)  When the terminal, parking lot, repair garage, headquarters, place of pickup or delivery of the restricted motor vehicle is not on a designated truck route, ingress to and egress from such places shall be made by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage, headquarters, place of pickup or delivery and the nearest designated truck route. (Ord. No. 754, § 1, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 46-5. - Same—Enforcement. (a)  The city clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate map setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted; the maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be available to the public. (b)  The public works director shall cause those streets upon which truck traffic is prohibited to be clearly sign-posted to give notice that section 46-4.5 is in effect. (Code 1989, § 18-6; Ord. No. 140, § 3, 11-18-1972; Ord. No. 754, § 1, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 46-6. - Hazardous driving.     It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle of any kind within the limits of this city in a hazardous manner, regardless of speed. The term "hazardous driving" is defined to be driving any vehicle of any kind on any street in the city in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person, or any damage to personal property that might result therefrom, taking into consideration the conditions and surroundings of such time and place that a careful and prudent person would observe. (Code 1989, § 18-7; Ord. No. 87, § 8.2, 9-3-1962) 
Sec. 46-7. - Funeral processions.     Vehicles of a funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles, provided such vehicles shall identify themselves by burning regular headlights and shall keep in close formation. When the lead vehicle in a funeral procession has entered an intersection on a green light, all other cars in the procession may proceed through the intersection, even though such signal may change to red. (Code 1989, § 18-8; Ord. No. 87, § 8.10, 9-3-1962) State Law reference— Funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76. 
Secs. 46-8—46-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING 
Sec. 46-33. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Parking enforcement officer means non-sworn personnel designated by the director of public safety or his designee, for the purpose of enforcing parking regulations, including issuance of citations and/or towing of vehicles parked in restricted areas. (Code 1989, § 18-20; Ord. No. 216, § 2, 11-11-1985; Ord. No. 717, § 1, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 46-34. - Designation of parking areas; marking. (a)  The chief of police is authorized to designate specific parking areas or zones within the city in which the parking of vehicles is regulated or prohibited. The chief of police shall make such determinations upon the basis of any engineering and traffic investigations indicating that the adoption of such regulations and prohibitions will aid in the reasonable regulation and control of the parking of vehicles and the reasonable movement of traffic. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the chief of police is authorized to designate areas or zones in which: (1)  Parking is prohibited at all times or at designated times; (2)  Parking is permitted for specified types of vehicles only; or (3)  Parking may not exceed a specified consecutive period of time. (b)  Each parking area or zone shall be marked or indicated by adequate signs setting forth the applicable restriction in a sufficiently legible manner. (Code 1989, § 18-21; Ord. No. 216, § 1, 11-11-1985) 
Sec. 46-35. - Compliance with no-parking or restricted parking markings or signs.     It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any street in the city where such street or place of such parking has painted thereat a yellow or no parking line, or has erected thereat signs providing for parking, or to fail to comply with such marking or sign which limits parking thereat. (Code 1989, § 18-22; Ord. No. 126, 4-9-1973) 
Sec. 46-36. - Enforcement; fine, impoundment of vehicle.     Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the city council from time to time. All parking enforcement officers and police officers shall enforce the provisions of this article, and shall be empowered to issue written citations requiring the accused to appear to answer the charge. In addition, where any vehicle has been left unattended in a restricted zone for 24 hours or more, the parking enforcement officer or police officer is authorized to cause the vehicle to be towed away to the nearest garage or other place of safety, at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. (Code 1989, § 18-23; Ord. No. 216, § 3, 11-11-1985; Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-14-2015) State Law reference— Impoundment of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206. 
Secs. 46-37—46-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES, MOTORCADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Operation of motor vehicles and motorcycles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7. 
Sec. 46-61. - Definitions. (a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Motorcade means an organized procession containing 25 or more vehicles, except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley.     Parade means any march or procession consisting of people, animals or vehicles or a combination thereof, except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley, which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.     Special event means any activity which occurs upon private or public property that will affect the ordinary use of public streets, rights-of-way or sidewalks. This includes, but is not limited to, fairs, festivals, foot runs and bicycle runs. (b)  Private social gatherings, neighborhood block parties and neighborhood parades conducted primarily on subdivision streets within the neighborhood and which will make only limited use of other city streets are not included in these definitions. However, no such event shall be held unless and until an exemption letter for such event has been obtained from the director of recreation and parks or his designee. No fee shall be charged for an exemption letter. (Code 1989, § 18-36; Ord. No. 370, § 1, 2-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-62. - Permit required.     No person or organization shall conduct a parade, motorcade or special event within the city, or knowingly participate in any such parade, motorcade or special event, unless and until a permit to conduct such parade, motorcade or special event has been obtained from the city traffic engineer, or, as hereinafter provided, from the city council. (Code 1989, § 18-37; Ord. No. 370, § 2, 2-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-63. - Parade, motorcade or special event for commercial purpose prohibited.     No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade, motorcade or special event which the city traffic engineer finds is to be held for the primary purpose of advertising any products, goods, wares, merchandise or events and is designed to be held primarily for private profit. Otherwise, permits shall be issued on a non-discriminatory basis. (Code 1989, § 18-38; Ord. No. 370, § 3, 2-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-64. - Interference with parade, motorcade or special event.     No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade, motorcade or special event conducted under permit from the city traffic engineer in violation of any of the terms of the permit, nor knowingly join in or participate in any permitted parade, motorcade or special event without the consent or over the objection of the permittee, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct. (Code 1989, § 18-39; Ord. No. 370, § 4, 2-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-65. - Permit application and fee.     An application for a permit shall be submitted to the city traffic engineer with a non-refundable application fee that shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the clerk of courts no later than 30 days prior to the proposed event. The city traffic engineer may, in his discretion, consider an application for a permit which is filed less than 30 days prior to the date of the event. The permit application shall be made in writing on a form approved by the city traffic engineer. The application shall contain the following information: (1)  The name, address and telephone number of the sponsoring organization or individual, including the name, address and telephone number of an individual who shall be designated as a contact person and agent for service of process; (2)  The proposed date, location, hours of operation and schedule of proposed events, including the location of the assembly area, the location of the disbanding area, and any route to be traveled; (3)  An estimate of the number of participants, and the number of individuals that will be utilized to monitor and control the event; (4)  A description of any sound amplification equipment proposed to be used; and (5)  Such other information as the city traffic engineer deems reasonably necessary to determine whether a permit may be issued. (Code 1989, § 18-40; Ord. No. 370, § 5, 2-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-66. - Standards for issuance or denial of permit.     The city traffic engineer may deny a permit upon reasonably determining that: (1)  The event will disrupt traffic within the city beyond practical solution; (2)  The event will unreasonably interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants; (3)  The location of the event will cause extreme hardship to adjacent businesses or residents; (4)  The event will require the diversion of so many public employees that allowing the event would unreasonably deny service to the remainder of the city; (5)  The event will interfere with another event for which a permit has been issued; and (6)  The applicant refuses to sign the permit indicating his willingness to abide by or comply with the provisions of this article and the conditions set forth in the permit. (Code 1989, § 18-41; Ord. No. 370, § 6, 2-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-67. - Departmental cost analysis; permit fee.     The city traffic engineer shall send copies of a permit application to all affected city departments. Each departmental activity required for the event shall be itemized, showing hourly rate and total cost. Costs shall only reflect those activities related to the management of streets. The total street management costs to the city shall be the sum of each department's costs, and shall be the amount of the permit fee. The permit fee shall not be applicable to any event sponsored or co-sponsored by the city, or to any event designated from time to time by resolution of the city council as a traditional or historic annual event. An example of a traditional or historic annual event is the Old Soldier's Day Parade. The city traffic engineer may develop a permit fee schedule based upon the size of the event, provided that the fee schedule is reasonably related to the actual street management costs of the city. The city traffic engineer shall also develop a clean-up cost deposit schedule based upon the size of the event. (Code 1989, § 18-42; Ord. No. 370, § 7, 2-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-68. - Issuance of permit.     Upon payment of the permit fee and clean-up cost deposit, and execution of the permit by the applicant indicating the applicant's agreement to abide by this article and the conditions set forth in the permit, the city traffic engineer shall issue the permit. The conditions of the permit shall include specifications as to the date, location, size and time limits for the event, limitations on amplification equipment, the maximum number and type of vehicles, if any, the maximum number of participants, and the minimum number of persons required to monitor the event. In addition, each permit shall contain a condition that the permittee shall hold the city harmless and indemnify the city, its officials and employees, from any and all claims or lawsuits for personal injury or property damage arising from or in any way connected to the event, except for any claims arising solely out of the negligent acts of the city, its officials or employees. In addition, the city traffic engineer may, in his discretion, require proof that the permittee has insurance, with limits of coverage, as determined by the city traffic engineer, adequate for the risks associated with the event and to support the permittee's indemnity obligations to the city. (Code 1989, § 18-43; Ord. No. 370, § 8, 2-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-69. - Limitation of liability.     This article shall not constitute a waiver of sovereign immunity, create rights in any third party, or impose upon the city or its officials or employees any liability or responsibility for any injury or damage to any person or property arising out of the event for which a permit has been issued. The city and its officials and employees shall not be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reason of inspections performed, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of the use of any city right-of-way. (Code 1989, § 18-44; Ord. No. 370, § 9, 2-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-70. - Sanitation and clean up.     A permit may be issued only after adequate waste disposal facilities have been identified and obtained by the permittee. The permittee will clean the rights-of-way of rubbish and debris, returning the rights-of-way to their previous condition, within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event. If the permittee completes the clean-up in a timely manner, the clean-up cost deposit shall be refunded. If the permittee fails to clean up such refuse, the city may perform the clean-up, and the clean-up cost deposit shall be forfeited. (Code 1989, § 18-45; Ord. No. 370, § 10, 2-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-71. - Revocation of permits. (a)  All permits issued pursuant to this article are temporary and do not vest any permanent rights. Any permit may be summarily revoked by the city traffic engineer upon a determination by the city traffic engineer that: (1)  The permit application contained incomplete or false information; (2)  The applicant is not complying with all terms and conditions of the permit or this article; or (3)  The occurrence of an emergency which threatens the safety of the public or property. (b)  Notice of the revocation shall be delivered in writing to the registered agent of the permittee designated in the permit application. Delivery may be by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, and notice shall be deemed given when personally served or when deposited in the mail, as the case may be. (Code 1989, § 18-46; Ord. No. 370, § 11, 2-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-72. - Appeals procedure.     Any applicant whose permit application has been denied or revoked may appeal from the determination of the city traffic engineer within five days thereafter to the city council, by filing a written notice of appeal for a hearing by the city council at its next meeting. Upon such appeal, the city council may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the determination of the city traffic engineer. (Code 1989, § 18-47; Ord. No. 370, § 12, 2-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-73. - Penalty.     In addition to any other remedy provided under this article or other applicable law, any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine according to the penalties described in section 1-8. Each day that an offense occurs or continues under this article shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. (Code 1989, § 18-49; Ord. No. 370, § 14, 2-19-1996) 
Secs. 46-74—46-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL MONITORING DEVICES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Traffic control signal monitoring devices generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20; permit to operate traffic control signal monitoring system, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-21. 
Sec. 46-92. - Authorization of traffic control signal monitoring devices.     Subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-14-21, the chief of police and the city council authorize the use of traffic control signal monitoring devices for purposes of automated traffic enforcement. Use of said devices shall be governed by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-20 through 40-14-24, and any other applicable provisions of law. (Code 1989, § 18-62; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 46-93. - Identification of intersections for use of traffic control signal monitoring devices.     The city department of public works shall be responsible for the identification and selection of intersections where traffic control signal monitoring devices will be utilized and for compliance with O.C.G.A. §§ 40-14-22 and 40-14-23. (Code 1989, § 18-63; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 46-94. - Enforcement.     The city police department shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20. (Code 1989, § 18-64; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 46-95. - Civil penalty.     The driver of a motor vehicle cited pursuant to this article shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty according to the penalties described in section 1-8. Citations shall be issued by the city police department in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f)(3)(B). (Code 1989, § 18-65; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 46-96. - Contesting the civil penalty. (a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(d), liability shall be determined based upon preponderance of the evidence. Prima facie evidence that the vehicle described in the citation issued pursuant to this article was operated in violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a), together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such violation the registered owner of the vehicle, shall permit the trier of fact in his discretion to infer that such owner of the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. Such an inference may be rebutted if the owner of the vehicle: (1)  Testifies under oath in open court that he was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation; (2)  Presents to the court prior to the return date established on the citation a certified copy of a police report showing that the vehicle had been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged violation; or (3)  Submits to the court prior to the return date established on the citation a sworn notarized statement identifying the name of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. (b)  The provisions of this article shall not limit law enforcement agencies to the use of traffic control signal monitoring devices in enforcing O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a); and, when there is evidence obtained from another source or sources which constitutes a prima facie case of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a), such violation may be prosecuted as otherwise provided by law in lieu of, but not limited to, enforcement under this article. (Code 1989, § 18-66; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 46-97. - Warning period.     In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f)(3)(B), only warning notices and not citations for violations shall be sent during the 30-day period following the installation of any traffic control signal monitoring device. (Code 1989, § 18-67; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 6-6-2005) 
Secs. 46-98—46-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - READY-MIX CONCRETE TRUCKS 
Sec. 46-125. - Restrictions on ready-mix concrete trucks. (a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any ready-mix concrete truck on the public roads of the city in such a manner so as to result in the spillage or leakage of concrete or similar debris onto any city road or walk. In the event of any such spill, it shall be the duty of the owner and operator of the truck to report the spill to the city department of public works within 24 hours of the spill. In addition, the owner shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city in removing the concrete and/or repairing the roadway. In the event that the owner fails to reimburse the city for such costs within 30 days after written notice, the city may pursue any and all civil remedies available to the city at law or in equity to recover its costs, including reasonable attorney's fees. Criminal prosecution for any violation of this article shall not relieve any owner from the obligation to reimburse the city for such costs; nor shall payment of such costs bar criminal prosecution for any violation of this article. (b)  In addition to those prohibitions listed above, it shall be unlawful to operate any ready-mix concrete truck on the public roads within the city unless such truck is equipped with a chute enclosure, or some other mechanism which precludes the leakage of concrete and other debris from leaking or escaping from the truck while traveling through or within the city. For purposes of this article, the term "truck" is defined to mean any vehicle with two or more axles used primarily for the purpose of transporting materials and products. (c)  The chute enclosure must meet the following requirements: (1)  The device must be 100 percent effective in keeping debris from coming out of the chute when the device is engaged; (2)  The device must be rigid, open and close, and lock and unlock automatically when the flop chute is lowered or raised; (3)  The device shall have no parts which may become clogged with concrete; (4)  The device must close the chute at the end and seal it completely. No debris shall be able to escape and fall from the chute while the truck is traveling; (5)  The device shall be coated with a reflective paint, tape or logo so that it is clearly visible at night; and (6)  The device shall be permanently attached to the chute of each truck. (d)  Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be fined according to the penalties described in section 1-8; and each violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such; and each day that a violation continues shall be punishable as a separate offense. (Code 1989, § 10-61; Ord. No. 417, § 1, 3-15-1999) 
Chapter 47 - RESERVED 
Chapter 48 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 48-1—48-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Taxicabs, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-25; regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
Sec. 48-19. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Taxicab means a motor vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers for compensation in the city and not operated on a fixed route. The term "taxicab" shall not include limousines regulated by the state public service commission. (Code 1989, § 13-146; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 48-20. - Permits required.     No permit is required if the operation of the taxicab in the city is limited solely to passing through the city without picking up a passenger or dropping off a passenger whose trip originated outside the city. (Code 1989, § 13-147; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 523, § 1, 3-3-2003) 
Sec. 48-21. - Classes of permits.     There shall be three classes of permits required under this article: (1)  Company permit. This permit applies to persons, firms, partnerships, corporations or other entities engaged in the business of operating a taxicab in the city, and which are subject to an occupation tax under chapter 42. (2)  Resident operator's permit. This permit applies to any person operating a taxicab on the streets of the city and who is operating under the auspices of a company permit. (3)  Nonresident operator's permit. This permit applies to any person operating a taxicab on the streets of the city and who is not operating under the auspices of a company subject to an occupation tax in the city. (Code 1989, § 13-148; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 48-22. - Company permit.     In order to secure a company permit, an applicant must provide information showing its qualifications on a form provided by the city, and must submit to a background investigation and fingerprinting. An applicant must: (1)  Be at least 21 years of age; (2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence, or a person who has otherwise been granted employment authorized by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service; (3)  Hold an occupation tax certificate issued by the city; (4)  Maintain an office within the city staffed at all times during hours of operation as outlined in this article by company employees, including a dispatcher, from which all dispatching of vehicles will be performed; (5)  Provide proof of insurance as required in this article. (Code 1989, § 13-149; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 48-23. - Convictions disqualifying applicant for a company permit.     No permit shall be issued if the applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses: (1)  Manslaughter, or negligent homicide, resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle. (2)  Driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, in the last five years. (3)  Any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle is used. (4)  Failure to stop and render aid or leaving the scene of an accident, as required under the laws of the state. (5)  Perjury or false swearing in making any statements under oath in connection with this application for permit. (6)  Perjury or the making of a false affidavit or statement under oath relating to the ownership or operation of motor vehicles. (7)  Convictions or forfeiture of bail on three charges of a violation of the state motor vehicle laws within a 12-month period. (8)  The violation of any law involving moral turpitude. (9)  Repeated violation of the city ordinances, county laws, or state laws which affect the safety of human life or limb on the streets of the city. (Code 1989, § 13-150; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 523, § 2, 3-3-2003) 
Sec. 48-24. - Place of operation.     No person to whom an occupation tax certificate to operate or engage in a taxicab business has been granted by lawful authority shall operate or carry on the business from any place in the city except the established place of business referred to and described in the application for an occupation tax certificate to operate or engage in the taxicab business. (Code 1989, § 13-151; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 48-25. - Hours of operation.     The standard hours of operations for any holder of a company permit to operate or engage in a taxicab business within the city shall be Monday through Sunday, 24 hours per day. (Code 1989, § 13-152; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 48-26. - Insurance required. (a)  No owner of a taxicab shall operate or authorize any other person to operate a taxicab in the city unless it is covered by a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state, which provides the following minimum coverage: (1)  $25,000.00 for injury to or death of one person in one accident; (2)  $50,000.00 for injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident; and (3)  $25,000.00 for injury or destruction of property of others in any one accident. (b)  Each taxicab operated within the city limits shall be required to carry and maintain in effect this minimum insurance coverage and provide current certificates of insurance evidencing such coverage, the name of the insurance company supplying the coverage and the policy number. The insurance must provide specific coverage for a vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers. (c)  If the term of said insurance coverage is less than a period of 12 months, on the first Monday of each month, the holder of the company permit shall provide to the chief of police or his designee either a current insurance identification card for each vehicle intended to be operated in the coming month or a verified statement from a licensed insurance agent or licensed insurance company within this state setting forth the identity of the vehicles for which coverage has been procured, by vehicle identification number, make and model, the amount of coverage afforded to each such vehicle and the term for which such coverage has been prepared by the taxicab company or taxicab driver. (d)  If the term of such insurance coverage is at least a period of 12 months, proof of such insurance coverage, together with a receipted premium from the insurer, or its duly authorized agent, showing payment of the premium on the policy for and during the period covered by the life of the occupational tax certificate, shall be provided to the city before a permit shall be issued. The insurance policy must provide and stipulate therein that the insurer will give notice to the city a minimum of 30 days before its termination or cancellation, for any reason, of the policy on the person insured. (e)  Failure to maintain such coverage shall constitute cause for revocation of a city permit. (f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to waive applicable state or federal laws, if any, which require a higher amount of minimum coverage. (Code 1989, § 13-153; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 523, § 3, 3-3-2003) 
Sec. 48-27. - Drivers' qualifications.     Before operating a taxicab within the city, a driver shall: (1)  Possess a Georgia class C driver's license, with a for-hire endorsement or a private background check certification, through the taxicab service or ride share network service that employs them; (2)  Be competent to operate a motor vehicle; (3)  Be familiar with the traffic laws and ordinances of the city; (4)  Not have been convicted of a felony unless ten years have elapsed since the date of completion of the felony sentence; (5)  Not have been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude within past ten years; (6)  Not have been classified as an habitual offender by the department of public safety for the previous five years; (7)  Not have had a driver's license revoked by the department of public safety for violations for the previous five years; (8)  Provide authorization and any information necessary to enable the director of public safety or his designee to investigate the driver's background, criminal history, and traffic record; (9)  Be of good character as determined by the aforesaid investigation; and (10)  Possess an operator's permit issued by the city. (Code 1989, § 13-154; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 523, § 4, 3-3-2003) 
Sec. 48-28. - Taxicab equipment.     All taxicabs operating in the city shall: (1)  Be equipped with a taximeter maintained in good working order at all times. Such taximeter shall be permanently affixed in front of the passenger's seat and be visible to them at all times. After sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. It shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. It shall be sealed at all points and connections that, if manipulated, would affect its correct reading and recording. (2)  Be affixed with a vehicle permit sticker issued by the director of public safety or his designee. Such stickers must at all times be displayed in the upper right corner of the rear window. Each vehicle will be assigned a numbered sticker, and that sticker shall not be used on any other vehicle. (3)  Such marking shall be affixed only by means of permanent vinyl lettering or paint, and shall be a minimum of four inches in height. The four-inch lettering requirement can be met if the logo is a minimum of four inches in height and the lettering within the logo is a minimum of two inches in height. (4)  Be marked with rates on the side of the vehicle so as to be plainly visible to persons seeking to use the taxicab. (5)  Maintain signage in the passenger compartment stating, in clearly legible lettering of a minimum of one inch in height, "The public is invited to contact the city department of public safety by calling (678)297-6306 to report any instance of a taxicab being operated while not in a clean and safe operating condition." (6)  Be equipped with a roof light permanently mounted on the roof of the vehicle and maintained in good working order at all times. (7)  Be maintained in good, safe and serviceable mechanical condition as verified in a statement signed by a technician at a location properly licensed to do business within the city, and be in compliance with all county and state licensing and emission standards. (8)  Be maintained in a clean condition, free from foreign matter and offensive odors. (9)  Transport as passengers only the number of persons specified by the vehicle manufacturer. (10)  The minimum weight of a taxicab shall be 2,000 pounds, as determined by the manufacturer's specifications. (11)  No vehicle operated as a taxicab shall be more than eight years old. (12)  No taxicab shall have less than three doors for loading passengers, and each taxicab must be a station wagon, a sedan, a minivan or a sports utility vehicle. All such vehicles shall meet the emission standards as set by federal guidelines for their particular class. (Code 1989, § 13-155; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 523, § 5, 3-3-2003) 
Sec. 48-29. - Log books. (a)  Daily trip sheets shall be maintained for all taxicabs operated within the city. The driver shall retain the trip sheets in the vehicle for a period of 72 hours from the time of the recorded trip, after which they will be maintained in the office of the company permit holder for a period of no less than 120 days. All trip sheets shall be subject to the inspection of the police chief or his designee. (b)  As used in this subsection, the term "trip sheet" means a daily log of all passengers, the time, place of entry and the destination of each passenger, the amount charged and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire. (Code 1989, § 13-156; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 48-30. - Transferability.     Any vehicle permit issued in accordance with this article shall not be transferable. (Code 1989, § 13-157; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 48-31. - Denial, suspension and revocation of permit. (a)  An application for a permit or a permit issued under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked for due cause as defined in subsection (c) of this section. (b)  The municipal court shall furnish a permit holder a notice setting forth the time, place, and purpose of a hearing at which it intends to consider the revocation or suspension of a permit. After a hearing, if the municipal court determines due cause exists, it may suspend, revoke or place on probation for a maximum of 12 months, with or without conditions, the permit. (c)  A permit may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: (1)  Where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for a permit. (2)  For failure to pay all fees, taxes, penalties or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article, and of this Code. (3)  For failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a permit. (4)  For violation of any part of this article by the permit holder, his agents, partners, officers, employees or contractors. (5)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse shall result in the automatic suspension of the permit. (6)  For unauthorized transfer or other misuse of the permit. (d)  An operator's permit may be suspended or revoked for having three or more moving violations in any 12-month period. (e)  Permit holders under this article are responsible for violations of this article by their vehicle operators whether such operators are direct employees or independent contractors. (f)  Permits issued under this article are not transferable. (Code 1989, § 13-158; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 523, § 6, 3-3-2003) 
Sec. 48-32. - Regulatory fee required.     A regulatory fee of $300.00 shall be required annually for a company permit and the resident operator's permits for drivers operating under the auspices of a company permit. A regulatory fee of $50.00 shall be required annually for a nonresident operator's permit. (Code 1989, § 13-159; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 523, § 7, 3-3-2003) 
Sec. 48-33. - Notification of new drivers.     It shall be the duty of a company permit holder to notify the director of public safety whenever a new driver is hired or terminated from employment. Failure to so notify can result in revocation of the permit. (Code 1989, § 13-160; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 48-34. - Violations. (a)  Repeated violations of traffic laws or ordinances, or of any ordinance provision regulating the conduct of taxicab drivers, shall be cause for revocation of said permit to operate in the city. (b)  It is a violation and grounds for suspension or revocation of an operator permit for any operator to: (1)  Commit more than three traffic infractions within any 12-month period; (2)  Be found guilty of a felony; (3)  Be guilty of reckless driving or driving or being in physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs; (4)  Fail to deliver to the city police department within 24 hours any property of value left in a vehicle; (5)  Allow a person to alight from the vehicle while it is in motion, or discharge a passenger at any place other than the curb or pavement edge; (6)  Allow a passenger to consume alcohol, intoxicating substances, or other controlled substances in the vehicle; (7)  Transport a passenger to a destination by a route that is not the safest and most direct, unless the passenger specifically authorizes such alternate or indirect route; (8)  Pick up any additional passengers without the express consent of the original passenger; (9)  Refuse to pick up as a passenger any person of proper deportment when the vehicle is available, or discriminate against any person because of race, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age, or mental or sensory handicap; (10)  Activate the meter when the vehicle is not engaged or fail to activate the meter at the beginning of each trip, unless the trip is made under contract; (11)  Activate equipment indicating the vehicle is engaged when it is not, or fail to activate such equipment when the vehicle is engaged; (12)  Engage in any unfair or deceptive acts or practices. (Code 1989, § 13-161; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 523, § 8, 3-3-2003) 
Sec. 48-35. - Enforcement and penalty. (a)  The police department and the code enforcement office shall enforce the regulations contained in this article. (b)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished according to the penalties described in section 1-8. Each separate occurrence shall be deemed a separate offense. (c)  The violation of the provisions of this article by any person, corporation, partnership or other entity may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city. (d)  Violations of any provision of this article by any permit holder shall be due cause for revocation of any city permit or certificate, after notice and hearing before the city municipal court. (Code 1989, § 13-162; Ord. No. 497, § I, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 48-36. - Miscellaneous.     Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit the charging of a flat rate for trips to and from Hartsfield International Airport, provided that such flat rates are conspicuously posted on the taxicab or set forth on a rate card provided to the customer prior to the trip. (Code 1989, § 13-163; Ord. No. 523, § 9, 3-3-2003) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1989 CODE     This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1989 Code, as updated through July 17, 2017, which are included herein. Sections of the 1989 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 1989 Code Section Section this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-7 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 1-10 1-10 1-11 1-11 2-1 2-1 2-2 2-2 2-3 2-4 2-4 2-5 2-5 2-6 2-6 2-7 2-7 2-8 2-8 2-9 2-9 2-10 2-10 2-11 2-11 2-12 2-12 2-13 2-13 2-14 2-14 2-15 2-41 2-55 2-42 2-56 2-43 2-57 2-44 2-58 2-45 2-59 2-46 2-60 2-61 2-79 2-62 2-80 2-63 2-81 2-64 2-82 2-65 2-83 2-81 2-110 2-82 2-111 2-83 2-112 2-84 2-113 2-85 2-114 2-86 2-115 2-87 2-116 2-89 2-117 2-116 2-150 2-117 2-151 2-118 2-152 2-119 2-153 2-120 2-154 2-121 2-155 2-122 2-156 2-123 2-157 2-124 2-158 2-125 2-159 2-126 2-160 2-141 2-189 2-142 2-190 2-143 2-191 2-144 2-192 2-145 2-193 2-146 2-194 2-147 2-195 2-149 2-196 2-150 2-197 2-151 2-198 2-152 2-199 2-153 2-200 2-154 2-201 2-155 2-202 2-157 2-203 2-158 2-204 3-1 4-1 3-2 4-2 3-3 4-3 3-4 4-4 3-5 4-5 3-6 4-6 3-7 4-7 3-8 4-8 3-9 4-9 3-10 4-10 3-11 4-11 3-12 4-12 3-13 4-13 3-14 4-14 3-15 4-15 3-16 4-16 3-17 4-17 3-18 4-18 3-20 4-19 3-21 4-20 3-22 4-21 3-23 4-22 3-24 4-23 3-25 4-24 3-26 4-25 3-27 4-26 3-28 4-27 3-29 4-28 3-30 4-29 3-40 4-47 3-41 4-48 3-42 4-49 3-43 4-50 3-44 4-51 3-45 4-52 3-46 4-53 3-47 4-54 3-50 4-83 3-51 4-84 3-52 4-85 3-53 4-86 3-60 4-116 3-61 4-117 3-62 4-118 3-63 4-119 3-70 4-137 3-71 4-138 3-72 4-139 3-73 4-140 3-74 4-141 3-80 4-166 3-81 4-167 3-90 4-188 3-100 4-215 3-110 4-239 3-120 4-257 3-130 4-278 3-140 4-305 3-150 4-329 3-160 4-347 3-170 4-368 3-171 4-369 3-180 4-397 3-180.1 4-398 3-180.2 4-399 3-181 4-400 3-182 4-401 3-183 4-402 3-184 4-403 3-190 4-422 3-191 4-423 3-192 4-424 3-193 4-425 3-200 4-449 3-201 4-450 3-202 4-451 3-203 4-452 4-1 6-1 4-2 6-2 5-1 8-2 5-2 8-3 5-3 8-4 5-5 8-5 5-6 8-179 5-7 8-180 5-8 8-181 5-9 8-182 5-10 8-183 5-11 8-184 5-20 26-137 5-21 26-138 5-22 26-139 5-23 26-140 5-24 26-141 5-25 26-142 5-27 26-143 5-28 26-144 5-29 26-145 5-30 26-146 5-31 26-147 5-33 26-148 5-38 8-135 5-39 8-136 5-40 8-137 5-41 8-138 5-42 8-139 5-43 8-140 5-44 8-141 5-45 8-142 5-46 8-143 5-47 8-144 5-48 8-145 5-49 8-146 5-50 8-147 5-51 8-148 5-52 8-149 5-53 8-150 5-54 8-151 5-55 8-152 5-56 8-153 5-57 8-154 5-58 8-155 5-118 18-19 5-119 18-20 5-120 18-21 5-121 18-22 5-122 18-23 5-123 18-24 5-124 18-25 5-125 18-26 5-126 18-27 5-127 18-28 5-128 18-29 5-129 18-30 5-130 18-31 5-131 18-32 5-132 18-33 5-133 18-34 5-134 18-35 5-135 18-36 5-136 18-37 5-141 8-68 5-142 8-69 5-143 8-70 5-145 8-71 5-146 8-72 5-147 8-73 5-148 8-74 5-149 8-75 5-181 8-96 5-182 8-97 5-183 8-98 5-186 8-100 5-187 8-101 6-1 12-1 6-2 12-2 6-3 12-3 6-4 12-4 7-1 14-1 7-2 14-2 7-3 14-3 7-4 14-4 7-5 14-5 7-6 14-6 7-7 14-7 7-8 14-8 7-9 14-9 7-10 14-10 7-11 14-11 7-12 14-12 8-1 42-1 8-3 42-2 8-4 42-3 8-5 42-4 8-21 42-187 8-22 42-188 8-23 42-189 8-24 42-190 8-25 42-191 8-26 42-192 8-27 42-193 8-28 42-194 8-29 42-195 8-30 42-196 8-31 42-197 8-32 42-198 8-33 42-199 8-34 42-200 8-51 42-120 8-61 42-139 8-62 42-140 8-63 42-141 8-64 42-142 8-65 42-143 8-66 42-144 8-67 42-145 8-68 42-146 8-69 42-147 8-70 42-148 8-71 42-149 8-72 42-150 8-73 42-151 8-74 42-152 8-75 42-153 8-76 42-154 8-77 42-155 8-78 42-156 8-79 42-157 8-80 42-158 8-81 42-159 9-1 20-1 9-3 20-2 9-4 20-3 9-5 20-4 9-6 20-5 9-12 20-7 9-13 20-8 9-14 20-9 9-15 20-10 9-16 20-11 9-20 20-34 9-22 20-35 9-23 20-36 9-24 20-37 9-25 20-38 9-26 20-39 9-27 20-40 9-28 20-41 9-29 20-42 9-30 20-43 9-51 20-62 9-52 20-63 9-53 20-64 9-54 20-65 9-55 20-66 9-56 20-67 9-57 20-68 10-1 22-1 10-2 22-2 10-3 22-3 10-4 22-4 10-5 22-5 10-19 26-85 10-20 26-86 10-21 26-87 10-22 26-88 10-23 26-89 10-24 26-90 10-25 26-91 10-26 26-92 10-30 26-19 10-31 26-20 10-32 26-21 10-33 26-22 10-34 26-23 10-35 26-24 10-36 26-25 10-37 26-26 10-38 26-27 10-39 26-28 10-40 26-29 10-41 26-30 10-42 26-31 10-43 26-32 10-44 26-33 10-45 26-34 10-61 46-125 11-50 38-1 11-51 38-2 11-52 38-3 11-53 38-4 11-54 38-5 11-55 38-6 11-56 38-7 11-57 38-8 11-58 38-9 11-59 38-10 11-60 38-11 11-61 38-12 11-62 38-13 11-63 38-14 11-64 38-15 11-65 38-16 11-66 38-17 11-67 38-18 11-68 38-19 11-69 38-20 11-70 38-21 11-71 38-22 11-81 38-34 11-82 38-35 11-83 38-36 11-84 38-37 11-85 38-38 11-86 38-39 11-87 38-40 11-88 38-41 11-89 38-42 11-90 38-43 11-100 38-54 11-101 38-55 11-102 38-56 11-103 38-57 11-104 38-58 11-105 38-59 12-17 28-1 12-19 10-207 12-20 10-127 12-21 44-48 12-29.1 42-55 12-29.2 42-56 12-29.3 42-57 12-29.4 42-58 12-29.5 42-59 12-29.6 42-60 12-29.7 42-61 12-29.8 42-62 12-29.9 42-63 12-29.10 42-64 12-29.11 42-65 12-29.12 42-66 12-29.13 42-67 12-29.14 42-68 12-29.15 42-69 12-29.16 42-70 12-29.18 42-71 12-29.19 42-72 12-29.20 42-73 12-29.21 42-74 12-29.22 42-75 12-29.23 42-76 12-29.24 42-77 12-29.25 42-78 12-29.26 42-79 12-29.27 42-80 12-29.28 42-81 12-29.29 42-82 12-29.30 42-83 12-29.31 42-84 12-29.32 42-85 12-29.33 42-86 12-29.34 42-87 12-30 10-366 12-31 10-367 12-32 10-368 12-33 10-369 12-34 10-370 12-35 10-371 12-36 10-372 12-37 10-373 12-51 10-177 12-52 10-178 12-53 10-179 12-54 10-180 12-55 10-181 12-56 10-182 12-57 10-183 12-71 10-336 12-72 10-337 12-73 10-338 12-74 10-339 12-75 10-340 12-76 10-341 12-77 10-342 12-78 10-343 12-79 10-344 12-80 10-345 12-81 10-346 12-101 10-54 12-102 10-55 12-103 10-56 12-104 10-57 12-105 10-58 12-106 10-59 12-107 10-60 12-108 10-61 12-109 10-62 12-110 10-63 12-111 10-64 12-112 10-65 12-113 10-66 12-121 10-91 12-122 10-92 12-123 10-93 12-124 10-94 12-125 10-95 12-126 10-96 12-127 10-97 12-128 10-98 12-129 10-99 12-141 10-238 12-142 10-239 12-143 10-240 12-144 10-241 12-145 10-242 12-146 10-243 12-147 10-244 12-148 10-245 12-149 10-246 12-150 10-247 12-151 10-248 12-185 10-19 12-186 10-20 12-187 10-21 12-188 10-22 12-189 10-23 12-190 10-24 12-191 10-25 12-192 10-424 12-193 10-425 12-201 42-29 12-202 42-30 12-203 42-31 12-204 42-32 12-205 42-33 12-206 10-405 12-207 10-153 12-208 10-154 12-209 10-310 12-210 10-311 12-211 10-312 12-212 10-313 12-213 10-314 12-214 10-315 12-215 10-316 13-1 30-1 13-2 30-2 13-3 30-3 13-3.1 30-4 13-4 30-5 13-5 30-6 13-6 30-7 13-20 26-113 13-21 26-114 13-22 26-115 13-23 26-116 13-24 26-117 13-25 26-118 13-26 26-119 13-41 16-19 13-42 16-20 13-43 16-21 13-44 16-22 13-45 16-23 13-46 16-24 13-47 16-25 13-76 16-54 13-101 26-57 13-102 26-58 13-103 26-59 13-104 26-60 13-105 26-61 13-106 26-62 13-107 26-63 13-108 30-33 13-108 30-34 13-108 30-35 13-108 30-36 13-108 30-37 13-108 30-38 13-108 30-39 13-146 48-19 13-147 48-20 13-148 48-21 13-149 48-22 13-150 48-23 13-151 48-24 13-152 48-25 13-153 48-26 13-154 48-27 13-155 48-28 13-156 48-29 13-157 48-30 13-158 48-31 13-159 48-32 13-160 48-33 13-161 48-34 13-162 48-35 13-163 48-36 14-1 32-1 14-2 32-2 14-3 32-3 14-4 32-4 14-5 32-5 14-20 32-29 14-21 32-30 14-22 32-31 14-23 32-32 14-24 32-33 14-25 32-34 14-26 32-35 14-27 32-36 14-28 32-37 14-29 32-38 14-30 32-39 14-31 32-40 15-1 34-1 15-2 34-2 15-3 34-3 15-4 34-4 15-5 34-5 15-20 34-29 15-21 34-30 15-23 34-31 15-24 34-32 15-25 34-33 15-26 34-34 15-27 34-35 15-28 34-36 15-29 34-37 15-30 34-38 15-31 34-39 15-32 34-40 15-33 34-41 15-34 34-42 16-1 36-1 16-2 36-2 16-3 36-3 16-4 36-4 16-5 36-5 16-6 36-6 16-7 36-7 16-8 36-8 16-9 36-9 16-10 36-10 16-31 36-39 16-32 36-40 16-33 36-41 16-34 36-42 16-35 36-43 16-36 36-44 16-37 36-62 16-38 36-63 16-39 36-64 16-40 36-65 16-41 36-66 16-42 36-67 16-43 36-68 16-44 36-69 16-45 36-70 16-46 36-71 17-1 40-1 17-20 40-21 17-21 40-22 17-22 40-23 17-23 40-24 17-24 40-25 17-25 40-26 17-26 40-27 17-27 40-28 17-28 40-29 17-29 40-30 17-30 40-31 17-31 40-32 17-32 40-33 17-33 40-34 17-34 40-35 17-35 40-36 17-36 40-37 17-37 40-38 17-38 40-39 17-51 40-67 17-52 40-68 17-53 40-69 17-54 40-70 17-55 40-71 17-57 40-72 17-81 40-103 17-82 40-104 17-85 40-105 17-100 40-126 17-101 40-127 17-102 40-128 17-103 40-129 17-104 40-130 17-105 40-131 17.5-20 44-1 17.5-21 44-70 17.5-22 44-71 17.5-23 44-72 17.5-24 44-73 17.5-25 44-74 17.5-26 44-75 17.5-27 44-76 17.5-28 44-77 17.5-30 44-21 18-1 46-1 18-2 46-2 18-3 46-3 18-4 46-4 18-6 46-5 18-7 46-6 18-8 46-7 18-20 46-33 18-21 46-34 18-22 46-35 18-23 46-36 18-36 46-61 18-37 46-62 18-38 46-63 18-39 46-64 18-40 46-65 18-41 46-66 18-42 46-67 18-43 46-68 18-44 46-69 18-45 46-70 18-46 46-71 18-47 46-72 18-49 46-73 18-62 46-92 18-64 46-94 18-65 46-95 18-66 46-96 18-67 46-97  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION     This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. Legislation  Date Section  Section this Code Ord. No. 79 7-31-1961 1 36-2 2 36-3 3 36-4 — 36-1 Ord. No. 81 11-20-1961 1 14-1 2 14-4 3 14-5 4 14-6 5 14-7 6 14-8 7 14-9 8 14-2 — 14-3 — 14-11 Ord. No. 87 9-3-1962 3 30-3 4.1 30-5 8.2 46-6 8.10 46-7 Ord. No. 95 10-26-1965 1 20-9 2 20-9 Ord. No. 101 11-8-1966 — 42-120 Ord. No. 104 2-14-1967 35 4-13 Ord. No. 106 10-9-1967 — 14-10 Ord. No. 110 11-29-1969 — 22-1 Ord. No. 114 4-12-1971 1 44-48 Ord. No. 123 10-23-1972 1 40-1 Ord. No. 140 11-18-1972 3 46-5 Ord. No. 126 4-9-1973 — 46-35 Ord. No. 131 9-10-1973 1 30-1 — 30-2 Ord. No. 139 10-28-1974 1 10-367 2 10-366 3 10-370 4 10-371 5 10-372 6 10-368 7 10-369 8 10-373 Ord. No. 140 11-18-1974 1 46-4 Ord. No. 141 4-28-1975 1 4-12 Ord. No. 142 8-25-1975 1 12-1 — 12-3 — 12-4 Ord. No. 158 10-23-1978 1 2-5 Ord. No. 159 11-6-1978 1 42-1 Ord. No. 164 3-12-1979 (A) 26-137 (B) 26-138 (C) 26-139 (D) 26-140 (E) 26-141 (F) 26-142 (H) 26-143 (I) 26-144 (J) 26-145 (K) 26-146 (L) 26-147 (N) 26-148 Ord. No. 165 5-14-1979 4 20-5 11 20-2 12 20-4 13 20-3 Ord. No. 167 7-23-1979 (A) 26-19 — 26-21 (B) 26-22 (C) 26-20 (D) 26-23 (E) 26-24 (F) 26-26 (G) 26-27 (H) 26-29 (I) 26-28 (J) 26-30 (K) 26-32 (L) 26-25 (M) 26-31 (N) 26-33 (P) 26-34 Ord. No. 173 1-22-1980 15 10-207 Ord. No. 176 3-10-1980 1 40-21 2 40-22 3 40-24 4 40-25 5 40-26 6 40-29 7 40-28 — 40-30 8 40-28 9 40-31 10 40-32 11 40-33 12 40-27 13 40-36 14 40-23 15 40-37 16 40-38 17 40-39 19 40-36 20 40-34 21 40-35 Ord. No. 178 8-11-1980 — 34-2 Res. No. 104 10-27-1980 1 32-29 2 32-30 3 32-31 4 32-31 5 32-32 6 32-33 7 32-34 8 32-35 — 32-38 9 32-36 10 32-37 11 32-39 12 32-40 Res. No. 137 9-13-1982 1 34-3 2 34-3 3 34-3 Ord. No. 187 9-20-1982 1 38-1 2 38-10 4 38-12 5 38-13 6 38-2 7 38-3 8 38-4 9 38-8 10 38-5 11 38-9 12 38-6 13 38-7 14 38-3 — 38-16 15 38-17 16 20-8 17 38-14 18 38-15 19 38-18 20 38-19 21 38-20 22 38-21 Ord. No. 188-A 2-28-1983 1 8-179 2 8-180 3 8-181 4 8-2 6 8-3 7 8-182 8 8-4 9 8-183 Res. No. 148 3-28-1983 — 42-3 Res. of 3-28-1983 3-28-1983 — 42-2 Ord. No. 189 6-30-1983 — 2-6 Ord. No. 193 12-15-1983 11.1 28-1 11.2 28-1 11.3 28-1 11.4 28-1 Ord. No. 199 5-14-1984 — 20-8 Ord. of 7-9-1984 7-9-1984 — 2-7 Ord. No. 204 10-22-1984 2 20-35 3 20-36 4 20-37 5 20-38 6 20-39 7 20-40 8 20-41 9 20-42 10 20-43 — 20-34 Ord. No. 204-B 1-28-1985 2.0 18-20 3.1 18-21 3.2 18-22 4 18-19 5.0 18-23 6.0 18-24 6.1 18-24 6.2 18-25 6.3 18-26 6.5 18-28 6.6 18-29 6.7 18-26 6.8 18-30 6.9 18-31 7.1 18-32 7.2 18-33 7.3 18-34 7.4 18-27 7.5 18-35 8.1 18-36 8.2 18-37 Ord. No. 205 2-11-1985 1 10-127 2 10-127 3 10-127 4 10-127 Ord. No. 207 3-25-1985 — 10-207 Ord. No. 207-A 3-25-1985 1 8-135 2 8-135 3 8-135 4 8-137 5 8-136 6 8-141 7 8-142 8 8-143 9 8-144 10 8-145 11 8-140 12 8-138 13 8-139 14 8-146 15 8-147 16 8-148 17 8-149 18 8-150 19 8-151 20 8-152 21 8-153 22 8-154 23 8-155 Ord. No. 209 5-27-1985 1 26-86 2(a) 26-87 2(b) 26-88 3 26-89 4 26-92 5 26-90 6 26-91 Ord. No. 213 8-12-1985 — 36-5 Ord. No. 214 8-12-1985 — 32-1 — 32-2 — 32-3 Ord. No. 215 10-14-1985 2 22-3 Res. of 10-14-1985 10-14-1985 — 34-1 Ord. No. 216 11-11-1985 1 46-34 2 46-33 3 46-36 Res. of 2-10-1986 2-10-1986 — 22-2 Ord. No. 218-A 9-22-1986 1.001 4-2 1.002 4-1 1.003 4-3 1.004 4-4 1.005 4-5 1.006 4-6 1.007 4-7 1.008 4-8 1.009 4-9 1.010 4-10 1.011 4-17 1.012 4-18 1.014 4-19 1.015 4-20 1.016 4-21 1.017 4-22 1.018 4-23 1.019 4-24 1.020 4-25 1.022 4-27 1.023 4-28 1.024 4-29 1.025 4-47 1.026 4-48 1.027 4-49 1.028 4-50 1.029 4-51 1.030 4-52 1.031 4-1 1.032 4-83 1.033 4-84 1.034 4-85 1.035 4-86 1.036 4-11 1.037 4-116 1.038 4-117 1.039 4-118 1.040 4-119 1.044 4-166 1.045 4-167 Ord. No. 220 11-25-1986 1 20-7 Ord. No. 225 1-26-1987 A 8-5 Res. of 5-11-1987 5-11-1987 — 2-2 Ord. No. 226 5-27-1987 1 12-2 Ord. No. 229 8-10-1987 1 46-1 Res. of 8-10-1987 8-10-1987 — 6-1 Ord. No. 230-A 9-14-1987 1 36-39 2 36-40 3 36-41 4 36-42 5 36-43 Ord. No. 230 9-28-1987 1 36-6 2 36-7 3 36-8 4 36-9 5 36-10 Ord. of 3-14-1988(1) 3-14-1988(1) 1 2-58 Ord. of 3-14-1988(2) 3-14-1988(2) 1 2-1 2 2-1 3 2-1 Ord. of 3-28-1988(1) 3-28-1988(1) 1 2-55 2 2-57 3 2-60 4 2-56 Ord. No. 241-A 4-25-1988 1 40-103 2 40-104 5A 40-105 Ord. No. 242 4-25-1988 1 34-29 2 34-30 4 34-31 5 34-32 6 34-33 7 34-34 8 34-35 9 34-36 10 34-37 11 34-38 12 34-39 13 34-40 14 34-41 15 34-42 Ord. No. 247 9-26-1988 A 8-2 — 8-3 Ord. No. 253-A 2-13-1989 2 46-2 — 46-3 Res. No. 300 2-13-1989 1 34-5 Res. No. 308 2-27-1989 1 34-4 Ord. No. 254 3-13-1989 2 46-1 Ord. No. 256 5-8-1989 1 42-187 2 42-188 3 42-189 4 42-190 5 42-191 6 42-192 7 42-193 8 42-194 9 42-195 10 42-196 11 42-197 12 42-198 13 42-200 14 42-199 Ord. No. 257 5-8-1989 1 20-62 2 20-63 3 20-64 4 20-65 5 20-66 6 20-67 7 20-68 Ord. No. 260 7-10-1989 1 4-22 Ord. No. 262 9-25-1989 — 46-2 Ord. No. 263 10-23-1989 1 42-139 2 42-140 3 42-141 4 42-142 5 42-143 6 42-144 7 42-145 8 42-146 9 42-147 10 42-148 11 42-149 12 42-150 13 42-151 14 42-152 15 42-153 16 42-154 17 42-155 18 42-156 19 42-157 20 42-158 21 42-159 22 42-139 Ord. No. 264 10-23-1989 1 36-2 Ord. No. 266 11-27-1989 1 2-79 2 2-80 3 2-81 4 2-82 5(a) 2-83 5(b) 2-83 Ord. No. 269 1-22-1990 1 40-67 2 40-68 3 40-69 4 40-70 5 40-71 7 40-72 Ord. No. 270 2-12-1990 1 8-184 2 8-184 3 8-184 4 8-184 Ord. No. 271 2-12-1990 2 34-31 3 34-36 4 34-39 Ord. No. 273 3-26-1990 1 10-336 2 10-337 3 10-338 4 10-339 5 10-340 6 10-341 7 10-342 8 10-343 9 10-344 10 10-345 11 10-346 Ord. No. 274 4-9-1990 1 8-68 2 8-69 3 8-70 5 8-71 6 8-72 7 8-73 8 8-74 9 8-75 Ord. No. 276 6-11-1990 1 18-24 — 18-25 — 18-26 — 18-27 — 18-30 — 18-31 — 18-33 — 18-36 — 18-37 — 36-41 — 36-42 — 36-43 2 36-44 Ord. No. 277 7-23-1990 1A 38-1 1B 38-3 1C 38-10 1D 38-11 1E 38-13 1F 38-17 Ord. No. 278 7-23-1990 1 2-81 2 2-79 — 2-80 — 2-82 Res. No. 378 12-17-1990 — 42-4 Res. No. 383 1-20-1991 — 2-2 Ord. No. 280 1-28-1991 1 8-96 2 8-97 3 8-98 6 8-100 7 8-101 Res. No. 396 4-8-1991 — 20-10 Ord. No. 286 5-13-1991 1 32-4 2 32-4 3 32-4 Ord. No. 289 9-9-1991 1 10-54 2 10-55 3 10-56 4 10-91 5 10-57 6 10-58 7 10-59 8 10-60 9 10-61 10 10-92 11 10-93 12 10-94 13 10-95 14 10-96 15 10-97 16 10-98 17 10-99 18 10-62 19 10-63 20 10-64 — 10-65 22 10-66 Ord. No. 290 11-11-1991 1 10-238 2 10-239 3 10-240 4 10-241 5 10-242 6 10-243 7 10-244 8 10-245 9 10-246 10 10-247 Ord. No. 309 9-28-1992 — 46-2 Ord. No. 314 10-12-1992 1 38-1 2 38-5 3 38-6 4 38-14 — 38-15 — 38-16 — 38-17 Ord. No. 317 5-24-1993 1 2-110 2 2-111 3 2-112 4 2-113 5 2-114 6 2-115 7 2-116 Ord. No. 319 9-27-1993 1 20-11 Ord. No. 321 10-11-1993 1 10-55 2 10-55 3 10-56 — 10-60 Ord. No. 327 12-20-1993 1 2-1 Ord. No. 329 1-24-1994 1 22-4 2 22-4 3 22-4 4 22-4 Res. No. 536 6-13-1994 1 38-43 2 38-43 Ord. No. 348 6-20-1994 1 46-2 Ord. No. 353 9-26-1994 1 2-117 Ord. No. 354 12-19-1994 1 38-34 2 38-35 3 38-36 4 38-37 5 38-38 6 38-39 7 38-40 8 38-41 9 38-42 Ord. No. 355 12-20-1994 1 42-55 2 42-56 3 42-57 4 42-58 5 42-59 6 42-60 7 42-61 8 42-62 9 42-63 10 42-64 11 42-65 12 42-66 13 42-67 14 42-68 15 42-69 16 42-70 18 42-71 19 42-72 20 42-73 21 42-74 22 42-75 23 42-76 24 42-77 25 42-78 26 42-79 27 42-80 28 42-81 29 42-82 30 42-83 31 42-84 32 42-85 33 42-86 Ord. No. 359 4-10-1995 1 4-22 2 4-28 Ord. No. 365 6-19-1995 1 2-1 Ord. No. 366 8-28-1995 1 42-55 2 42-56 3 42-57 4 42-58 5 42-59 6 42-60 7 42-61 8 42-62 9 42-63 10 42-64 11 42-65 12 42-66 13 42-67 14 42-68 15 42-69 16 42-70 18 42-71 19 42-72 20 42-73 21 42-74 22 42-75 23 42-76 24 42-77 25 42-78 26 42-79 27 42-80 28 42-81 29 42-82 30 42-83 31 42-84 32 42-85 33 42-86 Ord. No. 370 2-19-1996 1 46-61 2 46-62 3 46-63 4 46-64 5 46-65 6 46-66 7 46-67 8 46-68 9 46-69 10 46-70 11 46-71 12 46-72 14 46-73 Ord. No. 373 3-25-1996 — 4-28 — 4-29 — 4-188 — 4-215 — 4-257 — 4-278 Ord. No. 374 4-1-1996 1 16-19 2 16-20 3 16-21 4 16-22 5 16-23 6 16-24 7 16-25 Ord. No. 375 4-1-1996 — 46-2 Ord. No. 379 6-24-1996 1 2-8 — 2-9 — 2-10 — 2-11 — 2-12 Ord. No. 385 1-27-1997 — 46-2 Ord. No. 387 4-7-1997 1 10-19 2 10-20 3 10-21 4 10-22 5 10-23 6 10-24 7 10-25 Res. No. 662 6-30-1997 I 2-4 II 2-4 Ord. No. 394 8-4-1997 1 44-1 — 44-21 — 44-70 — 44-71 — 44-72 — 44-73 — 44-74 — 44-75 — 44-76 — 44-77 Ord. No. 397 12-16-1997 1 42-189 2 42-199 Ord. No. 400 2-16-1998 1 38-22 Ord. No. 403 4-6-1998 1 42-58 Ord. No. 423 6-21-1998 1 46-2 Ord. No. 410 8-24-1998 1 40-126 2 40-127 3 40-128 4 40-129 5 40-130 6 40-131 Ord. No. 411 8-24-1998 1 46-1 Ord. No. 412 9-21-1998 1 38-54 2 38-55 3 38-56 4 38-57 5 38-58 6 38-59 Ord. No. 739 9-28-1998 — 16-54 Ord. No. 417 3-15-1999 1 46-125 Ord. No. 421 4-3-1999 1 38-35 5-3-1999 2 38-36 3 38-38 Ord. No. 429 9-20-1999 1 26-57 2 26-58 3 26-59 4 26-60 5 26-61 6 26-62 7 26-63 Res. No. 800 10-18-1999 — 22-5 Ord. No. 437 12-20-1999 1 36-62 2 36-63 3 36-64 4 36-65 5 36-66 6 36-67 7 36-68 8 36-69 9 36-70 10 36-71 Ord. No. 439 3-6-2000 1 20-8 Ord. No. 442 6-5-2000 1 2-150 2 2-151 3 2-152 4 2-153 5 2-154 6 2-155 7 2-156 8 2-157 9 2-158 10 2-159 11 2-160 Ord. No. 443 6-6-2000 1 42-189 Ord. No. 448 8-21-2000 1 2-2 Ord. No. 449 8-21-2000 1 46-2 2 46-2 3 46-2 Ord. No. 455 11-6-2000 1 38-36 Ord. No. 457 12-18-2000 1 42-120 2 42-143 Ord. No. 473 5-7-2001 1 36-62 2 36-63 3 36-64 4 36-65 5 36-66 6 36-67 7 36-68 8 36-69 9 36-70 10 36-71 Ord. No. 480 8-27-2001 1 10-424 — 10-425 Ord. No. 485 12-17-2001 1 42-29 2 42-30 3 42-31 4 42-32 5 42-33 Ord. No. 487 2-4-2002 1 46-2 2 46-2 3 46-2 4 46-2 5 46-2 6 46-2 7 46-2 8 46-2 9 46-2 10 46-2 11 46-2 12 46-2 13 46-2 14 46-2 15 46-2 16 46-2 17 46-2 18 46-2 19 46-2 20 46-2 21 46-2 22 46-2 23 46-2 24 46-2 25 46-2 26 46-2 27 46-2 28 46-2 29 46-2 Ord. No. 489 2-4-2002 1 30-6 Ord. No. 497 6-17-2002 I 48-19 — 48-20 — 48-21 — 48-22 — 48-23 — 48-24 — 48-25 — 48-26 — 48-27 — 48-28 — 48-29 — 48-30 — 48-31 — 48-32 — 48-33 — 48-34 — 48-35 Ord. No. 498 7-15-2002 I 38-54 — 38-55 — 38-56 — 38-57 — 38-58 — 38-59 Ord. No. 505 9-23-2002 — 38-35 — 38-36 Ord. No. 506 9-23-2002 — 28-1 Ord. No. 507 9-23-2002 — 42-4 — 42-187 — 48-188 — 42-190 — 42-192 — 42-193 — 42-194 — 42-195 — 42-196 — 42-198 — 42-200 Ord. No. 512 12-2-2002 1 4-17 Ord. No. 513 12-2-2002 1 4-6 Res. No. 991 12-16-2002 — 14-12 Ord. No. 515 1-21-2003 1 4-9 Ord. No. 523 3-3-2003 1 48-20 2 48-23 3 48-26 4 48-27 5 48-28 6 48-31 7 48-32 8 48-34 9 48-36 Ord. No. 524 3-3-2003 1 4-17 Ord. No. 532 12-15-2003 1 4-17 Ord. No. 535 2-2-2004 1 30-33 — 30-34 — 30-35 — 30-36 — 30-37 — 30-38 — 30-39 Ord. No. 538 2-23-2004 — 42-187 — 42-188 — 42-189 — 42-190 — 42-191 — 42-192 — 42-193 — 42-194 — 42-195 — 42-196 — 42-197 — 42-198 — 42-199 — 42-200 Ord. No. 540 3-15-2004 1 26-85 — 26-86 — 26-87 — 26-88 — 26-89 — 26-90 — 26-91 — 26-92 Ord. No. 543 4-19-2004 — 46-2 Ord. No. 562 12-13-2004 1 2-60 Res. No. 1117 2-21-2005 1 2-13 2 2-13 3 2-13 Ord. No. 566 4-18-2005 — 4-6 Ord. No. 567 5-23-2005 — 16-19 — 16-20 — 16-21 — 16-22 — 16-23 — 16-24 — 16-25 Ord. No. 568 6-6-2005 1 46-92 — 46-94 — 46-95 — 46-96 — 46-97 Ord. No. 570 6-20-2005 — 16-54 Res. No. 1153 7-25-2005 — 2-14 Ord. No. 573 9-6-2005 — 4-2 — 4-6 — 4-8 — 4-12 — 4-13 — 4-14 — 4-15 — 4-16 — 4-19 — 4-27 — 4-47 — 4-83 Ord. No. 575 10-3-2005 1 4-329 Ord. No. 576 10-3-2005 1 26-113 — 26-114 — 26-115 — 26-116 — 26-118 — 26-119 Ord. No. 581 2-20-2006 1 2-1 Ord. No. 587 5-1-2006 1 2-189 2 2-190 3 2-191 4 2-192 5 2-193 6 2-194 7 2-195 9 2-196 10 2-197 11 2-198 12 2-199 13 2-200 14 2-201 15 2-202 17 2-203 18 2-204 Ord. No. 593 6-19-2006 1(exh. A) 42-56 — 42-57 — 42-58 — 42-62 — 42-65 — 42-66 — 42-73 — 42-74 — 42-78 Ord. No. 594 6-19-2006 — 16-54 Ord. No. 595 6-19-2006 — 20-65 Ord. No. 598 7-10-2006 1 4-347 Ord. No. 599 8-21-2006 — 46-2 Ord. No. 600 9-5-2006 1 26-116 Ord. No. 605 5-21-2007 — 14-12 Res. No. 1299 6-4-2007 — 16-54 Ord. No. 617 2-18-2008 — 46-2 Ord. No. 621 5-19-2008 1 30-4 Ord. No. 622 5-19-2008 1 4-50 2 4-368 — 4-369 Ord. No. 623 5-19-2008 1 10-405 Res. No. 1358 6-2-2008 — 16-54 Res. No. 1371 9-15-2008 — 2-15 Ord. No. 628 2-2-2009 1 46-2 2 46-2 3 46-2 4 46-2 5 46-2 Res. No. 1422 6-15-2009 — 16-54 Ord. No. 632 6-22-2009 1 44-48 Ord. No. 633 6-22-2009 1 42-188 2 42-190 Ord. No. 637 12-7-2009 1(exh. A) 36-62 — 36-63 — 36-64 — 36-65 — 36-66 — 36-67 — 36-68 — 36-69 — 36-70 — 36-71 2 36-62 — 36-63 — 36-64 — 36-65 — 36-66 — 36-67 — 36-68 — 36-69 — 36-70 — 36-71 Res. No. 1493 6-7-2010 — 16-54 Ord. No. 643 7-19-2010 1 4-17 Ord. No. 645 9-20-2010 1 46-2 2 46-2 3 46-2 4 46-2 5 46-2 6 46-2 7 46-2 8 46-2 9 46-2 10 46-2 11 46-2 12 46-2 13 46-2 14 46-2 15 46-2 16 46-2 17 46-2 18 46-2 19 46-2 20 46-2 21 46-2 22 46-2 23 46-2 24 46-2 25 46-2 26 46-2 27 46-2 28 46-2 29 46-2 30 46-2 31 46-2 32 46-2 33 46-2 34 46-2 Ord. No. 647 2-7-2011 1 10-153 — 10-154 Res. No. 1535 2-21-2011 — 42-87 Ord. No. 648 3-21-2011 1 32-5 Ord. No. 649 5-16-2011 1 4-53 — 4-54 Ord. No. 650 6-13-2011 1 4-118 Res. No. 1557 6-13-2011 — 16-54 Ord. No. 658 8-22-2011 1 4-397 — 4-400 — 4-401 — 4-402 — 4-403 Ord. No. 659 12-19-2011 1 4-47 Ord. No. 660 12-19-2011 1 2-55 2 2-56 3 2-57 4 2-58 6 2-60 Ord. No. 664 4-16-2012 1 4-137 — 4-138 — 4-139 — 4-140 — 4-141 Ord. No. 662 5-21-2012 1 2-189 2 2-190 3 2-191 4 2-192 5 2-193 6 2-194 7 2-195 9 2-196 10 2-197 11 2-198 12 2-199 13 2-200 14 2-201 15 2-202 17 2-203 18 2-204 Res. No. 1617 6-4-2012 — 16-54 Ord. No. 668 8-6-2012 1 4-398 — 4-399 Res. No. 1626 8-6-2012 — 14-12 Ord. No. 669 11-5-2012 1 46-2 2 46-2 3 46-2 4 46-2 5 46-2 6 46-2 7 46-2 8 46-2 9 46-2 10 46-2 11 46-2 12 46-2 13 46-2 14 46-2 15 46-2 16 46-2 17 46-2 18 46-2 19 46-2 20 46-2 21 46-2 22 46-2 23 46-2 24 46-2 25 46-2 26 46-2 27 46-2 28 46-2 29 46-2 30 46-2 31 46-2 Ord. No. 670 12-3-2012 1 30-7 Ord. No. 673 3-25-2013 1 4-422 — 4-423 — 4-424 — 4-425 Ord. No. 674 4-8-2013 1 10-310 — 10-311 — 10-312 — 10-313 — 10-314 — 10-315 — 10-316 Res. No. 1667 6-3-2013 — 16-54 Ord. No. 679 7-15-2013 1 4-6 — 4-18 — 4-47 — 4-7 — 4-24 — 4-29 — 4-50 — 4-119 2 4-1 3 4-6 4 4-9 5 4-11 6 4-18 7 4-23 8 4-26 9 4-47 10 4-49 11 4-51 12 4-53 13 4-54 14 4-141 15 4-215 16 4-239 17 4-257 18 4-305 19 4-449 — 4-450 — 4-451 — 4-452 Ord. No. 683 10-7-2013 — 10-177 — 10-178 — 10-179 — 10-180 — 10-181 — 10-182 — 10-183 Ord. No. 682 10-17-2013 1 2-59 Res. No. 1723 6-2-2014 — 16-54 Ord. No. 694 9-15-2014 1 4-49 2 4-400 Ord. No. 697 10-6-2014 1 10-310 — 10-311 — 10-312 — 10313 — 10-314 — 10-315 — 10-316 Ord. No. 698 12-1-2014 1 36-62 2 36-63 3 36-64 4 36-65 5 36-66 6 36-67 7 36-68 8 36-69 9 36-70 10 36-71 Ord. No. 701 2-23-2015 1 4-49 Res. No. 1785 6-1-2015 — 16-54 Ord. No. 706 7-20-2015 I 42-120 II 42-120 Ord. No. 709 8-17-2015 2 42-189 Ord. No. 714 9-28-2015 — 24-31 Ord. No. 717 12-14-2015 1 46-33 2 46-36 Ord. No. 722 3-21-2016 1 4-1 2 4-28 3 4-49 4 4-137 5 4-141 6 4-188 Res. No. 1829 3-21-2016 — 2-1 Ord. No. 723 4-4-2016 12-161 10-275 12-162 10-276 12-163 10-277 12-164 10-278 12-165 10-279 12-166 10-280 12-167 10-281 12-168 10-282 12-169 10-283 12-170 10-284 12-171 10-285 12-172 10-286 12-173 10-287 12-174 10-288 Ord. No. 724 4-18-2016 — 2-3 Ord. No. 725 5-23-2016 — 30-7 Res. No. 1847 6-6-2016 — 16-54 Ord. No. 728 9-19-2016 1 4-404 Ord. No. 729 9-26-2016 — 10-313 Ord. No. 735 3-20-2017 3 8-47 Ord. No. 740 5-16-2017 1 4-1 2 4-47 3 4-48 4 4-49 5 4-53 6 4-82 7 4-116 8 4-347 9 4-425 Ord. No. 742 6-19-2017 1 4-401 Ord. No. 745 7-17-2017 — 30-3 Ord. No. 747 8-28-2017 1 26-114 Ord. No. 754  4- 9-2018 1 46-4       Added 46-4.5 46-5 Ord. No. 755  4-30-2018 1       Rpld 2-189—2-204       Added 2-189—2-200 Ord. No. 759  5-21-2018 1—7 Adopt. Ord., p. xi Ord. No. 733  2- 6-2017 1 4-1 2       Added 4-55 Ord. No. 751 10-16-2017 5(exh. C) 36-67(c)(2) Ord. No. 768  8-20-2018 1 4-48(2) Ord. No. 770 11-12-2018 1       Added 20-8(b)(6)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE     This table shows the location within this Charter and Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Georgia Statutes (O.C.G.A.). O.C.G.A. Section Section this Code 1-1-1 1-2 1-1-3 1-5 1-1-7 1-3 1-3-1 1-2 — 1-12 1-3-1(d)(1) 1-2 1-3-1(d)(3) 1-2 1-3-2 1-2 1-3-3 1-2 1-4-1 1-2 2-10-80 et seq. 42-72 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 3-1-2 4-1 3-3-1 4-2 3-3-2 4-2 3-3-2(c) 4-6 3-3-3 4-4 3-3-7 4-21 3-3-21 4-17 3-3-23 4-22 — 4-50 3-3-24 4-22 — 4-50 3-3-26 4-141 3-3-41 Ch. 10, Art. III 3-4-1 4-1 3-4-26 4-23 3-4-40 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. IV 3-4-49 Ch. 4 (note) 3-4-80 4-14 3-4-130 4-15 3-5-1 4-422 3-5-40 Ch. 4, Art. XVII 3-5-80 4-12 3-6-4 4-54 3-6-60 4-13 3-7-1 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. III 3-7-60 4-16 3-8-1 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. X 3-11-1 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. IX 3-11-3 4-239 3-14-1 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. XII 3-30-23 4-26 4-5-4 26-86 4-11-1 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 8-2-1 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) — Ch. 8, Art. V 8-2-3 Ch. 8, Art. V — 8-97 8-2-20 et seq. 8-5 — 8-29 8-2-20(9)(B) 8-29 8-2-20(9)(B)(i) Ch. 8 (note) 8-2-25 2-152 8-2-25(a) Ch. 20 (note) 8-2-25(c) 2-152 8-2-26 Ch. 8 (note) 8-2-200 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. VI 10-14-1 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 12-3-1 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 12-5-440 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 12-5-441 18-19 12-5-453 18-20 12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. III 12-8-60 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III — Ch. 38, Art. II 16-1-1 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 16-5-47 10-282 16-6-6 10-95 16-6-8 10-56 16-7-25 Ch. 40 (note) 16-7-42 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. IV 16-7-51 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. IV 16-11-30 30-2 16-11-36 30-1 16-11-39 30-3 16-11-41 30-4 16-11-43 30-2 — Ch. 40 (note) 16-11-103— 16-11-105 Ch. 10, Art. VIII 16-11-120 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. VIII 16-11-126 et seq. 30-5 16-12-4 Ch. 6 (note) 16-12-35(b)—(g) 10-153 16-12-35(d)(2) 10-153 17-6-10 Ch. 2, Art. II 17-6-50 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. XII 17-6-71 10-366 20-2-16.03(3) 30-37 21-2-1 et seq. Char. § 5.10 21-3-1 et seq. 2-58 tit. 22 Char. § 1.13 — Char. § 7.10 25-2-1 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 25-2-12(a) 20-10 25-9-1 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. IV 31-12A-1 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) 31-19-1 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 32-4-90 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 32-31-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 33-3-5 42-29 33-3-5(1) 42-32 33-8-4 42-31, 42-32 33-8-8 Ch. 42, Art. II — 42-72 33-8-8.1 Ch. 42, Art. II — 42-31 33-8-8.2 Ch. 42, Art. II — 42-32 36-1-15 10-127 36-18-1 Ch. 44 (note) 36-30-1 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 36-30-8 1-8 36-30-10 Ch. 40 (note) 36-31-1 et seq. Ch. 1 (note) 36-32-1.1 2-56 36-32-5 1-8 36-34-2 Ch. 2 (note) — Ch. 44 (note) 36-34-3 Ch. 40 (note) 36-35-1 et seq. Char. (note) 36-35-3 Ch. 1 (note) 36-35-4 Char. § 1.13 36-35-6(a)(2) 1-8 — Ch. 30 (note) 36-35-6(a)(5) Ch. 42, Art. III 36-37-4 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 36-37-6 Char. § 6.30 36-60-1 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 36-60-3 Ch. 10, Art. II — Ch. 10, Art. III 36-60-6 10-279 36-60-25 Ch. 48, Art. II 36-64-1 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 36-64-1—36-64-14 32-29 36-64-5 Ch. 32 (note) 36-66-1 et seq. 36-4 36-70-1 et seq. Ch. 36, Art. I 36-71-1 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. II — 24-19 36-71-2(8) 42-56 36-74-1 et seq. 2-150 36-74-1—36-74-3 Ch. 2, Art. IV 36-80-1 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 36-80-19 1-1 38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 38-3-3 14-1 38-3-27 14-5 40-1-1 46-1 40-5-124 Ch. 46 (note) 40-6-1—40-6-395 46-1 40-6-7 Ch. 46, Art. III 40-6-20—40-14-24 46-92 40-6-20 Ch. 46, Art. IV — 46-94 40-6-20(a) 46-96 40-6-20(d) 46-96 40-6-20(f)(3)(B) 46-95 — 46-97 40-6-76 46-7 40-6-160—40-6-164 46-1 40-6-160 46-1 40-6-181 46-2 40-6-183 46-2 40-6-206 46-36 40-6-253.1 Ch. 38, Art. II 40-6-371 Ch. 46 (note) 40-6-372 Ch. 46 (note) — 46-1 40-11-1 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II 40-13-22 Ch. 46 (note) 40-14-21—40-14-23 46-92 40-14-21 Ch. 46, Art. IV 41-1-1 et seq. Char. § 1.13 — 26-137, 26-138 — Ch. 30 (note) 41-1-1 26-137 41-1-9 Ch. 10, Art. VIII 41-2-1 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. V — 26-138 41-2-5 Ch. 30 (note) 41-2-8 26-137 41-2-9 26-138 41-2-13 26-144 41-3-1 Ch. 10, Art. III — 10-288 41-3-13 10-288 43-4B-25 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. XIII 43-4B-25—43-4B-30 10-405 43-10-1 et seq. 10-276 43-24A-1 et seq. 10-275, 10-276 — 10-278, 10-279 43-24A-22 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. IX 43-24A-22 10-275 44-12-130 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. XI 44-12-130— 44-12-137 10-344 44-12-132 10-339 44-12-133 10-339 45-10-1 Ch. 2, Art. I — Ch. 2, Art. V 45-10-3 Ch. 2, Art. I 45-10-10 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 45-11-1 1-10 45-18-31 34-1 45-20-90 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 46-5-1(b)(8), (9) 44-48 46-5-1 et seq. 44-48 46-5-133 16-54 46-5-134(2) 16-54 tit. 48 Ch. 28 48-2-40 42-195 48-2-44 42-120 — 42-195 48-5-1 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) — Ch. 42, Art. IV 48-5-40 RL § 1 48-5-48.2 42-3 48-5-50.1 RL § 5 48-5-350 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) — Ch. 42, Art. IV 48-5-355 42-72 48-5-356 42-72 48-6-90 et seq. 28-1 48-6-93 28-1 — 42-72 48-6-93(a) 28-1 48-6-93(d) 28-1 48-6-95 28-1 48-7-27 RL § 3 — RL § 4 48-13-1 et seq. 42-87 48-13-5 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III — 42-55 48-13-5—48-13-26 42-64 48-13-7 42-58, 42-59 48-13-8 42-57 48-13-9 42-57 — Ch. 48, Art. II 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) 42-62 48-13-20 42-87 48-13-51 Ch. 42, Art. V 48-13-51(b)(2) 42-187—42-189 48-13-55 42-72 50-8-1 et seq. 24-20, 24-21 50-14-1 et seq. Char. § 2.18 50-14-1 Ch. 2, Art. I 50-14-1(d) Ch. 2, Art. I 50-14-3 Ch. 2, Art. I 50-18-70 et seq. 2-196 50-27-70 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. V 50-36-1 10-279 — 10-281  